Zoonotic Diseases: Federal Actions Needed to Improve Surveillance and Better Assess Human Health Risks Posed by Wildlife.  GAO-23-105238 . Washington, D.C.: May 31, 2023. 

Year recommendation made: 2023 

Recommendation: The Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), in collaboration with other agencies, as appropriate, should comprehensively assess zoonotic disease risks related to imported wildlife to inform CDC's decisions about regulations. Such an assessment could include identifying high priority categories of wildlife and then conducting risk assessments for those particular categories. 

Actions needed: HHS disagreed with this recommendation. In August 2024, CDC officials reported establishing an agency workgroup to systemically review the CDC zoonotic disease risk assessment process. The workgroup created a risk assessment model for estimating the zoonotic risk a species poses to the U.S population and tested it on three species CDC regulates. CDC officials said they plan to build upon this risk assessment model and use it to review additional species CDC regulates, in addition to other species that post a threat to public health. CDC officials also said they were awaiting the publication of a Smithsonian Institution study to help determine what, if any, public health risk assessments of wildlife may be needed. In January 2025, CDC released a National One Health Framework that includes an objective to support the development of risk-prediction tools for zoonotic diseases, in line with this recommendation. As of February 2025, CDC had not taken further action to address this recommendation. 

While CDC has taken positive steps, we continue to believe that CDC’s assessment of zoonotic disease risks related to imported wildlife should be comprehensive to fully address this recommendation. CDC could use a risk-based approach—for example, identifying high priority categories of wildlife for risk assessments—to use its resources efficiently. It could do so in collaboration with other agencies, such as the Smithsonian Institution, as appropriate. Conducting such an assessment could help prevent the introduction of zoonotic diseases into the United States. 

High-risk area:  HHS Leadership and Coordination of Public Health Emergencies Page 6 GAO-25-108032 HHS Priority Recommendations 

Directors: Steve D. Morris, Natural Resources & Environment, and Karen L. Howard, Science, Technology Assessment, and Analytics 

Contact information:  MorrisS@gao.gov  and  HowardK@gao.gov
