Food Safety: Additional Actions Needed to Help FDA’s Foreign Offices Ensure Safety of Imported Food.  GAO-15-183 . Washington, D.C.: January 30, 2015. Page 10 GAO-25-108032 HHS Priority Recommendations 

Year recommendation made: 2015 

Recommendation: To help ensure the safety of food imported into the United States, the Commissioner of FDA should complete an analysis to determine the annual number of foreign food inspections that is sufficient to ensure comparable safety of imported and domestic food. If the inspection numbers from that evaluation are different from the inspection targets mandated in the FDA Food Safety Modernization Act, FDA should report the results to Congress and recommend appropriate legislative changes. 

Actions needed: HHS agreed with this recommendation. As of February 2025, FDA has taken some steps to address this recommendation. In May 2023, FDA conducted an analysis that determined 4,695 annual foreign inspections represented an optimal target for ensuring the safety of imported food when combined with other FDA programs and oversight activities. FDA’s analysis used a risk-based approach to prioritize certain foreign facilities for inspections while excluding others for varied reasons, such as facilities other countries are routinely inspecting. However, the analysis states that FDA does not have the resources to meet the identified target. Further, in August 2024, FDA officials told us they do not use the annual target when planning FDA’s foreign inspection efforts. FDA officials told us the agency does not intend to take further action to implement the risk-based approach for prioritizing facilities. According to officials, the agency does not intend to report the results of the 2023 analysis to Congress or take steps to recommend legislative changes in support of FDA’s foreign inspection efforts. 5

To address the intent of this recommendation, FDA could use the target it identified and communicate to Congress regarding the resources FDA requires to meet it. FDA could instead revisit its May 2023 analysis and use updated information and assumptions to identify a new annual target, and then communicate this new target to Congress. By not pursuing either option, FDA is unable to measure the performance of its overall foreign inspection efforts or assess whether such efforts are sufficiently protecting U.S. consumers. 

High-risk area:  Improving Federal Oversight of Food Safety 

Director: Steve D. Morris, Natural Resources & Environment 

Contact information:  MorrisS@gao.gov 

Prevent and Reduce Improper Payments in Medicaid and Medicare 

Medicaid: CMS Oversight and Guidance Could Improve Recovery Audit Contractor Program.
