GAO-23-106025 . Washington, D.C.: June 28, 2023. 

Year recommendation made: 2023     

> 5 In 2025, we found that between 2018 and 2023, FDA conducted at most 1,727 inspections of foreign facilities— about 9 percent of its annual target under the FDA Food Safety Modernization Act. As FDA has not fully addressed this recommendation from 2015, we asked Congress to consider directing FDA to conduct an analysis to determine the annual number of foreign food facility inspections sufficient to ensure the safety of imported food, and communicate this number and FDA’s underlying analysis to Congress. We also asked Congress to consider, upon receiving the relevant information and analysis from FDA, updating the annual target number of foreign facility food inspections FDA should conduct to ensure the safety of imported food. For more information, see GAO, Food Safety: FDA Should Strengthen Inspection Efforts to Protect the U.S. Food Supply ,GAO-25-107571 (Washington, D.C.: Jan. 8, 2025). Page 11 GAO-25-108032 HHS Priority Recommendations

Recommendation: The Administrator of CMS should conduct a study to determine whether it is cost effective to require states to include payments to managed care organizations and their providers as part of the Recovery Audit Contractor program. 

Actions needed: HHS disagreed with this recommendation. CMS stated that states have many other ways to oversee managed care improper payments and that conducting a study regarding the cost-effectiveness of requiring all states to include managed care in their recovery audit contractor programs may not be the most efficient use of time and resources. In March 2024, CMS reiterated that the current regulatory flexibility allows states to review managed care encounters if they determine it to be appropriate. As of February 2025, CMS did not indicate any change in its position. 

We believe that while it is important that CMS use its resources efficiently, it is also essential that states use Medicaid funds effectively. CMS can determine whether including managed care payments in the recovery audit contractor programs would be cost effective for the overall program. As such, we maintain the validity of conducting a study to determine if it is cost effective for the recovery audit contractors to include managed care claims and could generate sufficient revenue to support a recovery audit contractor program. 

High-risk area:  Strengthening Medicaid Program Integrity 

Director: M. Hannah Padilla, Financial Management and Assurance 

Contact information: PadillaH@ gao .gov
