Drug Discount Program: Federal Oversight of Compliance at 340B Contract Pharmacies Needs Improvement.  GAO-18-480 . Washington, D.C.: June 21, 2018. 

Year recommendations made: 2018 

Recommendations: 

• The Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) should issue guidance to covered entities on the prevention of duplicate discounts under Medicaid managed care, working with CMS as HRSA deems necessary to coordinate with guidance provided to state Medicaid programs. 

• The Administrator of HRSA should incorporate an assessment of covered entities’ compliance with the prohibition on duplicate discounts, as it relates to Medicaid managed care claims, into its audit process after guidance has been issued and ensure that identified violations are rectified by the entities. 

Actions needed: HHS agreed with these recommendations. However, as of February 2024, it had not taken steps to implement them. Since 2019, HRSA has expressed concerns that, because guidance is not enforceable, it cannot implement these recommendations until the agency has regulatory authority. In February 2025, HHS reported that CMS had recently finalized new regulations which included policies that impact 340B covered entities and the prevention of duplicate discounts in Medicaid managed care. It also noted that in the absence of explicit statutory authority for HRSA itself to issue regulations on this topic, HRSA plans to use this rule to strengthen efforts to prevent duplicate discounts. 

To fully implement these recommendations, HRSA needs to communicate to covered entities how they are to prevent duplicate discounts under Medicaid managed care and assess the potential for these duplicate discounts as part of its audits. Until our recommendations are fully implemented, HRSA will not have assurance that covered entities’ efforts are effectively Page 16 GAO-25-108032 HHS Priority Recommendations 

preventing noncompliance. As a result, manufacturers will continue to be at risk of being required to erroneously provide duplicate discounts for Medicaid prescriptions. 

Director: Michelle B. Rosenberg, Health Care 

Contact information:  RosenbergM@gao.gov 

Strengthen Medicaid Program Oversight
