Medicaid Managed Care: Rapid Spending Growth in State Directed Payments Needs Enhanced Oversight and Transparency.  GAO-24-106202 . Washington, D.C.: December 14, 2023. 

Year recommendation made: 2024 

Recommendation: The Administrator of CMS should enhance the agency's fiscal guardrails for approving state directed payments by establishing a definition of, and standards for, assessing whether directed payments result in payment rates that are reasonable and appropriate, and communicating those to states; determining whether additional limits are needed; and requiring states to submit data on actual spending amounts at renewal. 

Actions needed: HHS neither agreed nor disagreed with this recommendation. In May 2024, CMS finalized a proposed rule that included activities to enhance the agency’s fiscal guardrails for state directed payments. The final rule also requires states to submit data to CMS on the total dollars expended by each managed care organization for state directed payments paid to providers. CMS officials said they will revise review procedures to reflect the need to consider available spending data when the agency approves a renewal of a state directed payments. Officials also said they plan to issue technical guidance to states that will include additional information on standards for assessing whether proposed state directed payments are reasonable and appropriate. As of February 2025, we continued to monitor progress toward these actions. 

The provisions CMS included in the agency's final rule partially address our recommendation. To fully implement this recommendation, CMS needs to take additional steps, such as finalizing its review procedures for renewal applications and issuing the planned technical guidance on payment rate standards. Implementing this recommendation would help CMS develop fiscal guardrails and reduce the agency’s risk of approving billions of dollars in federal funds for ineffective state directed payments. 

High-risk area:  Strengthening Medicaid Program Integrity 

Director: Michelle B. Rosenberg, Health Care 

Contact information:  RosenbergM@gao.gov
