Medicare Advantage: CMS Should Improve the Accuracy of Risk Score Adjustments for Diagnostic Coding Practices.  GAO-12-51 . Washington, D.C.: January 12, 2012. 

Year recommendation made: 2012 

Recommendation: To help ensure appropriate payments to MA plans, the Administrator of CMS should take steps to improve the accuracy of the adjustment made for differences in Page 22 GAO-25-108032 HHS Priority Recommendations 

diagnostic coding practices between MA and Medicare fee-for-service. Such steps could include, for example, accounting for additional beneficiary characteristics, including the most current data available, identifying and accounting for all years of coding differences that could affect the payment year for which an adjustment is made, and incorporating the trend of the impact of coding differences on risk scores. 

Actions needed: HHS agreed with this recommendation. CMS applied the statutory minimum adjustment to MA payments for calendar year 2023; however, as of February 2025, CMS had not provided any documentation of its analysis or the basis for its determination of the diagnostic coding adjustment. In recent years, CMS made other changes to its methodology for calculating the diagnostic coding adjustment (i.e., excluding diagnosis codes that were differentially reported in Medicare fee-for-service and MA), which likely improved accuracy of the adjustment. However, a modified methodology that, for example, incorporates more recent data and accounts for all relevant years of coding differences, would better ensure an accurate adjustment in future years. 

To fully implement this recommendation, CMS needs to provide evidence of the sufficiency of its coding adjustment or implement an adjustment based on analysis using an updated methodology. Until CMS takes these steps, payments to MA plans may not accurately account for differences in diagnostic coding between these plans and traditional Medicare providers. 

Potential financial benefit if implemented: Tens of billions 

High-risk area:  Medicare Program & Improper Payments 

Director: Leslie V. Gordon, Health Care 

Contact information:  GordonLV@gao.gov 

Improve Health Care Infrastructure, Information Technology, and Cybersecurity
