Federal Real Property: Agencies Should Provide More Information about Increases in Deferred Maintenance and Repair.  GAO-24-105485 . Washington, D.C.: November 16, 2023. 

Year recommendation made: 2024 

Recommendation: The Secretary of Health and Human Services should ensure that the department works with its component agencies to develop plans to address their deferred maintenance and repair (DM&R) backlogs and identify the funding and time frames needed to reduce them in congressional budget requests, related reports to decision-makers, or both. 

Actions needed: HHS agreed with this recommendation. In November 2023, HHS stated that it will work with partners in the Program Support Center offices to include guidance in preliminary budget submissions. This guidance will ask agencies to develop plans to address their DM&R backlog and identify the funding and time frames needed to reduce the backlog identified in the congressional justifications. HHS stated it can also work to include the DM&R backlog considerations in budget decision meeting materials and discussions. 

In its fiscal year 2025 budget justification, HHS requested additional funding for fiscal year 2025 and proposed additional funding for fiscal years 2026 and 2027 to address its backlog. However, the 2025 budget justification does not provide a specific plan, including funding and Page 23 GAO-25-108032 HHS Priority Recommendations 

time frames, for how HHS intends to address its backlog. As of February 2025, HHS had not provided further information about actions taken to address this recommendation 

To fully implement this recommendation, HHS needs to develop a more specific plan for reducing the backlog and include it in congressional budget requests or related reports to decision-makers. Doing so could help HHS better inform decision-makers about how funding levels could affect backlog reduction and help the decision-makers evaluate budget requests. 

High-risk area:  Managing Federal Real Property 

Director: Andrew Von Ah, Physical Infrastructure 

Contact information:  Vonaha@gao.gov
