25A-CR-3265
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/08/10/dewitt_hemphill_sr._v._state_of_indiana.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10943868/dewitt-hemphill-sr-v-state-of-indiana/
Caption: Dewitt Hemphill, Sr. v. State of Indiana
Date: 2026-08-10

Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-3265 | August 10, 2026 Page 1 of 12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I N T H E 
Court of Appeals of Indiana 
 
Dewitt Hemphill Sr., 
Appellant-Defendant 
v. 
State of Indiana, 
Appellee-Plaintiff 
August 10, 2026 
Court of Appeals Case No. 
25A-CR-3265 
Appeal from the Marion Superior Court 
The Honorable Charles F. Miller, Judge 
Trial Court Cause No. 
49D29-2401-F1-1189 
Opinion by Judge Weissmann 
Judges Bailey and Brown concur. 

Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-3265 | August 10, 2026 Page 2 of 12 
 
Weissmann, Judge. 
[1] Dewitt Hemphill Sr. was jointly tried for and convicted of molesting both his 7-
year-old granddaughter and an 11-year-old family friend. At trial, Hemphill’s 
granddaughter testified that Hemphill fondled her vagina with his fingers while 
she slept in his bed with him and her grandmother during an overnight visit in 
2015. The family friend testified that Hemphill had sexual intercourse with her 
three different times in 2017 after inviting her over to watch movies, tricking her 
into his bedroom, and forcing her onto his bed. The family friend also testified 
that, on other occasions, Hemphill showed her pornographic videos and used a 
vibrator on her vagina. 
[2] Hemphill appeals his convictions, arguing that the trial court erred by denying 
his pretrial motion to sever the charged offenses. He claims the charges were 
joined solely on the ground that they were of the same or similar character, 
entitling him to mandatory severance. The State contends that severance was 
discretionary, claiming the charges were joined because each offense was based 
on “a series of acts connected together or constituting parts of a single scheme 
or plan.” Ind. Code § 35-34-1-9(a)(2). 
[3] Contrary to the State’s claim, Hemphill’s charged offenses did not share a 
common modus operandi simply because they all occurred in his bedroom. We 
also find that his position of trust with each victim and alleged motive to molest 
them—to satisfy his own sexual desires—speak more to the general character of 
child molesting than to a single scheme or plan. Without more, these 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-3265 | August 10, 2026 Page 3 of 12 
 
commonalities did not sufficiently connect the offenses under Indiana Code § 
35-34-1-9(a)(2). We conclude that severance was mandatory, not discretionary, 
and that the trial court erred by denying Hemphill’s motion to sever the charges 
by victim. We therefore reverse and remand for further proceedings consistent 
with this opinion. 
Facts 
[4] Hemphill’s granddaughter, D.K., and family friend, S.K., do not know each 
other. But in 2015 and 2023, respectively, each child reported being molested by 
Hemphill. Police separately investigated the reports, and the State eventually 
charged Hemphill with ten offenses. Two of the charges were dismissed prior to 
trial. The remaining offenses and their alleged victims were as follows: 
Count III Level 1 felony child molesting, D.K. 
Count IV Level 4 felony child molesting, D.K. 
Count V Level 1 felony child molesting, S.K. 
Count VI Level 4 felony child molesting, S.K. 
Count VII Level 6 felony dissemination of matter harmful to 
minors, S.K. 
Count VIII Level 6 felony intimidation, S.K. 
Count IX Level 1 felony child molesting, S.K. 
Count X Level 1 felony child molesting, S.K. 
[5] Prior to trial, Hemphill moved to sever Counts III and IV from Counts V 
through X so that the charged offenses involving his granddaughter, D.K., 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-3265 | August 10, 2026 Page 4 of 12 
 
would be tried separately from those involving the family friend, S.K. The trial 
court denied the motion after a hearing, and the case proceeded to a single jury 
trial on all eight charges. 
[6] At trial, Hemphill’s granddaughter, D.K., testified to the following facts. She 
had a good relationship with her paternal grandmother (Grandmother) as a 
child and would regularly spend the night at Grandmother’s home. Her 
paternal grandfather, Hemphill, lived separately from Grandmother, but on 
occasion, Grandmother would take her to Hemphill’s apartment. Once, in 
2015, when D.K. was 7 years old, she and Grandmother spent the night with 
Hemphill at his apartment. All three slept in Hemphill’s bed with Hemphill in 
the middle. While D.K. was sleeping that night, Hemphill reached into her 
pants, beneath her underwear, and began “grazing” her vagina with his fingers. 
Tr. Vol. II, p. 170. 
[7] In proving the charged offenses involving D.K., the State also presented the 
testimony of: (1) D.K.’s mother, to whom D.K. first reported being molested by 
Hemphill; (2) two police detectives, who investigated D.K.’s report; and (3) a 
forensic child interviewer, who interviewed D.K. about the molestation. None 
of these witnesses testified about S.K. 
[8] The family friend, S.K., testified to the following facts at trial. Hemphill was a 
“family friend,” whom she viewed as an “uncle.” Tr. Vol. III, p. 26. In 2017, 
Hemphill lived near S.K. and would often pick her up and take her to his 
apartment to watch movies in his living room. Eventually, during these movie 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-3265 | August 10, 2026 Page 5 of 12 
 
viewings, Hemphill began rubbing S.K.’s inner thighs and “upper body” with 
his hands. Id. at 34. During later visits, Hemphill would also “trick” S.K. into 
his bedroom by asking her to retrieve something and then following her there. 
Id. at 58-59. Once in the bedroom, Hemphill sometimes showed S.K. videos of 
people having sex. Other times, he touched her vagina with a vibrator. And on 
three occasions over the course of several weeks, Hemphill pushed S.K. onto 
his bed, removed her clothes, and had sexual intercourse with her. 
[9] In proving the charged offenses involving S.K., the State also presented the 
testimony of: (1) a police officer, to whom S.K. first reported being molested by 
Hemphill; (2) a third police detective, who investigated S.K.’s report; and (3) an 
Indiana Department of Child Services caseworker, who interviewed S.K. about 
the molestations. None of these witnesses testified about D.K. 
[10] The jury found Hemphill not guilty of Count III (Level 1 felony child 
molesting, D.K.) and Count VIII (Level 6 felony intimidation, S.K.) but guilty 
of the other six charges. Accordingly, the trial court entered judgments of 
conviction against Hemphill on Counts V, IX, and X (all Level 1 felony child 
molesting, S.K.); Counts IV and VI (both Level 4 felony child molesting, D.K. 
and S.K., respectively); and Count VII (Level 6 felony dissemination of matter 
harmful to minors, S.K.). The court later sentenced Hemphill to a total of 45 
years in prison. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-3265 | August 10, 2026 Page 6 of 12 
 
Discussion and Decision 
[11] Hemphill appeals his six convictions, arguing that the trial court erred by 
denying his motion to sever the charged offenses involving his granddaughter, 
D.K., from those involving the family friend, S.K. This argument implicates 
two related statutes: Indiana Code § 35-34-1-9 (Joinder Statute), and Indiana 
Code § 35-34-1-11 (Severance Statute). 
[12] Subsection (a) of the Joinder Statute provides, in pertinent part: 
Two (2) or more offenses may be joined in the same indictment 
or information, with each offense stated in a separate count, 
when the offenses: 
(1) are of the same or similar character, even if not part of a 
single scheme or plan; or 
(2) are based on the same conduct or on a series of acts 
connected together or constituting parts of a single scheme or 
plan. 
Ind. Code § 35-34-1-9(a). 
[13] Subsection (a) of the Severance Statute provides, in pertinent part: 
Whenever two (2) or more offenses have been joined for trial in 
the same indictment or information solely on the ground that 
they are of the same or similar character, the defendant shall 
have a right to a severance of the offenses. In all other cases the 
court, upon motion of the defendant or the prosecutor, shall 
grant a severance of offenses whenever the court determines that 
 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-3265 | August 10, 2026 Page 7 of 12 
 
severance is appropriate to promote a fair determination of the 
defendant’s guilt or innocence of each offense considering: 
(1) the number of offenses charged; 
(2) the complexity of the evidence to be offered; and 
(3) whether the trier of fact will be able to distinguish the 
evidence and apply the law intelligently as to each offense. 
Ind. Code § 35-34-1-11(a). 
[14] When the two statutes are read together, severance is mandatory under the 
Severance Statute if two or more offenses are joined solely under subsection 
(a)(1) of the Joinder Statute. Pierce v. State, 29 N.E.3d 1258, 1265 (Ind. 2015). 
But severance is discretionary under the Severance Statute if two or more 
offenses are joined under subsection (a)(2) of the Joinder Statute. Id. Here, there 
is no dispute that all of Hemphill’s charged offenses were of the same or similar 
character and, thus, were joinable under subsection (a)(1) of the Joinder Statute. 
The question is whether the offenses were based on “a series of acts connected 
together or constituting parts of a single scheme or plan,” such that they were 
also joinable under subsection (a)(2). If so, severance was discretionary, not 
mandatory. 
[15] To determine whether offenses were joined under subsection (a)(2) of the 
Joinder Statute, “we ask whether the operative facts establish a pattern of 
activity beyond mere satisfaction of the statutory elements.” Id. “It is well-
settled that a common modus operandi and motive can sufficiently link crimes 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-3265 | August 10, 2026 Page 8 of 12 
 
committed on different victims.” Id. “But establishing the defendant’s unique 
method of committing the crimes is not the exclusive way of showing his acts 
are connected together.” Id. “Offenses can also be linked by a defendant’s 
efforts to take advantage of his special relationship with the victims.” Id. “A 
common relationship between the defendant and the victims may even result in 
an interconnected police investigation into the crimes, producing overlapping 
evidence.” Id. 
[16] The State argues that Hemphill’s charged offenses were connected by a 
common modus operandi, similar relationships, and identical motives. It likens 
this case to Pierce, in which the defendant—Daniel Pierce—was jointly charged 
with molesting his granddaughter, two step-granddaughters, and great-niece. 
Pierce sought to sever the charges by victim, and our Supreme Court ruled that 
severance was discretionary, not mandatory, under the Severance Statute. Id. 
The Court explained: 
Pierce exploited his position of a trusted grandfather or great 
uncle by molesting young female family members in his care. 
The investigation into allegations made by [one victim] in her 
interview led police to identify additional victims. Indeed, much 
of the evidence overlaps, as the various caretakers testified to 
their observations of Pierce’s inappropriate behavior toward the 
girls. And Pierce’s method was consistent. He invited each 
granddaughter to spend the night at his home, when no other 
children would be present. He touched all four girls’ breasts or 
vaginas with his hands, attempting to use his mouth on the 
vaginas of the two youngest girls. Regarding his motive, . . . 
Pierce’s activity toward all four girls was driven by his aim to 
fulfill his sexual desires. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-3265 | August 10, 2026 Page 9 of 12 
 
We decline to require separate trials as of right where the 
defendant committed the same crime, in substantially the same 
way, against similar victims. Because Pierce’s criminal acts were 
sufficiently connected together, he was not entitled to severance. 
Id. at 1266-67. 
[17] Pierce is distinguishable from Hemphill’s case in several respects. In Pierce, the 
defendant used the same approach to access every victim. He invited each girl 
to spend the night at his home when no other children were present. Id. The 
record in Hemphill’s case revealed a different approach for each victim. 
Hemphill’s granddaughter, D.K., was already at Hemphill’s home when he 
molested her. Grandmother had brought her there for a sleepover, and both 
were sleeping with Hemphill in his bed when the molestation occurred. In 
contrast to this seemingly opportunistic crime, Hemphill premeditatedly 
molested the family friend, S.K. He lured her to his apartment under the pretext 
of watching movies and, once alone with her, tricked her into his bedroom to 
molest her. These are two distinct approaches to child molesting. 
[18] The defendant in Pierce also molested every victim in similar ways. He touched 
each girl’s breasts or vagina with his hands and attempted oral sex with the two 
youngest girls. Id. In contrast, Hemphill’s molestations of his granddaughter, 
D.K., and the family friend, S.K., looked nothing alike. He touched D.K.’s 
vagina with his fingers on one occasion; his abuse of S.K. unfolded over several 
weeks. Hemphill rubbed S.K.’s thighs and body, showed her pornography, used 
a vibrator on her, and eventually had sexual intercourse with her three separate 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-3265 | August 10, 2026 Page 10 of 12 
 
times. A single touching during sleep is not “the same crime, in substantially 
the same way,” as a month-long escalation to intercourse. See id. at 1266. 
[19] Given the distinct methods by which Hemphill molested his granddaughter, 
D.K., and family friend, S.K., the charged offenses did not share a common 
modus operandi. But see Craig v. State, 730 N.E.2d 1262, 1264-65 (Ind. 2000) 
(finding common modus operandi where defendant separately molested two girls 
in the same week by asking them to take a “taste test,” covering their eyes with 
tape, inserting his penis into their mouths, and instructing them to suck on it). 
We also do not find Hemphill’s charged offenses sufficiently connected by his 
relationships with D.K. and S.K. or his alleged motive to molest them. 
[20] The State claims that, as D.K.’s grandfather and S.K.’s “uncle,” Tr. Vol. III, p. 
26, Hemphill abused similar positions of trust in molesting each victim. It also 
asserts that Hemphill had the same motive in molesting both D.K. and S.K.—
to satisfy his sexual desires. But a position of trust and sexual desires are often 
present in child molesting offenses. Without more, they do not justify joinder 
under subsection (a)(2) of the Joinder Statute. See Pierce, 29 N.E.3d at 1266-67 
(finding child molesting offenses sufficiently connected by common method, 
interconnected police investigation, and overlapping evidence in addition to 
similar relationships and identical motives); Craig, 730 N.E.2d at 1264-65 
(finding same based on common method and close temporal proximity in 
addition to identical relationships and motives). 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-3265 | August 10, 2026 Page 11 of 12 
 
[21] Notably, in Pierce, one victim’s disclosure led police to discover the other three 
victims. 29 N.E.3d at 1266. The same witnesses also testified about observing 
the defendant engage in inappropriate behavior with each of the girls. Here, 
there was no such overlap in police investigation or the evidence presented at 
trial. Hemphill’s granddaughter, D.K., and family friend, S.K., did not know 
each other, and their reports of being molested by Hemphill came eight years 
apart. Moreover, the allegations were investigated separately, and nothing in 
the record suggests that the two cases were treated as connected before the State 
chose to join them for trial. As tried, the charged offenses involving D.K. and 
S.K. also shared no common witnesses, and none of the evidence used to prove 
the charges involving one victim bore on those involving the other. 
[22] On these facts, we conclude the charged offenses involving Hemphill’s 
granddaughter, D.K., were joined with those involving the family friend, S.K., 
solely on the ground that they were of the same or similar character. Severance 
was therefore mandatory under Indiana Code § 35-34-1-11(a). Finding the trial 
court erred by denying Hemphill’s motion to sever the charges by victim, we 
reverse and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.1 
Bailey, J., and Brown, J., concur. 
 
1 Hemphill also argues that the trial court erred by failing to advise him of the consequences of being a credit 
restricted felon, as required by Indiana Code § 35-38-1-7.8(c). Because we reverse Hemphill’s convictions and 
remand, this issue is moot. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-3265 | August 10, 2026 Page 12 of 12 
 
ATTORNEY FOR APPELLANT 
Eugene A. Kress 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
 
ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLEE 
Theodore E. Rokita 
Attorney General of Indiana 
Robert M. Yoke 
Deputy Attorney General 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
 
