25A-CR-2071
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/08/05/demontre_lamont_boyd_v._state_of_indiana.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10940098/demontre-lamont-boyd-v-state-of-indiana/
Caption: Demontre Lamont Boyd v. State of Indiana
Date: 2026-08-05

Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 1 of 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE 
Court of Appeals of Indiana 
 
Demontre Lamont Boyd, 
Appellant-Defendant 
v. 
State of Indiana, 
Appellee-Plaintiff 
August 5, 2026 
Court of Appeals Case No. 
25A-CR-2071 
Interlocutory Appeal from the Clark Circuit Court 
The Honorable Bradley B. Jacobs, Judge 
Trial Court Cause No. 
10C02-2210-F6-1260 
Opinion by Judge Mathias 
Judges May and Felix concur. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 2 of 24 
 
Mathias, Judge. 
[1] During a traffic stop of a vehicle driven by Demontre Lamont Boyd, a canine 
officer jumped into Boyd’s vehicle and alerted to the presence of narcotics. 
Because of that alert, law enforcement officers determined they had probable 
cause to search the vehicle. The officers found marijuana and cocaine in the 
vehicle and the State subsequently charged Boyd with Level 6 felony possession 
of cocaine and Class B misdemeanor possession of marijuana. 
[2] Boyd filed a motion to suppress the evidence obtained during the vehicle 
search, which the trial court denied. The court then granted Boyd permission to 
pursue an interlocutory appeal of that order, which our court accepted. On 
appeal, Boyd asks us to determine whether the canine search violated his 
Fourth Amendment rights and whether the search was unreasonable under 
Article 1, Section 11 of the Indiana Constitution. 
[3] Concluding that the canine search violated both the federal and state 
constitutions, we reverse and remand for proceedings consistent with this 
opinion. 
Facts and Procedural History 
[4] On October 1, 2022, Clarksville Police Department Officer Tyler Ash was 
parked on Eastern Boulevard when he observed a Chevrolet Impala drive past 
him. Officer Ash noted the driver’s alarmed facial expression upon seeing the 
officer’s patrol vehicle and the driver’s tight grip on the steering wheel, with the 
driver having his hands in the ten o’clock and two o’clock positions. Officer 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 3 of 24 
 
Ash inexplicably found the driver’s facial expression, grip on the wheel, and 
hand positioning suspicious. He then pulled out onto the roadway and began to 
follow the Impala. Officer Ash saw the driver, later identified as Boyd, reach 
over into the area near his front passenger seat and the center console. Boyd 
then drove the Impala over the fog line. 
[5] After seeing Boyd cross the fog line, Officer Ash initiated a traffic stop. Boyd 
abruptly stopped his vehicle in the middle of the lane of traffic on U.S. 31 
South. The officer saw Boyd reaching over into the passenger compartment and 
ordered Boyd to show his hands. The officer walked up to Boyd’s driver’s side 
window and then directed Boyd to pull his vehicle over into the emergency lane 
at the side of the highway. Boyd moved his vehicle into the emergency lane and 
Officer Ash returned to his patrol vehicle to run Boyd’s information. Officer 
Ash also requested a canine unit. 
[6] Approximately thirteen minutes after Officer Ash had initiated the traffic stop, 
Officer Susan Woodard arrived on the scene with her canine partner, Officer 
Blitz. Officer Ash would later testify that he was still preparing the warning for 
the unsafe lane movement thirteen minutes after the stop.1 
[7] When Officers Woodard and Blitz arrived on the scene, the officers decided to 
remove Boyd from his vehicle before deploying Officer Blitz for a free air sniff. 
Officer Woodard told Officer Colton Forman, who had also arrived to assist 
 
1 Officer Ash did not issue the warning or record the warning in his system. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 4 of 24 
 
with the traffic stop, to leave the driver’s side door open if Boyd failed to shut it. 
Officer Forman then asked Boyd to step out of the vehicle so that the officers 
could speak to him. Officer Forman opened the driver’s side door for Boyd to 
exit. Officer Forman then stood to the side of the door, kept his hand on the 
door frame, and held onto the door frame as Boyd exited the vehicle. To shut 
his driver’s side door, Boyd would have had to ask the officer to remove his 
hold on the door and then push the door closed. See State’s Ex. D (video from 
Officer Forman’s body camera). Neither Boyd nor Officer Forman closed the 
driver’s side door. 
[8] Thereafter, Officer Woodard deployed Officer Blitz around the car’s exterior. 
The officer left the canine on his lead. Officer Blitz began the free air sniff at the 
rear passenger-side bumper. The canine’s breathing and body language changed 
after the dog reached the front passenger-side window. See State’s Ex. B, Part 2. 
Officer Woodard believed that her canine’s change in behavior indicated the 
presence of the odor of narcotics. 
[9] Officer Blitz continued to sniff around the front of the vehicle to the driver’s 
side. As the canine approached the front driver’s side bumper, his behavior 
changed again, which Officer Woodard interpreted as another indication of the 
presence of the odor of narcotics. After Officer Blitz reached the open driver’s 
side door, the canine circled around the open door and then jumped into the car 
while Officer Woodard continued to hold the canine’s lead. Officer Blitz 
proceeded to the back seat, where he turned around and began to sniff at the 
center console. The canine gave his “final alert” at the center console by 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 5 of 24 
 
straddling the console and assuming a “passive position.” Tr. Vol. 2, pp. 9-10. 
Officer Woodard then returned Officer Blitz to her police vehicle. The canine 
sniff of the vehicle lasted less than one minute. 
[10] Relying on the canine sniff alerting to the presence of the odor of narcotics, 
Officers Ash and Forman decided they had probable cause to search Boyd’s 
vehicle. First, Officer Ash conducted a pat-down search of Boyd’s person but 
did not find any contraband. The officers then searched the vehicle. Officer 
Forman found cocaine under the front passenger-seat floorboard mat. Officer 
Ash found marijuana in the center console and in the side compartment in the 
driver-side door. 
[11] On October 4, the State charged Boyd with Level 6 felony possession of cocaine 
and Class B misdemeanor possession of marijuana. On June 13, 2025, Boyd 
filed a motion to suppress the evidence obtained during the vehicle search. 
Boyd argued the vehicle search violated his rights under the Fourth 
Amendment and Article 1, Section 11. Specifically, Boyd argued that the traffic 
stop was “not supported by reasonable suspicion of any violation of the law” 
and that the officers lacked probable cause and/or reasonable suspicion to 
search his vehicle. Appellant’s App. Vol. 2, p. 94. Boyd also argued that the 
traffic stop was unlawfully prolonged to allow for a canine sniff. Finally, Boyd 
claimed that the canine’s entry into the vehicle, which was facilitated by Officer 
Woodard, constituted an unconstitutional warrantless search. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 6 of 24 
 
[12] The trial court held a hearing on Boyd’s motion. During the hearing, Officer 
Woodard testified that she was a certified canine trainer and had been a canine 
handler for seven years. Tr. Vol. 2, p. 5. She also described how a canine 
conducts a free air sniff and how a canine alerts to the presence of the odor of 
narcotics. However, Officer Woodard did not testify concerning Officer Blitz’s 
specific training. 
[13] Officer Woodard also described Officer Blitz’s behavior while conducting the 
free air sniff outside of Boyd’s vehicle. The officer testified that she kept Officer 
Blitz on his lead but allowed “him to lead the way.” Id. at 8. At the front 
passenger side of the vehicle, Officer Blitz had his first “indication to the 
presence of a narcotic odor.” Id. The canine then “showed another indicator 
that he smelled the presence of a narcotic odor at the front bumper.” Id. at 9. 
[14] Officer Woodard testified that an indication is different than an alert. Id. at 18. 
The officer gave her opinion concerning whether an “indication” was enough 
to establish probable cause. On cross-examination, Boyd’s counsel asked: 
Counsel: So indication, not enough to establish probable cause is 
it[?] 
Woodard: That’s incorrect[.] 
Counsel: You think an indication is enough to conduct a 
warrantless search of somebody’s car[?] 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 7 of 24 
 
Woodard: If he is not able to get to [the] source, which he was 
not able to get to [the] source at the passenger front side of the 
vehicle[.] 
Id. 
[15] The officer explained that a canine alerts at the “source.” Id. at 23. She stated 
that Officer Blitz “gave [her] several indications and where he got to the point 
where he could follow his nose to the source, he did so, which is legal[.]” Id. at 
24. Officer Woodard believed that, because Officer Blitz twice indicated to the 
presence of the odor of narcotics, it was appropriate for Officer Blitz to then 
jump into Boyd’s vehicle where he gave an “alert” at the source of the odor. Id. 
at 23-24. 
[16] But the officer also implicitly agreed that the two indications outside of Boyd’s 
vehicle by themselves, did not give the officers probable cause to search. 
Specifically, during cross-examination, Officer Woodard agreed with defense 
counsel’s statement that 
[i]f the canine officer had not alerted on the center console, you 
would not have had probable cause and the officers on scene 
would not have had probable cause to search the vehicle . . . . 
Id. at 28. Officer Ash also believed that Officer Blitz’s alert to the center console 
of the vehicle gave the officers probable cause to search the vehicle. Id. at 56. 
Specifically, Boyd’s counsel asked: 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 8 of 24 
 
No independent reason whatsoever for the search, right. No 
other reason you would have probable cause to search his car 
besides the alert to the center console of his vehicle[.] 
Id. Officer Ash replied, “[c]orrect[.]” Id. 
[17] On July 15, the court entered a written order denying the motion. The court 
found that Officer Ash’s observations of Boyd’s unsafe lane movement and 
furtive movements justified the investigatory stop, and the “length of the stop 
[was] perfectly appropriate under the totality of the circumstances.” Appellant’s 
App. Vol. 2, pp. 120-21. Concerning the canine free air sniff and entry into 
Boyd’s vehicle, the court found: 
Officer Woodard testified several times that her canine 
“indicated” to the presence of contraband during the free air 
sniff. She described this as the canine finding the scent, losing it, 
then finding it again. The “indicating” is different from “alerting” 
and itself is not determinative of much. However, the 
“indicating” behavior of craning his neck, changing his breathing 
pattern, and changing his body language told Officer Woodard 
there was contraband near. The canine then proceeded to follow 
his nose and through the open door, entered the vehicle. Once 
inside the vehicle, he continued to sniff, finally alerting on the 
center console. This “alerting” behavior is indicative of the 
canine finding the source of the odor, and not just detecting the 
odor in the environment. And this behavior gives rise to probable 
cause for a vehicle search. 
Id. at 121-22. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 9 of 24 
 
[18] Boyd requested permission to file an interlocutory appeal of the order denying 
his motion to suppress. The trial court certified its order for interlocutory 
appeal, and our court accepted jurisdiction.2 
Standard of Review 
[19] Boyd contends the trial court erred by denying his motion to suppress. Our 
standard of review for such a claim is as follows: 
Trial courts enjoy broad discretion in decisions to admit or 
exclude evidence. Robinson v. State, 5 N.E.3d 362, 365 (Ind. 
2014). When a trial court denies a motion to suppress evidence, 
we necessarily review that decision “deferentially, construing 
conflicting evidence in the light most favorable to the ruling.” Id. 
However, we “consider any substantial and uncontested evidence 
favorable to the defendant.” Id. We review the trial court’s 
factual findings for clear error, declining invitations to reweigh 
evidence or judge witness credibility. Id. . . . If the trial court’s 
decision denying “a defendant’s motion to suppress concerns the 
constitutionality of a search or seizure,” then it presents a legal 
question that we review de novo. [Id]. 
Marshall v. State, 117 N.E.3d 1254, 1258 (Ind. 2019). 
[20] In Marshall, our supreme court observed that 
[t]raffic stops, for even minor violations, fall within the 
protections of the federal and state constitutions. When a law 
enforcement officer stops a vehicle for a suspected traffic 
 
2 We held oral argument in this case at Hoosier Boys State at Trine University on June 18, 2026. We extend 
our gratitude to Jerry Wagenblast, Dr. Tony Kline, and Chuck Mason for their kind hospitality. We also 
thank the attorneys for the excellence of their written and oral advocacy. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 10 of 24 
 
infraction like speeding, that officer seizes the vehicle’s occupants 
under the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution 
and Article 1, Section 11 of the Indiana Constitution; and that 
traffic stop must pass constitutional muster. Heien v. North 
Carolina, 574 U.S. 54, 135 S. Ct. 530, 536, 190 L.Ed.2d 475 
(2014) (citing Brendlin v. California, 551 U.S. 249, 255-59, 127 S. 
Ct. 2400, 168 L.Ed.2d 132 (2007)); Meredith v. State, 906 N.E.2d 
867, 869 (Ind. 2009) (Fourth Amendment); State v. Quirk, 842 
N.E.2d 334, 339-40 (Ind. 2006) (Article 1, Section 11). . . . Even 
though the Fourth Amendment and Article 1, Section 11 share 
parallel language, they part ways in application and scope. The 
Indiana Constitution sometimes affords broader protections than 
its federal counterpart and requires a separate, independent 
analysis from this Court. [M.D.] v. State, 108 N.E.3d 301, 304 
(Ind. 2018). 
Id. 
Boyd’s Fourth Amendment Argument 
[21] The Fourth Amendment protects “[t]he right of the people to be secure in their 
persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and 
seizures, shall not be violated” and provides that “no Warrants shall issue, but 
upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly 
describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.” 
“The fundamental purpose of the Fourth Amendment is to protect the 
legitimate expectations of privacy that citizens possess in their persons, homes, 
and belongings.” State v. Parrott, 69 N.E.3d 535, 541 (Ind. Ct. App. 2017), trans. 
denied. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 11 of 24 
 
[22] “In general, the Fourth Amendment prohibits searches and seizures conducted 
without a warrant that is supported by probable cause.” Id. (quoting Mullen v. 
State, 55 N.E.3d 822, 827 (Ind. Ct. App. 2016)). “As a deterrent mechanism, 
evidence obtained without a warrant is not admissible in a prosecution unless 
the search or seizure falls into one of the well-delineated exceptions to the 
warrant requirement.” Mullen, 55 N.E.3d at 827. 
The “automobile exception” to the warrant requirement allows 
police to search a vehicle without obtaining a warrant if they 
have probable cause to believe evidence of a crime will be found 
in the vehicle. Brinegar v. United States, 338 U.S. 160, 164, 69 S. 
Ct. 1302, 93 L. Ed. 1879 (1949); Carroll v. United States, 267 U.S. 
132, 153-54, 45 S. Ct. 280, 69 L. Ed. 543 (1925). This doctrine is 
grounded in two notions: 1) a vehicle is readily moved and 
therefore the evidence may disappear while a warrant is being 
obtained, and 2) citizens have lower expectations of privacy in 
their vehicles than in their homes. California v. Carney, 471 U.S. 
386, 391, 105 S. Ct. 2066, 85 L.Ed.2d 406 (1985); South Dakota v. 
Opperman, 428 U.S. 364, 367, 96 S. Ct. 3092, 49 L.Ed.2d 1000 
(1976). 
State v. Hobbs, 933 N.E.2d 1281, 1285 (Ind. 2010). “Probable cause is ‘not a 
high bar,’ and is cleared when the totality of the circumstances establishes ‘a fair 
probability’—not proof or a prima facie showing —of criminal activity, 
contraband, or evidence of a crime.’” Hodges v. State, 125 N.E.3d 578, 581-82 
(Ind. 2019) (quoting Kaley v. United States, 571 U.S. 320, 338, 134 S. Ct. 1090, 
188 L.Ed.2d 46 (2014); Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213, 235, 103 S. Ct. 2317, 76 
L.Ed.2d 527 (1983)). 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 12 of 24 
 
[23] A canine sniff conducted during a lawful traffic stop is not itself a search under 
the Fourth Amendment. Hobbs, 933 N.E.2d at 1286. A reliable canine alert may 
establish probable cause to search a vehicle. Id. Whether the canine’s alert 
establishes probable cause depends on the dog’s reliability and the surrounding 
circumstances, not on rigid evidentiary requirements. Florida v. Harris, 568 U.S. 
237, 246-48, 133 S. Ct. 1050, 185 L.Ed.2d 61 (2013). 
[24] In Harris, the Supreme Court considered “how a court should determine if the 
‘alert’ of a drug-detection dog during a traffic stop provides probable cause to 
search a vehicle.” 568 U.S. at 240. Ultimately, the Supreme Court upheld the 
use of a trained canine to establish probable cause but also concluded that issues 
surrounding the use of canine officers involves a highly fact-sensitive inquiry. 
Id. at 246-47. The Court listed several factors courts can consider to determine a 
canine’s reliability, including the canine’s training and proficiency in locating 
narcotics. Id. at 246. 
[25] The State bore the burden to prove that the officers’ entry into Boyd’s vehicle 
was constitutional; however, the State did not present any evidence concerning 
Officer Blitz’s training and/or certification. Officer Woodard testified that she is 
a certified canine trainer, but the only evidence concerning Officer Blitz’s 
training was Officer Woodard’s explanation to Boyd during the traffic stop that 
the canine was trained to detect the odor of certain narcotics. Given the lack of 
evidence concerning Officer Blitz’s training and proficiency at detecting 
narcotics, Officer Woodard’s understanding of Officer Blitz’s indicating-versus-
alerting behavior is of utmost importance to our resolution of this case. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 13 of 24 
 
[26] A canine officer’s behavior necessarily requires interpretation by a trained 
human partner, and canine officers exhibit varying behavior depending on their 
training. See, e.g., McKinney v. State, 212 N.E.3d 697, 704 (Ind. Ct. App. 2023) 
(describing the canine’s “bracketing” behavior), trans. denied. In McKinney, the 
canine briefly lowered his back legs but did not sit, which was typically the 
canine’s final alert response. Id. The canine’s handler believed that the canine 
did not sit on the roadway because it was covered in “slush.” Id. Because the 
officer’s testimony established that she was trained to determine, based on the 
canine’s behavior, when the canine had detected the odor of drugs, the fact that 
the canine “did not fully sit down as his final response [wa]s not dispositive.” 
Id. See also Florida v. Jardines, 569 U.S. 1, 12-13 (2013) (Kagan, J., concurring) 
(observing that “drug-detection dogs are highly trained tools of law 
enforcement, geared to respond in distinctive ways to specific scents so as to 
convey clear and reliable information to their human partners”). 
[27] Here, Officer Woodard described Officer Blitz’s behavior while conducting the 
free air sniff outside of his vehicle as “indicating” the presence of the odor of 
narcotics, but the canine did not “alert” to the presence of narcotics until the 
canine was allowed inside the vehicle. Officer Woodard testified that an 
indication is different than an alert. Tr. Vol. 2, p. 18. The officer explained that 
a canine alerts at the “source.” Id. at 23. She stated that Officer Blitz “gave [her] 
several indications and where he got to the point where he could follow his 
nose to the source, he did so . . . .” Id. at 24. However, the officer agreed with 
defense counsel’s statement at the suppression hearing that 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 14 of 24 
 
[i]f the canine officer had not alerted on the center console, you 
would not have had probable cause and the officers on scene 
would not have had probable cause to search the vehicle . . . . 
Id. at 28. Logically then, we must conclude, as did the trial court, that Officer 
Blitz’s two indications during the free air sniff were not sufficient to establish 
probable cause to search Boyd’s vehicle. 
[28] Despite Officer Woodard’s testimony and the trial court’s finding concerning 
Officer Blitz’s behavior during the free air sniff, the State argues that Officer 
Blitz’s two indications to the presence of the odor of narcotics during the exterior 
free air sniff were sufficient to establish probable cause to search the vehicle’s 
interior. See, e.g., Hardbaugh v. State, 96 N.E.3d 102, 106 (Ind. Ct. App. 2018), 
trans. denied. But the State relies on cases that generally use the terms “indicate” 
and “alert” interchangeably and not as the actual terms of art that they are in 
the context of a free air sniff. 
[29] The State does not argue any other evidence obtained before the free air sniff 
occurred would have allowed the officers to conclude that evidence of a crime 
might be found in Boyd’s vehicle. Officer Ash did not believe that Boyd was 
impaired and there are many reasons that a driver might reach into the 
passenger compartment of a vehicle. Officer Ash initiated the traffic stop after 
Boyd’s car crossed over the fog line, an extremely minor traffic infraction which 
is not an uncommon behavior for many motorists traveling on Hoosier 
roadways. On the specific facts and circumstances presented here, we conclude 
that, because the officers had no other reason to believe that narcotics would be 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 15 of 24 
 
found in Boyd’s vehicle before the free air sniff, Officer Blitz’s two indications 
during the free air sniff by themselves were insufficient to establish probable 
cause. 
[30] Citing the “instinctive entry” rule, the State claims that “[e]ven if Officer Blitz 
had not indicated on the car’s exterior, . . . his entry into the car would not have 
violated the Fourth Amendment.” Appellee’s Br. at 16. The instinctive entry 
rule originated in United States v. Stone, 866 F.2d 359, 360-62 (10th Cir. 1989). In 
that case, law enforcement officers had reasonable suspicion that the defendant 
driver possessed narcotics. During the traffic stop, the canine on the scene 
“showed interest underneath the rear area of the car and at the passenger door, 
and then jumped in the open hatchback where [it] ‘keyed’ on a duffle bag . . . .” 
Id. at 361. The trained handler let the canine “go where [its] nose would take 
[it].” Id. When law enforcement officers searched the duffle bag, they found 
narcotics. The Tenth Circuit held that the canine’s “instinctive actions” did not 
constitute a search within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment because the 
officers, who had reasonable suspicion to believe that the automobile contained 
narcotics, did not facilitate the canine’s entry into the vehicle or encourage the 
canine to enter the car. Id. at 363-64. In subsequent cases, some federal and 
state courts have held that the instinctive entry rule applies only if law 
enforcement officers did not assist, facilitate, or create an opportunity for the 
canine to enter the vehicle. See e.g., United States v. Winningham, 140 F.3d 1328, 
1329 (10th Cir. 1998). 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 16 of 24 
 
[31] Recently, our court considered the instinctive entry rule in Ocampo v. State, 268 
N.E.3d 823, 830 (Ind. Ct. App. 2025). In Ocampo, officers were watching for 
Ocampo’s vehicle, because the vehicle was the subject of a drug investigation. 
268 N.E.3d at 827. The officers observed the driver of the vehicle commit 
driving infractions and initiated a traffic stop. The officers removed Ocampo 
and his passenger from the vehicle. Neither the passenger nor the officer shut 
the passenger door of the vehicle. Thereafter, a canine officer performed an on-
lead free air sniff of the vehicle’s exterior. The canine officer “did not alert for 
the presence of narcotics during th[at] exterior sniff.” Id. 
[32] As the canine officer neared the open passenger door, the handling officer 
removed the canine’s lead because the canine indicated his intent to enter the 
vehicle. Id. The canine officer then jumped through the open passenger door 
and, after sniffing the driver’s seat, passenger seat, and the second row of seats, 
the canine eventually alerted to the presence of narcotics in the third row of 
seats and scratched at the door panel on the passenger side. Id. at 827-28. The 
canine’s partner officer then leaned into the vehicle so that he was able to see 
where the canine was alerting. Id. at 828. The officers then removed the side 
door panel and saw a brown plastic bag under the vehicle’s speaker. A wrapped 
package in that bag contained a substance that tested positive for the presence 
of heroin. Id. 
[33] Ocampo appealed the denial of his motion to suppress the narcotics found 
during the vehicle search and argued in pertinent part that the canine officer’s 
interior sniff violated his Fourth Amendment rights. Our court concluded that 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 17 of 24 
 
the canine’s handler, Officer Powell, had facilitated Officer Swag’s entry into 
the vehicle. 
Officer Powell testified that he knew that Swag was about to 
jump into the vehicle and removed Swag’s lead for the express 
purpose of allowing him to search inside. Officer Powell further 
explained that had Swag’s lead not been removed, he would have 
gotten “hung up around armrests or the seats or stuff like that” 
and would not have been able to freely move around the vehicle. 
Tr. at 8. Thus, the act of removing Swag’s lead necessarily 
facilitated the interior vehicle sniff and the trial court erred in 
reaching the opposite conclusion. 
Id. at 832. Our court held that facilitating a dog’s entry into a vehicle without 
first establishing probable cause constitutes an improper search. Id. at 835 
(citation omitted). And our court reversed the trial court’s order denying 
Ocampo’s motion to suppress. 
[34] We agree with the Ocampo panel’s result but decline to apply the instinctive 
entry rule. Officer Woodard deployed her canine for the purpose of obtaining 
information and allowed the canine to enter Boyd’s protected private space. See 
Hardin v. State, 148 N.E.3d 932, 945 (Ind. 2020) (acknowledging that “Hoosiers 
regard vehicles as private areas not subject to random police rummaging”). 
Where a human law enforcement officer lacks probable cause to enter a vehicle 
to search, there is no reason why a canine officer should be permitted to enter a 
vehicle to search, whether that entry is instinctive or not. It is more than 
reasonable to require trained handlers to prevent canines from entering vehicles 
that law enforcement officers lack probable cause to search. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 18 of 24 
 
[35] The record in this case establishes that before Officer Blitz conducted the free 
air sniff, Officer Woodard wanted to make it possible for Blitz to enter Boyd’s 
vehicle. The officer told Officer Forman to leave the driver’s side door of 
Boyd’s car open if Boyd did not shut it. Officer Forman’s body camera video 
shows that he opened the car door for Boyd, kept his hand on the door frame, 
and used his position adjacent to the door and in front of Boyd to make it 
difficult for Boyd to close the door. See State’s Ex. D. We cannot conclude that 
a reasonable person in Boyd’s position would have believed that he had the 
legal right or the officer’s permission to shut the car door. The door was left 
open as Officer Woodard had directed. During the free air sniff, Officer 
Woodard did not make any attempt to prevent Officer Blitz from entering 
Boyd’s vehicle. 
[36] We agree with Boyd that “[i]t defies credulity to suggest that Detective 
Woodard did not manipulate circumstances to be sure that her canine could 
jump into Boyd’s car and conduct a sniff test by directing officers to leave open 
Boyd’s door.” Appellant’s Br. at 16. Therefore, even if we adopted the Ocampo 
panel’s instinctive entry rule, because the officers manipulated Boyd into 
leaving the driver’s side door open, Officer Blitz’s entry into Boyd’s vehicle 
constituted an improper search. 
[37] For all of these reasons, we agree with Boyd that the warrantless vehicle search 
violated his Fourth Amendment rights. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 19 of 24 
 
Boyd’s Article 1, Section 11 Argument 
[38] Boyd also claims the search violated Article 1, Section 11 of the Indiana 
Constitution, which provides that 
[t]he right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, 
papers, and effects, against unreasonable search or seizure, shall 
not be violated; and no warrant shall issue, but upon probable 
cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly 
describing the place to be searched, and the person or thing to be 
seized. 
“While almost identical in wording to the federal Fourth Amendment, the 
Indiana Constitution’s Search and Seizure clause is given an independent 
interpretation and application.” Myers v. State, 839 N.E.2d 1146, 1153 (Ind. 
2005). 
[39] “To determine whether a search or seizure violates the Indiana Constitution, 
courts must evaluate the reasonableness of the police conduct under the totality 
of the circumstances.” Id. (internal quotation omitted). “[T]he totality of the 
circumstances requires consideration of both the degree of intrusion into the 
subject’s ordinary activities and the basis upon which the officer selected the 
subject of the search or seizure.” Id. (internal quotation omitted). Although 
there may well be other relevant considerations under the circumstances, our 
Supreme Court has explained that the “reasonableness of a search or seizure as 
turning on a balance of: 1) the degree of concern, suspicion, or knowledge that 
a violation has occurred, 2) the degree of intrusion the method of the search or 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 20 of 24 
 
seizure imposes on the citizen’s ordinary activities, and 3) the extent of law 
enforcement needs.” Litchfield v. State, 824 N.E.2d 356, 361 (Ind. 2005). 
The degree of concern that a violation has occurred. 
[40] Officer Ash initiated the traffic stop because Boyd’s vehicle crossed over the fog 
line, but the officer had no reason to believe Boyd was impaired or that he had 
committed any other offense. The officer did find it odd that Boyd stopped his 
car in the middle of U.S. 31 South after the officer initiated the traffic stop. But 
the officer had not observed any facts that would lead a reasonable person to 
conclude that Boyd possessed contraband. Therefore, when Officer Ash 
initiated the traffic stop and requested a canine officer, his degree of concern or 
suspicion that Boyd was concealing contraband in his vehicle was minimal. 
And when Officers Woodard and Blitz arrived on the scene, the law 
enforcement officers still had no other reason to believe that Boyd’s vehicle 
contained narcotics. 
[41] After Officer Blitz gave two indications to the presence of the odor of narcotics 
near Boyd’s vehicle, law enforcement officers’ degree of concern that the 
vehicle contained contraband increased. But we must consider all of the 
circumstances of the traffic stop and not just Officer Blitz’s two indications 
during the free air sniff. 
The degree of intrusion 
[42] Next, Boyd claims that the degree of intrusion was high for a minor traffic 
infraction. We measure the degree of intrusion from the defendant’s point of 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 21 of 24 
 
view, considering the “intrusion into both the citizen’s physical movements and 
the citizen’s privacy.” Hardin v. State, 148 N.E.3d 932, 944 (Ind. 2020). 
[43] Officer Woodard and Officer Blitz arrived on the scene while Officer Ash was 
still completing the paperwork for the warning for unsafe lane movement. And 
the State contends that the degree of intrusion into Boyd’s privacy was 
relatively low because a canine’s exterior free air sniff is not a search. See Thayer 
v. State, 144 N.E.3d 843, 849 (Ind. Ct. App. 2020) (stating that a canine’s free 
air sniff of a vehicle’s exterior does not involve a significant intrusion on a 
person’s privacy). “Likewise, a traffic stop typically amounts to a small 
intrusion on a citizen’s ordinary activities.” Dunem v. State, 254 N.E.3d 559, 571 
(Ind. Ct. App. 2025), trans. denied. 
[44] Although the request for a canine officer did not unreasonably prolong the 
traffic stop, the initial thirteen minutes was not an insignificant intrusion on 
Boyd’s liberty where Officer Ash’s only avowed purpose for the stop was to 
give Boyd a warning for crossing over the fog line. The officers also 
significantly intruded on Boyd’s liberty when they removed him from his 
vehicle despite the relative insignificance of the alleged infraction, Officers 
Woodard and Forman then manipulated the scene to ensure that Boyd’s car 
door remained open during Officer Blitz’s free air sniff. Finally, Officer Blitz’s 
entry into the vehicle through the open driver’s side door was not an 
insignificant intrusion on Boyd’s privacy. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 22 of 24 
 
Law enforcement needs 
[45] Boyd argues that there were no law enforcement needs justifying the request for 
a canine officer to conduct a free air sniff. Boyd was cooperative and the 
officers did not believe he was dangerous or impaired. Boyd argues that the 
officers had no reason to suspect that his vehicle contained evidence of a crime. 
[46] We agree with the State that generally the “needs of law enforcement to find 
evidence of drug activity is obviously high.” Appellee’s Br. at 20 (quoting 
McKinney v. State, 212 N.E.3d 697, 708 (Ind. Ct. App. 2023)); see also, Austin v. 
State, 997 N.E.2d 1027, 1036 (Ind. 2013) (holding that law enforcement needs 
are great when investigating drug trafficking). But under these specific 
circumstances, Officer Ash had no reason to suspect that Boyd was impaired or 
that his vehicle contained contraband. He witnessed Boyd drive his vehicle over 
the fog line and reach into the vehicle’s passenger compartment or center 
console, both of which are very common driver conduct. The sole reason for 
the traffic stop was that Boyd had crossed over the fog line. On the record 
before us, we can easily conclude that the infraction for which Boyd was 
stopped did not endanger any other person or motorist. Simply said, Officer 
Ash had absolutely no reason to suspect drug activity before Officer Blitz was 
inside the vehicle and alerted on the center console of Boyd’s vehicle. 
The totality of these circumstances leads us to conclude that the search 
of Boyd’s vehicle was unconstitutional under Article 1, Section 11. 
[47] Officer Ash stopped Boyd for a minor traffic infraction that is common driver 
behavior. The officer had no reason to suspect that Boyd was impaired or had 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 23 of 24 
 
contraband in his vehicle before he requested a canine officer. Officer Blitz’s 
entry into Boyd’s vehicle after the officers facilitated his entry by impairing 
Boyd’s ability to shut his car door was a significant degree of intrusion. We 
acknowledge a law enforcement officer’s high degree of need to investigate drug 
activity, but this factor is not outcome determinative where the officer has no 
reason to suspect drug activity after the initial traffic stop and before 
manipulation of the scene to facilitate entry into the vehicle by a canine officer. 
Under the totality of these circumstances, we conclude that the officers’ search 
of Boyd’s vehicle was unreasonable, and therefore, violated Article 1, Section 
11. 
Conclusion 
[48] We hold, under these unique facts and circumstances, that the warrantless 
search of Boyd’s vehicle was unconstitutional under the Fourth Amendment of 
the US Constitution and under Indiana Constitution. We therefore instruct the 
trial court to issue an order granting Boyd’s motion to suppress. See Ocampo, 
268 N.E.3d at 835. 
[49] We reverse and remand for proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
May, J., and Felix, J., concur. 
ATTORNEY FOR APPELLANT 
Matthew J. McGovern 
Fishers, Indiana 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2071 | August 5, 2026 Page 24 of 24 
 
 
ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLEE 
Theodore E. Rokita 
Attorney General of Indiana 
Andrew M. Sweet 
Deputy Attorney General 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
