24A-PL-2536
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/07/27/timothy_stabosz_v._shaw_friedman.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10935353/timothy-stabosz-v-shaw-friedman/
Caption: Timothy Stabosz v. Shaw Friedman
Date: 2026-07-27

Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 24A-PL-2536 | July 27, 2026 Page 1 of 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE 
Court of Appeals of Indiana 
 
Timothy Stabosz, 
Appellant-Defendant/Cross-Appellee 
v. 
Shaw Friedman, 
Appellee-Plaintiff/Cross-Appellant 
July 27, 2026 
Court of Appeals Case No. 
24A-PL-2536 
Appeal from the LaPorte Circuit Court 
The Honorable Stephen R. Bowers, Special Judge 
Trial Court Cause No. 
46C01-2106-PL-1110 
Opinion by Judge Brown 
Judges Weissmann and Felix concur. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 24A-PL-2536 | July 27, 2026 Page 2 of 11 
 
Brown, Judge. 
[1] Timothy Stabosz appealed the trial court’s order reinstating an order belatedly 
granting a Motion to Correct Error filed by Shaw Friedman after the motion 
was deemed denied pursuant to Ind. Trial Rule 53.3. On cross-appeal, 
Friedman sought appellate review of the issues raised in his Motion to Correct 
Error as well as two additional evidentiary issues that were not raised in his 
motion. In a published opinion, this Court vacated the belated order granting 
the Motion to Correct Error, agreeing with Stabosz that his appeal voided the 
belated order. Stabosz v. Friedman, 274 N.E.3d 480, 485, 489 (Ind. Ct. App. 
2025), reh’g denied, aff’d in part and vacated in part, 280 N.E.3d 799 (Ind. 2026). 
For Friedman’s cross-appeal, we rejected his arguments raised in his Motion to 
Correct Error and reinstated the jury verdict. Id. at 486-489. Believing the 
Indiana Supreme Court’s decision in Cavinder Elevators, Inc. v. Hall, 726 N.E.2d 
285 (Ind. 2000), limited the scope of our review, we declined to reach two cross-
appeal arguments that Friedman had not raised in his Motion to Correct Error. 
Stabosz, 274 N.E.3d at 489 n.9. Upon the Indiana Supreme Court’s directive on 
remand, we consider those two issues now, find no reversible error, and 
reaffirm our prior holding reversing and vacating the trial court’s belated order 
and reinstating the jury verdict in favor of Stabosz.1 
 
1 Our original opinion was affirmed in part and vacated in part on transfer. See Stabosz v. Friedman, 280 
N.E.3d 799 (Ind. 2026). The case is now before us on remand from the Indiana Supreme Court with a 
directive to “consider in the first instance the issues in the cross-appeal that the court noted in footnote nine 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 24A-PL-2536 | July 27, 2026 Page 3 of 11 
 
Facts and Procedural History 
[2] The Indiana Supreme Court summarized the factual and procedural history of 
this case as follows: 
Shaw Friedman was the LaPorte County attorney when Timothy 
Stabosz was the county auditor. After Stabosz made statements 
in emails and social media posts about Friedman’s professional 
conduct, Friedman sued, alleging that Stabosz defamed him. At 
the conclusion of a five-day trial, the jury returned a defense 
verdict for Stabosz. 
Friedman then filed a motion to correct error requesting a new 
trial based on five arguments: (1) the verdict was against the 
weight of the evidence; (2) the trial court instructed the jury 
incorrectly; (3) the trial court improperly excluded expert 
testimony; (4) a juror undertook an extrajudicial investigation; 
and (5) the trial court wrongly declined to take judicial notice of 
the second amended complaint. The trial court held a hearing on 
the motion, and after thirty days passed without a ruling, Trial 
Rule 53.3(A) deemed the motion denied on September 23, 2024. 
Ind. Trial Rule 53.3(A); T.R. 6(A). But three days later, the trial 
court entered an order belatedly granting the motion and 
ordering a new trial based on the instruction issue. 
Stabosz then filed a motion to set aside that order, arguing the 
order was void because the trial rules already deemed the motion 
to correct error denied. The trial court granted that motion the 
day after it was filed, rescinding the belated order. But then 
Friedman filed a motion to reconsider, and the trial court came 
full circle, granting that motion and reinstating its order granting 
the motion to correct error and ordering a new trial. 
 
of its opinion that it was declining to address.” Stabosz, 280 N.E.3d at 805. In all other respects, our opinion 
was summarily affirmed. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 24A-PL-2536 | July 27, 2026 Page 4 of 11 
 
Stabosz appealed, arguing that the order belatedly granting the 
motion to correct error was void because the trial rules already 
deemed the motion denied. And besides, he argued, the motion 
should have failed on its merits anyway. Since Stabosz filed his 
notice of appeal on October 17, a few days before Friedman’s 
deadline to appeal from what the rules deemed a denial of his 
motion to correct error, Friedman cross-appealed rather than 
filing his own notice of appeal. 
Through his cross-appeal, Friedman raised the issues he had 
pressed in his motion to correct error plus two others. One of the 
additional arguments was that the trial court erred in excluding a 
photograph that Friedman argued contradicted testimony that a 
witness wasn’t part of a group called the Oath Keepers. The 
other additional argument was that the trial court erred in 
excluding evidence Friedman believed showed that what he 
alleged was Stabosz’s defamation was part of a pattern where 
Stabosz used similar language about others. 
In a published opinion, the Court of Appeals vacated the belated 
order granting the motion to correct error, agreeing with Stabosz 
that his appeal voided the belated order. Stabosz v. Friedman, 274 
N.E.3d 480, 485, 489 (Ind. Ct. App. 2025). For Friedman’s 
cross-appeal, the Court rejected his arguments and reinstated the 
jury verdict. Id. at 486-[4]89. Critical here, the Court refused to 
consider Friedman’s two cross-appeal arguments that he had not 
raised in his motion to correct error. Id. at 489 n.9. 
Stabosz, 280 N.E.3d at 800. Friedman petitioned for transfer, arguing among 
other things, that his cross-appeal should not have been limited to arguments 
raised in his deemed denied Motion to Correct Error. Concluding that it was 
compelled “to decide the scope of a cross-appeal when a party is caught betwixt 
and between because the trial court belatedly granted a Trial Rule 59 motion to 
correct error, but only after Trial Rule 53.3(A) already deemed the motion 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 24A-PL-2536 | July 27, 2026 Page 5 of 11 
 
denied because the judge failed to rule within thirty days,” the Indiana Supreme 
Court granted transfer to clarify what it saw as “an important, recurring issue of 
trial and appellate procedure.” Id. at 799. The Court held: “When (1) the 
nonmovant appeals from a trial court’s order belatedly granting a motion to 
correct error, and (2) the nonmovant files the notice of appeal before the 
movant’s deadline to appeal from what the trial rules deem a denial of the 
motion, then the movant may cross-appeal any issues it preserved in the trial 
court, not just issues in its motion to correct error.” Id. In short, a timely 
cross-appeal from a trial court’s order belatedly granting a motion to correct 
error is not limited to only issues raised in a motion to correct error; it may 
include any issues it preserved in the trial court.2 We turn to address the two 
issues raised on cross-appeal that have not yet been disposed of that were 
preserved in the trial court. 
Discussion 
[3] Friedman challenges two evidentiary rulings by the trial court.3 Specifically, he 
argues that the court abused its discretion in excluding a photograph that he 
 
2 The Indiana Supreme Court acknowledged the precedential origin of the confusion that contributed to this 
Court’s original decision, stating, “to be sure, our earlier statements acknowledge only a cross-appeal raising 
the same issues as the motion to correct error.” Stabosz, 280 N.E.3d at 804. 
3 We observe that Friedman’s argument regarding these two cross-appeal issues in his Appellee/Cross-
Appellant’s Brief is minimal. Indeed, in his reply brief, Friedman makes no further mention of these two 
evidentiary rulings. Rather, he concedes that all of the court’s evidentiary rulings “are subject to the abuse of 
discretion standard of review” and states that he raised such issues in his cross-appeal “primarily to avoid any 
future argument regarding the law of the case doctrine” in the event he were to be granted a new trial. 
Appellee/Cross-Appellant’s Reply Brief at 5. We do not grant him a new trial. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 24A-PL-2536 | July 27, 2026 Page 6 of 11 
 
claimed contradicted testimony that a witness was not part of a group called the 
Oath Keepers.4 Friedman also asserts that the trial court abused its discretion in 
excluding evidence he believed showed that what he alleged was Stabosz’s 
defamation was part of a pattern of conduct where, on prior occasions, Stabosz 
used some of the same language about others. 
[4] Generally, we review the trial court’s ruling on the admission or exclusion of 
evidence for an abuse of discretion. Roche v. State, 690 N.E.2d 1115, 1134 (Ind. 
1997), reh’g denied. We reverse only when the decision is clearly against the 
logic and effect of the facts and circumstances. Joyner v. State, 678 N.E.2d 386, 
390 (Ind. 1997), reh’g denied. We may affirm a trial court’s decision regarding 
the admission of evidence if it is sustainable on any basis in the record. Barker v. 
State, 695 N.E.2d 925, 930 (Ind. 1998), reh’g denied. 
[5] As for the first evidentiary issue, the record reveals that during cross-
examination of defense witness Joseph Haney, Friedman sought admission of a 
photograph of Haney wearing a vest upon which the words “Oath Keeper” 
appeared. Transcript Volume VI at 129, 146. The record indicates that the 
photo, marked as Plaintiff’s Exhibit 40, was posted on various social media 
accounts. Friedman suggested that the photograph contradicted both Stabosz’s 
and Haney’s sworn trial testimony that Haney was, in fact, not a member of the 
 
4 According to Stabosz, the Oath Keepers “are a far-right anti-government militia group.” Appellant/Cross-
Appellee’s Brief at 41 n.7 (citation omitted). He further states that the Oath Keepers “are widely known as a 
hate group.” Id. at 44. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 24A-PL-2536 | July 27, 2026 Page 7 of 11 
 
group known as the Oath Keepers. Stabosz’s counsel objected to the 
admissibility of the photograph and further informed the court he had “never 
seen” the photograph. Id. at 130. The court sustained the objection, observing 
that the court had already given Friedman the opportunity to make an offer to 
prove outside the presence of the jury regarding any alleged impeachment 
evidence and that Friedman had not presented the photograph to the court for 
review and had not presented any evidence that actually connected Haney to 
the Oath Keepers or to convince the court this collateral matter was relevant to 
Friedman’s defamation claim. Thereafter, Friedman asked the court to 
“reconsider” its ruling excluding the photograph, arguing that the photograph 
was “admissible impeachment evidence.” Id. at 165-166. In confirming its 
prior ruling excluding the photograph, the trial court stated that there were “a 
number of reasons” not to admit the evidence. Id. at 166. The court explained 
to Friedman’s counsel: 
I think it has the potential to be inflammatory. The timing of the 
posting, the timing of the disclosure are considerations as well. 
But the big thing I have simply is this: Counsel, I gave you the 
opportunity to present what it was that you wanted to put before 
the jury. We took a recess. We sent the jury out so there 
wouldn’t be any question about what we were doing. We looked 
at a bunch of other things. Not once was there any review of the 
photograph . . . you had an opportunity and you didn’t take 
advantage of the opportunity as far as I’m concerned. 
Id. at 166-167. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 24A-PL-2536 | July 27, 2026 Page 8 of 11 
 
[6] On appeal, Friedman makes limited argument on this issue and simply directs 
us to Ind. Evidence Rule 607 and argues that the court abused its discretion in 
excluding Exhibit 40 and that it should have been admitted for impeachment 
purposes. See Ind. Evidence Rule 607 (“Any party . . . may attack the witness’s 
credibility”). First, as implied by the trial court, we observe that the photograph 
does not necessarily serve as impeachment evidence as it does not necessarily 
contradict sworn testimony that Haney was not a member of the Oath Keepers. 
A photograph that Haney once wore a vest with those words on it demonstrates 
only that he wore such apparel. 
[7] Second, we agree with the trial court that a photograph suggesting Haney may 
be a member of, or at the very least sympathized with, an alleged hate group 
had the potential to be inflammatory. Ind. Evidence Rule 403 “directs courts, 
as gatekeepers, to exclude evidence if its risks substantially outweigh its 
relevance.” Escamilla v. Shiel Sexton Co., Inc., 73 N.E.3d 663, 670 (Ind. 2017). 
Specifically, as to “unfair prejudice,” courts look “to the capacity of the 
evidence to persuade by illegitimate means, or the tendency of the evidence to 
suggest decision on an improper basis.” Id. (citations omitted). We agree with 
the trial court that, in this case, the capacity of the evidence to persuade by 
illegitimate means outweighed any alleged relevance. 
[8] Finally, it is well established that improper rulings regarding the admission of 
evidence going to collateral matters that are not central to the determination of 
guilt or liability are not a basis for relief. Singh v. Lyday, 889 N.E.2d 342, 355 
(Ind. Ct. App. 2008) (collecting cases), reh’g denied, trans. denied; see, e.g., Parke 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 24A-PL-2536 | July 27, 2026 Page 9 of 11 
 
County v. Ropak, Inc., 526 N.E.2d 732, 740-741 (Ind. Ct. App. 1988) (concluding 
any error in exclusion of letter was harmless; although letter could have been 
used to impeach a witness, the impeachment concerned an issue separate from 
that on which the plaintiff brought its misrepresentation claim), reh’g denied, 
trans. denied. Without question, a photograph impeaching testimony that 
Haney is not, in fact, a member of the Oath Keepers falls into this category of a 
collateral issue separate from that which Friedman brought his defamation 
claim against Stabosz. Under the circumstances, we cannot say the trial court 
abused its discretion in excluding the photograph. 
[9] As for Friedman’s claim that the trial court abused its discretion in “excluding 
evidence of Stabosz’s prior use of defamatory language when in disputes with 
others,” Appellee/Cross-Appellant’s Brief at 38 (emphasis omitted), we 
similarly find no abuse of discretion. The record indicates that during cross-
examination of Stabosz, Friedman attempted to elicit testimony regarding 
language used by Stabosz in prior disputes with others, including the CEO of 
Scott’s Liquid Gold and with a company called PNG, both companies of which 
Stabosz was a shareholder. Stabosz objected to the line-of-questioning on the 
basis of relevance. Friedman argued that Stabosz made similar allegations of 
corruption against those companies and that “[i]t shows a pattern of making 
five allegations, by name, of the identical nature in this case at that time 
showing a pattern of behavior.” Transcript Volume III at 84. Stabosz 
responded, “[i]t’s prior bad acts then” and inadmissible. Id. The court noted 
multiple differences in the language used in the prior accusations and excluded 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 24A-PL-2536 | July 27, 2026 Page 10 of 11 
 
the evidence stating that the court was “not satisfied that it’s sufficient and 
similar” and that it was “a stretch” to call this a pattern of conduct. Id. The 
court further found that exclusion of the evidence was warranted as a “prior 
bad act.” Id. In an offer to prove, Friedman pointed to Stabosz’s prior 
accusations and the use of words such as “fleecing” and “henchman” which 
were the same words he used against Friedman in the current case. Id. at 86. 
[10] Again, Friedman’s cross-appeal argument on this issue is limited. He asserts 
generally that “[e]vidence of a pattern of conduct is admissible to refute an 
assertion of good faith.” Appellee/Cross-Appellant’s Brief at 39 (citing Eden 
United, Inc. v. Short, 573 N.E.2d 920, 927 (Ind. Ct. App. 1991), reh’g denied, 
trans. denied). However, as stated above, the trial court noted multiple 
differences in the language allegedly used by Stabosz on the prior occasions and 
found that the language was not sufficiently similar to the alleged defamatory 
statements made in the present case to be relevant of a pattern of conduct. 
Additionally, as alluded to by the trial court, pattern of conduct evidence would 
not be admissible to show that a person acted in conformity with that conduct 
on a particular occasion as Ind. Evidence Rule 404 prohibits the use of 
character and prior-acts evidence for propensity purposes. See Ind. Evidence 
Rule 404(a)(1) (“Evidence of a person’s character or character trait is not 
admissible to prove that on a particular occasion the person acted in accordance 
with the character or trait”). We cannot say that the court abused its discretion 
in excluding the evidence. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 24A-PL-2536 | July 27, 2026 Page 11 of 11 
 
[11] For the foregoing reasons, we reaffirm our prior holding reversing and vacating 
the trial court’s belated order and reinstating the jury verdict in favor of Stabosz. 
[12] Reversed. 
Weissmann, J., and Felix, J., concur. 
ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLANT 
Margaret M. Christensen 
Sarah Katherine Jackson 
Dentons Bingham Greenebaum LLP 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
Harold G. Hagberg 
Crown Point, Indiana 
Andrew B. Jones 
Michael P. Smyth 
Jones Law Office LLC 
South Bend, Indiana 
 
ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLEE 
Robert J. Palmer 
R. William Jonas, Jr. 
May • Oberfell • Lorber 
Mishawaka, Indiana 
 
