25A-MI-2817
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/07/27/todd_rokita_indiana_attorney_general_v._berry_global_group_inc..pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10935352/todd-rokita-indiana-attorney-general-v-berry-global-group-inc/
Caption: Todd Rokita, Indiana Attorney General v. Berry Global Group INC.
Date: 2026-07-27

Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-MI-2817 | July 27, 2026 Page 1 of 12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE 
Court of Appeals of Indiana 
 
Todd Rokita, Indiana Attorney General, 
Appellant-Petitioner 
v. 
Berry Global Group, Inc., and Haitian Center of Evansville, 
Appellees-Respondents 
July 27, 2026 
Court of Appeals Case No. 
25A-MI-2817 
Appeal from the Vanderburgh Superior Court 
The Honorable Robert J. Pigman, Judge 
Trial Court Cause No. 
82D03-2504-MI-2439 
Opinion by Judge Vaidik 
Judges Altice and Foley concur. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-MI-2817 | July 27, 2026 Page 2 of 12 
 
Vaidik, Judge. 
Case Summary 
[1] Indiana Code section 4-6-3-3 authorizes our attorney general to issue an 
“investigative demand”—commonly referred to as a “civil investigative 
demand,” or “CID”—if the attorney general has reasonable cause to believe 
that the recipient “may be in possession, custody, or control of documentary 
material, or may have knowledge of a fact that is relevant to an investigation 
conducted to determine if a person is or has been engaged in a violation of” a 
statute enforced by the attorney general. Attorney General Todd Rokita (“the 
Attorney General”) issued CIDs to Berry Global Group, Inc., and the Haitian 
Center of Evansville, referencing “an investigation being conducted concerning 
human labor trafficking and indecent nuisances.”1 But the CIDs didn’t identify 
a specific suspected perpetrator, victim, or incident being investigated. Berry 
Global and the Haitian Center, believing the CIDs were improper, declined to 
respond. The Attorney General filed petitions to enforce the CIDs, but he again 
failed to identify a specific suspected perpetrator, victim, or incident being 
investigated. The trial court denied the petitions, and the Attorney General 
appeals. 
 
1 A place where human trafficking is conducted or permitted is considered an “indecent nuisance” under 
Indiana law. Ind. Code § 32-30-7-1. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-MI-2817 | July 27, 2026 Page 3 of 12 
 
[2] We affirm. Section 4-6-3-3 authorizes the issuance of a CID only if an 
“investigation” is being conducted. For an investigation to exist, there must be 
a factual predicate—a n articulable reason to suspect that particular wrongdoing 
may be afoot. A mere hunch will not suffice. Here, the Attorney General has 
not shown that he has information of any sort, such as a complaint or tip, about 
a specific potential statutory violation. At most, he is searching for something to 
investigate. Therefore, the CIDs issued to Berry Global and the Haitian Center 
were unauthorized, invalid, and unenforceable. 
Facts and Procedural History 
[3] In November 2024, the Attorney General issued a CID to Berry Global, an 
Evansville manufacturing company. The CID stated that the Attorney General 
“has reasonable cause to believe that you may be in possession, custody, or 
control of documentary materials or may have knowledge of facts that are 
relevant to an investigation being conducted concerning human labor 
trafficking and indecent nuisances.” Appellant’s App. Vol. 2 p. 25. The CID 
said nothing else about the target, nature, or origin of the purported 
investigation, but it directed Berry Global to respond to dozens of 
interrogatories and requests for production relating to Berry Global’s hiring and 
employment of “Migrant” workers. Id. at 25-38. 
[4] Three weeks later, the Attorney General issued a substantially similar CID to 
the Haitian Center, a nonprofit organization that provides services to 
Evansville’s Haitian population. The CID directed the Haitian Center to 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-MI-2817 | July 27, 2026 Page 4 of 12 
 
respond to dozens of interrogatories and requests for production relating to 
those services. 
[5] Believing the CIDs to be improper, Berry Global and the Haitian Center 
declined to respond. The Attorney General then petitioned to enforce the CIDs. 
The petitions stated generally that (1) the arrival of migrants into Indiana, 
including Evansville, has “increased substantially” in recent years, (2) 
“[r]efugees and migrants are among the populations most vulnerable to human 
trafficking and forced labor,” and (3) “[t]he Attorney General is committed to 
combatting human trafficking in Indiana and ensuring that newly arrived 
migrants are not the victims of human trafficking, labor trafficking, or other 
forms of forced labor.” Id. at 17-20, 102-107. But the petitions, like the CIDs 
themselves, identified no specific suspected perpetrator, victim, or incident 
being investigated. Nonetheless, the Attorney General claimed that he has 
reasonable cause to believe that Berry Global and the Haitian Center “may be 
in possession of information relevant to an investigation of indecent nuisance 
and labor trafficking” because Berry Global is “a large, sophisticated employer 
that actively recruits refugees and migrants and works with various migrant 
resettlement nonprofits to do so” and the Haitian Center is “an organization 
that aids Haitian immigrants and refugees and collaborates with various 
migrant resettlement nonprofits.” Id. at 21, 108. 
[6] The cases were eventually consolidated, and the trial court heard oral 
argument. Counsel for the Attorney General described the origins of the 
purported investigation as follows: 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-MI-2817 | July 27, 2026 Page 5 of 12 
 
[T]he genesis of the Attorney General’s investigation of labor 
trafficking in Evansville stems from the recent, over the past three 
(3) or four (4) years, dramatic increase in the arrival of new 
migrants into the Evansville area. And in particular, migrants 
who are arriving in the Evansville area in search of employment 
opportunities and who, because of the circumstances in which 
they arrive in Evansville, and because they are seeking 
employment opportunities, are often uniquely vulnerable to 
exploitation by labor traffickers or other criminal elements who 
might seek to press them or coerce them into forced labor 
arrangements. 
Tr. p. 7. Later, the court asked, “Is there a specific allegation or event, criminal 
event, that you’re concerned with?” Id. at 30. Counsel responded, “We have 
not identified, and we’re not prepared to identify, a specific suspect who’s 
engaged in a specific act of human trafficking.” Id. 
[7] Following the oral argument, the trial court denied the Attorney General’s 
petitions. The court “presume[d] that the Attorney General’s request for the 
information [] sought is based on a legitimate concern for what all parties agree 
is a serious criminal offense, that is labor trafficking.” Appellant’s App. Vol. 2 
p. 224. The court concluded, however, that the Attorney General didn’t 
establish reasonable cause to believe Berry Global and the Haitian Center have 
information relevant to this concern. 
[8] The Attorney General now appeals. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-MI-2817 | July 27, 2026 Page 6 of 12 
 
Discussion and Decision 
[9] The Attorney General contends that the trial court erred by denying his 
petitions to enforce the CIDs. Because no witnesses testified, the trial court’s 
decision was based on a paper record and the arguments of counsel. Therefore, 
our review is de novo. See In re Adoption of C.B.M., 992 N.E.2d 687, 691 (Ind. 
2013); Trinity Homes, LLC v. Fang, 848 N.E.2d 1065, 1068 (Ind. 2006). 
[10] Indiana Code section 4-6-3-3(a) establishes and limits the Attorney General’s 
authority to issue CIDs: 
If the attorney general has reasonable cause to believe that a 
person may be in possession, custody, or control of documentary 
material, or may have knowledge of a fact that is relevant to an 
investigation conducted to determine if a person is or has been 
engaged in a violation of IC 4-6-9, IC 4-6-10, IC 13-14-10, IC 13-
14-12, IC 13-24-2, IC 13-30-4, IC 13-30-5, IC 13-30-8, IC 16-21-
15, IC 23-7-8, IC 24-1-2, IC 24-5-0.5, IC 24-5-7, IC 24-5-8, IC 25-
1-7, IC 27-1-37-8, IC 32-34-1.5, IC 37-5, or any other statute 
enforced by the attorney general or is or has been engaged in a 
criminal violation of IC 13, only the attorney general may issue 
in writing, and cause to be served upon the person or the person’s 
representative or agent, an investigative demand that requires 
that the person served do any combination of the following: 
(1) Produce the documentary material for inspection and 
copying or reproduction. 
(2) Answer under oath and in writing written 
interrogatories. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-MI-2817 | July 27, 2026 Page 7 of 12 
 
(3) Appear and testify under oath before the attorney 
general or the attorney general’s duly authorized 
representative. 
Here, the CIDs invoked Indiana Code chapter 32-30-7 and Indiana Code 
section 35-42-3.5-1, statutes that, when read together, grant the Attorney 
General enforcement authority relating to labor trafficking. 
[11] Where the recipient of a CID objects or otherwise fails to respond, the Attorney 
General may bring an action to enforce the CID. Ind. Code § 4-6-3-6(a). In such 
an action, the Attorney General has the burden to “demonstrate to the court 
that the demand is proper.” Id. Our Supreme Court has interpreted this 
requirement to mean that the Attorney General must establish that (1) “there is 
an investigation” and (2) “there are reasonable grounds to believe that the 
person to whom the CID is directed has information relevant to that 
investigation.” Nu-Sash of Indianapolis, Inc. v. Carter, 887 N.E.2d 92, 96 (Ind. 
2008). This burden is “a small one,” but it is important because it “affords all 
citizens some protection against ‘fishing expeditions’ or retaliatory or abusive 
CIDs that are unrelated to legitimate investigations, and imposes a mild 
deterrent to arbitrary use of government authority.” Id. 
[12] The trial court found that the Attorney General failed to establish reasonable 
cause to believe Berry Global and the Haitian Center have relevant information 
about labor trafficking. But there is a more fundamental problem: the Attorney 
General did not show that he is conducting an investigation. An investigation 
would entail the Attorney General inquiring into a complaint, tip, lead, report, 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-MI-2817 | July 27, 2026 Page 8 of 12 
 
or some other specific allegation or fact indicating that a discrete statutory 
violation has been or might have been committed by a particular perpetrator 
and/or against a particular victim. See Nu-Sash, 887 N.E.2d at 94 (the Attorney 
General issued a CID because consumer complaints indicated that a home-
improvement company might be violating the Home Improvement Contracts 
Act); Everdry Mktg. & Mgmt., Inc. v. Carter, 885 N.E.2d 6 (Ind. Ct. App. 2008) 
(the Attorney General issued a CID because consumer complaints indicated 
that two home-improvement companies might be violating the Deceptive 
Consumer Sales Act); Auto-Owners Ins. v. State, 692 N.E.2d 935 (Ind. Ct. App. 
1998) (the Attorney General issued a CID because a consumer complaint 
indicated that an insurance company might be violating the Deceptive 
Consumer Sales Act and the Salvage Motor Vehicles Act). 
[13] In other words, for an investigation to exist, there must be a factual predicate, 
i.e., something concrete to investigate. And Section 4-6-3-3 fixes the sequence 
the Attorney General must follow. He must first possess that factual predicate—
like a complaint, a tip, or documentation of an incident—and only then may he 
issue CIDs to those reasonably believed to have relevant information. What he 
cannot do is invert that sequence: select a person or company for reasons 
unrelated to any suspected violation, and then use the CID power to search for 
evidence of a violation that might justify having selected them in the first place. 
The former is an investigation. The latter is an attempt to reverse-engineer 
suspicion to fit a predetermined target—and it is precisely the kind of exercise 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-MI-2817 | July 27, 2026 Page 9 of 12 
 
the “investigation” requirement exists to prevent. The factual predicate leads to 
a CID, not the other way around. 
[14] As noted by Berry Global, the Haitian Center, and the diverse group of 
organizations that filed amicus briefs in their support, adopting the Attorney 
General’s expansive view of the CID statutes would create serious legal and 
practical concerns. Allowing the Attorney General to issue CIDs with no 
factual predicate would implicate the federal and state constitutional rights to 
(1) freedom of speech and freedom of association, if CIDs are issued in 
retaliation for the exercise of those rights, and (2) freedom from unreasonable 
searches and seizures. See Berry Global Br. pp. 31-32, 48-50; Haitian Center Br. 
pp. 26-28, 37-38; Brief of Amicus Curiae ACLU of Indiana pp. 5-15; Brief of 
Amicus Curiae National Immigrant Justice Center pp. 20-23. It would also 
open the door to significant burdens on Hoosier businesses and the broader 
Indiana economy. See Berry Global Br. pp. 34, 36; Brief of Amici Curiae 
National Association of Manufacturers and Indiana Manufacturers Association 
pp. 14-17; Brief of Amici Curiae Indiana Chamber of Commerce and Defense 
Trial Counsel of Indiana pp. 9-20. 
[15] Here, the Attorney General has never identified—in the CIDs, in his petitions 
to enforce, at oral argument before the trial court, or in his appellate briefs—any 
particularized information in his possession that could give rise to a labor-
trafficking investigation. He has never even alleged that such information 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-MI-2817 | July 27, 2026 Page 10 of 12 
 
exists.2 The record makes clear that the Attorney General is at most trawling for 
evidence of wrongdoing—looking for information that might eventually trigger 
an investigation, based on his alleged concern that someone, somewhere might 
be involved in labor trafficking.3 
[16] In sum, the Attorney General hasn’t shown that he has anything to investigate. 
With nothing to investigate, there can be no investigation. And with no 
investigation, the Attorney General has no authority to issue CIDs. Therefore, 
the CIDs issued to Berry Global and the Haitian Center were improper, and we 
affirm the denial of the Attorney General’s petitions to enforce them. 
[17] Affirmed. 
Altice, J., and Foley, J., concur. 
 
 
 
2 In the trial court, the Attorney General argued that requiring him to disclose the information that prompted 
an investigation “could easily compromise an investigation or violate confidentiality requirements.” 
Appellant’s App. Vol. 2 p. 149. He doesn’t renew that argument on appeal, for good reason. First, he 
apparently doesn’t have any such information to disclose in this case. Second, as Berry Global and the 
Haitian Center note, concerns about the secrecy of an investigation can be addressed by having the trial court 
conduct an in-camera review of whatever information the Attorney General possesses. 
3 Berry Global and the Haitian Center assert that the Attorney General’s true concern is illegal immigration, 
not labor trafficking. They point to the specific information sought in the CIDs and a press release the 
Attorney General issued the same month he issued the CIDs. See Press Release, Amid health and safety 
concerns, Attorney General Todd Rokita investigates potential labor trafficking networks in local communities (Nov. 8, 
2024) (available at https://www.in.gov/attorneygeneral/newsroom/ [https://perma.cc/7EY4-78SX]) 
(referencing “[i]llegal immigration caused by ‘border czar’ Kamala Harris’ perversion and misapplication of 
federal law”). We need not address that argument, because even assuming the Attorney General is concerned 
about labor trafficking in a broad sense, that abstract concern does not alone justify the issuance of CIDs. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-MI-2817 | July 27, 2026 Page 11 of 12 
 
ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLANT 
Theodore E. Rokita 
Attorney General 
James A. Barta 
Solicitor General 
Blake E. Lanning 
Assistant Chief Deputy 
David R. Whitson 
Lauren R. LaBaumbard 
Deputy Attorneys General 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
 
ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLEE 
BERRY GLOBAL GROUP, INC. 
Kian J. Hudson 
Amanda Jane Gallagher 
Barnes & Thornburg LLP 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
 
ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLEE 
HAITIAN CENTER OF EVANSVILLE 
Patrick A. Shoulders 
John D. Langmaid, IV 
Ziemer, Stayman, Weitzel & Shoulders, LLP 
Evansville, Indiana 
 
ATTORNEY FOR AMICUS CURIAE 
ACLU OF INDIANA 
Stevie J. Pactor 
ACLU of Indiana 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
 
ATTORNEY FOR AMICI CURIAE 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF MANUFACTURERS AND INDIANA 
MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION 
Jonathan L. Mayes 
Bose McKinney & Evans LLP 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-MI-2817 | July 27, 2026 Page 12 of 12 
 
ATTORNEYS FOR AMICI CURIAE 
INDIANA CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND DEFENSE TRIAL COUNSEL OF 
INDIANA 
Adam H. Berry 
Indiana Chamber of Commerce 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
Lucy R. Dollens 
Quarles & Brady LLP 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
 
ATTORNEYS FOR AMICUS CURIAE 
NATIONAL IMMIGRANT JUSTICE CENTER 
Maggie L. Smith 
FBT Gibbons 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
