25A-CR-2776
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/07/15/carey_lee_fleener_jr._v._state_of_indiana.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10928334/carey-lee-fleener-jr-v-state-of-indiana/
Caption: Carey Lee Fleener, Jr. v. State of Indiana
Date: 2026-07-15

Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2776 | July 15, 2026 Page 1 of 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE 
Court of Appeals of Indiana 
 
Carey Lee Fleener, Jr., 
Appellant-Defendant 
v. 
State of Indiana, 
Appellee-Plaintiff 
July 15, 2026 
Court of Appeals Case No. 
25A-CR-2776 
Appeal from the Marion Superior Court 
The Honorable Marie L. Kern, Judge 
The Honorable Heather M. Dean-Barton, Magistrate 
Trial Court Cause No. 
49D28-2505-F5-16520 
Opinion by Chief Judge Tavitas 
Judges Weissmann and Foley concur. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2776 | July 15, 2026 Page 2 of 13 
 
Tavitas, Chief Judge. 
Case Summary 
[1] Carey Fleener, Jr., appeals his convictions for criminal confinement, a Level 5 
felony, and domestic battery, a Level 6 felony. We affirm Fleener’s conviction 
for criminal confinement but reverse his conviction for domestic battery on 
substantive double jeopardy grounds and remand with instructions that the 
conviction and sentence on that count be vacated. 
Issues 
[2] Fleener presents two issues, which we restate as: 
I. Whether the State presented sufficient evidence to support 
Fleener’s conviction for criminal confinement. 
II. Whether Fleener’s convictions for both criminal confinement 
and domestic battery constitute substantive double jeopardy. 
Facts 
[3] Fleener is the former fiancé of Donnette Swift and the father of the youngest of 
Swift’s three minor children. Fleener moved into Swift’s home in November 
2024. Fleener and Swift were engaged, but Fleener broke off the engagement in 
May 2025. 
[4] On the morning of May 23, 2025, Swift took her oldest child to school and 
came back home. She then looked through Fleener’s phone and found text 
messages between Fleener and another woman. Upset by her discovery, Swift 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2776 | July 15, 2026 Page 3 of 13 
 
asked Fleener to move out of her house, but he refused. When Swift stated that 
she would evict Fleener, he threatened to stop supporting her financially. Swift 
responded that she would find someone else to support her, and the two began 
to yell at each other. Swift’s two younger children were present during the 
argument. 
[5] At some point during the argument, Swift took out her cell phone, and Fleener 
took the phone from her and threw it against the wall. Swift then walked to the 
front door to leave, but Fleener stood in the doorway and told Swift that she 
could not leave. When Swift tried to move past Fleener, he shoved her 
backward. The two then continued their argument, walking around the home 
and yelling at each other. Swift eventually walked toward her bedroom. 
Fleener again stood in the doorway and blocked Swift’s path. Swift’s middle 
child came out of her room, cried, and held onto Swift’s leg. Swift asked 
Fleener to calm down, but he continued to yell. 
[6] As the argument continued, Swift went to the front of the house and attempted 
to exit via a window; she opened the window, kicked the screen out, and 
screamed for help. Fleener then grabbed Swift’s hair and shirt collar from 
behind, dragged her away from the window, and threw her onto the floor. This 
caused Swift pain and left a red mark on her neck. Swift stood up and told 
Fleener to stop, but he continued to yell at Swift. Swift then took the children 
into a bedroom and locked the door. Swift used her child’s iPad to send a 
message to a friend, asking him to “send help.” Tr. Vol. II p. 18. That friend 
then called the police. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2776 | July 15, 2026 Page 4 of 13 
 
[7] Fleener received an alert on his phone notifying him that the police had been 
dispatched to the area. He, therefore, knocked on the door and asked Swift to 
fix her hair and come out. Swift gathered her children and came out of the 
bedroom, walked past Fleener, and went out the front door. She then fled to 
her father’s house, but she returned when the police arrived and reported what 
had happened. Fleener fled the scene before the police arrived. He was, 
however, wearing an electronic ankle monitor,1 which enabled the police to 
locate him at a convenience store. 
[8] On May 27, 2025, the State charged Fleener with: Count I, criminal 
confinement, a Level 5 felony; Count II, domestic battery, a Level 6 felony; 
Count III, battery resulting in bodily injury, a Class A misdemeanor; and Count 
IV, criminal mischief, a Class B misdemeanor. A bench trial was held on 
September 26, 2025, at which the trial court found Fleener guilty as charged. 
At sentencing on October 10, 2025, the trial court vacated the conviction on 
Count III due to double jeopardy concerns and entered judgment of conviction 
on the remaining charges. The court then sentenced Fleener as follows: Count 
I, three years in the Department of Correction; Count II, a consecutive two-year 
sentence to be executed on community corrections work release; and Count IV, 
sixty days to be served concurrently with Count II. Fleener now appeals. 
 
1 Fleener was on home detention at the time. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2776 | July 15, 2026 Page 5 of 13 
 
Discussion and Decision 
I. Sufficiency of the Evidence 
[9] Fleener first claims that the State failed to present sufficient evidence to support 
his conviction for criminal confinement. Sufficiency of the evidence claims 
warrant a deferential standard of review in which we “neither reweigh the 
evidence nor judge witness credibility, instead reserving those matters to the 
province of the [fact-finder].” Hancz-Barron v. State, 235 N.E.3d 1237, 1244 
(Ind. 2024). A conviction is supported by sufficient evidence if “there is 
substantial evidence of probative value supporting each element of the offense 
such that a reasonable trier of fact could have found the defendant guilty 
beyond a reasonable doubt.” Id. In conducting this review, we consider only 
the evidence that supports the fact-finder’s determination, not evidence that 
might undermine it. Id. It is not necessary that the evidence overcome every 
reasonable hypothesis of innocence; instead, the evidence is sufficient if an 
inference may reasonably be drawn from it to support the verdict. Drane v. 
State, 867 N.E.2d 144, 146-47 (Ind. 2007). 
[10] To convict Fleener of criminal confinement, the State had to prove that he 
“knowingly or intentionally confine[d] another person without the other 
person’s consent.” Ind. Code § 35-42-3-3(a). The offense is elevated to a Level 
5 felony if “it results in bodily injury to a person other than the confining 
person.” Id. § 3(b)(1)(C). 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2776 | July 15, 2026 Page 6 of 13 
 
[11] The evidence most favorable to the trial court’s judgment shows that, when 
Swift attempted to escape the house through the window, Fleener approached 
her from behind, grabbed her by the hair and collar, and threw her onto the 
floor. From this evidence, the trial court, acting as the trier of fact, could 
reasonably conclude that Fleener knowingly or intentionally confined Swift 
without her consent. 
[12] As to the element of bodily injury, Swift testified that, when Fleener grabbed 
her hair and collar, this caused her “a little” pain “on my hairline in the back.” 
Tr. Vol. II p. 17. Our Supreme Court has held that “any degree of physical 
pain may constitute a bodily injury. . . .” Bailey v. State, 979 N.E.2d 133, 142 
(Ind. 2012); see also Ind. Code § 35-31.5-2-29 (“‘Bodily injury’ means any 
impairment of physical condition, including physical pain.”). Accordingly, 
Swift’s testimony that Fleener’s actions caused her a little pain is sufficient to 
establish the element of bodily injury. 
[13] Fleener’s citation to McFadden v. State, 25 N.E.3d 1271 (Ind. Ct. App. 2015), is 
unavailing. In that case, there was no evidence of confinement beyond the 
defendant’s battery of the victim, which was established by evidence that the 
defendant “pushed, hit, and kicked [the victim] and pulled his hair.” Id. at 
1274. Nor did the victim testify that he felt confined. Id. Thus, there was no 
evidence independent of the battery that supported the confinement. Id. 
[14] We find the present case to be more like Mickens v. State, 115 N.E.3d 520 (Ind. 
Ct. App. 2018). In that case, we rejected the defendant’s claim that his 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2776 | July 15, 2026 Page 7 of 13 
 
confinement of the victim was merely incidental to the battery, as was the case 
in McFadden. We distinguished the holding in McFadden because it was based 
on the “removal” subsection of the criminal confinement statute that has since 
been eliminated. Mickens, 115 N.E.3d at 524. Instead, as here, the defendant in 
Mickens was charged with “confining” the victim without her consent, not 
removing her from one place to another. Id. For this reason alone, McFadden is 
not controlling. 
[15] Moreover, Mickens held that there was sufficient evidence of confinement 
independent of the battery. Id. Specifically, the defendant threw a plate at the 
victim and ordered her to leave, and when she refused, he threw her belongings 
onto the lawn, dragged her out of the house by her hair, stomped on her leg, 
grabbed her again, and dragged her back to the front door. Id. Relying on this 
course of conduct rather than the battery alone, the Mickens Court concluded 
the trier of fact could reasonably find that the defendant “substantially 
interfered with [the victim]’s liberty without her consent.” Id. 
[16] The same is true here. The evidence shows that Fleener confined Swift by 
grabbing her, preventing her from escaping through the window, and throwing 
her onto the floor. This conduct went beyond, and did not depend on, the 
earlier push that formed the basis of the domestic battery charge. Accordingly, 
we conclude that the State presented sufficient evidence to support Fleener’s 
conviction for criminal confinement resulting in bodily injury, a Level 5 felony. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2776 | July 15, 2026 Page 8 of 13 
 
II. Double Jeopardy 
[17] Fleener also claims that his convictions for domestic battery and criminal 
confinement constitute substantive double jeopardy.2 This inquiry differs from 
the one we resolved in Part I. There, we asked whether the evidence, viewed in 
the light most favorable to the verdict, was independently sufficient to support 
each element of confinement. Here, we ask whether Fleener’s convictions for 
criminal confinement and domestic battery—even though each is adequately 
supported by sufficient evidence—nonetheless punish him twice for a single 
criminal transaction. That question turns on a different analysis. And, here, 
the parties agree that the double jeopardy analysis in this case is governed by 
the three-part test set forth by our Supreme Court in Wadle v. State, 151 N.E.3d 
227 (Ind. 2020), as modified by A.W. v. State, 229 N.E.3d 1060, 1066 (Ind. 
2024). We review claims of double jeopardy de novo. See Wadle, 151 N.E.3d 
at 237. 
Wadle Step 1 
[18] In the first step of the Wadle analysis we consider “[i]f either statute clearly 
permits multiple punishment, whether expressly or by unmistakable 
implication.” Id. at 253. If so, our “inquiry comes to an end and there is no 
 
2 The State initially claims that Fleener waived his double jeopardy argument by failing to present it to the 
trial court. The State correctly notes that the trial court provided Fleener with an opportunity to explain 
which counts should be vacated on double jeopardy grounds, yet Fleener argued only that Count III, the 
misdemeanor battery conviction, should be vacated. We have held, however, that double jeopardy claims 
can be raised for the first time on appeal, or even by this Court sua sponte, because double jeopardy implicates 
fundamental rights. Moore v. State, 181 N.E.3d 442, 446 (Ind. Ct. App. 2022). We, therefore, address the 
merits of Fleener’s double jeopardy argument. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2776 | July 15, 2026 Page 9 of 13 
 
violation of substantive double jeopardy.” Id. If, however, the statutory 
language is not clear, “then [we] must apply our included-offense statutes to 
determine whether the charged offenses are the same.” Id. 
[19] Here, both parties agree that there is nothing in the statutes defining criminal 
confinement and domestic battery that clearly permits multiple punishment. 
See I.C. § 35-42-3-3(a), (b)(1)(C) (defining criminal confinement as a Level 5 
felony); Ind. Code §§ 35-42-2-1.3(a)(1), (b)(2) (defining domestic battery as a 
Level 6 felony).3 We agree and, therefore, proceed to Step 2. 
Wadle Step 2 
[20] At Step 2, we ask whether the offenses are included either inherently or “as 
charged,” also known as “factually included.” A.W., 229 N.E.3d at 1067. As 
clarified in A.W., if there are ambiguities in a charging instrument as to whether 
one offense is factually included in the other, we must construe any such 
ambiguity in the defendant’s favor and “find a presumptive double jeopardy 
violation at Step 2.” Id. at 1069. The State can rebut this presumptive double 
jeopardy violation at Step 3. Id. 
 
3 The operative language of the criminal confinement statute provides: “A person who knowingly or 
intentionally confines another person without the other person’s consent commits criminal confinement.” 
Ind. Code § 35-42-3-3(a). The offense is elevated to a Level 5 felony if “it results in bodily injury to a person 
other than the confining person.” Id. § 3(b)(1)(C). The operative language of the domestic battery statute 
provides: “a person who knowingly or intentionally . . . touches a family or household member in a rude, 
insolent, or angry manner . . . commits domestic battery.” Ind. Code § 35-42-2-1.3(a)(1). The offense is 
elevated to a Level 6 felony if the defendant is “at least eighteen (18) years of age” and the offense is 
committed “in the physical presence of a child less than sixteen (16) years of age, knowing that the child was 
present and might be able to see or hear the offense.” Id. § 1.3(b)(2). 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2776 | July 15, 2026 Page 10 of 13 
 
[21] Here, neither party contends that domestic battery is inherently included in 
criminal confinement or vice versa. We agree. See note 3, supra. The question 
then becomes whether the offenses are factually included. As to criminal 
confinement, the charging information here provided: 
On or about May 23, 2025, [Fleener] did knowingly confine 
Donnette Lynn Swift without the consent of Donnette Lynn 
Swift, said act resulting in bodily injury to Donnette Lynn Swift, 
to-wit: bruising, and/or abrasion, and/or scratch, and/or pain[.] 
Appellant’s App. Vol. II p. 17. As to the domestic battery, the information 
provided: 
On or about May 23, 2025, [Fleener], being at least eighteen (18) 
years of age, did knowingly touch Donnette Lynn Swift, a family 
or household member, in a rude, insolent, or angry manner and 
[Fleener] committed said offense in the presence of a child less 
than 16 years of age, knowing that the child was present and 
might be able to see or hear the offense[.] 
Id. 
[22] The State concedes that the charging information is ambiguous as to whether 
the domestic battery offense is a factually included offense of the criminal 
confinement offense. Based on A.W., we agree. That is, based on the language 
of the charging information, “it is conceivable” that, while Fleener was 
confining Swift, he also touched her in a rude, insolent, or angry manner. See 
A.W., 229 N.E.3d at 1070. We, therefore, presume a double jeopardy violation 
and proceed to Step 3, where the State may rebut this presumption. See id. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2776 | July 15, 2026 Page 11 of 13 
 
Wadle Step 3 
[23] At Step 3, we consider whether the facts demonstrate that the defendant’s 
actions were “so compressed in terms of time, place, singleness of purpose, and 
continuity of action as to constitute a single transaction.” Wadle, 151 N.E.3d at 
253. If so, the defendant’s convictions constitute double jeopardy. Id. 
[24] The State claims that Fleener committed the domestic battery offense by 
pushing Swift by the front door, which occurred before Fleener confined Swift 
by dragging her away from the window and throwing her on the floor to 
prevent her escape. Thus, the State argues, the battery was not part of the same 
criminal transaction as the confinement.
4 
[25] We observe, however, that during closing argument, the State relied on the 
same “pushing, pulling and dragging” to establish both confinement and 
battery. The deputy prosecutor stated during closing argument: 
[I]t was [Fleener’s] act in the pushing and the pulling and in the 
dragging of him confining [Swift] to the living room that caused 
those injuries to her body. That abrasion and those scratches and 
then like she said the pain when she was pulled down by her 
collar. 
Along with that, that kind of leads right into the domestic battery 
charge. There’s no question they were a family or household 
member under the statute. They do have a child together and 
both admit that they were living together at the time. We do 
 
4 We find the State’s reliance on Boatright v. State, 759 N.E.2d 1038 (Ind. 2001), and Hopkins v. State, 747 
N.E.2d 598 (Ind. Ct. App. 2001), to be unavailing, as both of those cases were decided under the Richardson 
actual evidence test, which was abrogated by Wadle. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2776 | July 15, 2026 Page 12 of 13 
 
know that the – this act was all done in a rude, insolent or angry 
manner. There’s no way really to pull somebody and push them 
around the way that he did in a way that is anything other than 
angry. . . . 
Tr. Vol. II p. 86. Thus, the prosecutor did not sufficiently distinguish the 
conduct supporting each count. 
[26] Fleener’s acts occurred during the same argument, on the same morning,5 and 
at the same house. Fleener’s actions were “so compressed in terms of time, 
place, singleness of purpose, and continuity of action as to constitute a single 
transaction.” Wadle, 151 N.E.3d at 253. Fleener’s convictions for both 
criminal confinement and domestic battery, therefore, constitute substantive 
double jeopardy.
6 
[27] We, therefore, reverse Fleener’s conviction for the lesser offense of domestic 
battery, see Bradshaw v. State, 239 N.E.3d 864, 869 (Ind. Ct. App. 2024), and 
remand with instructions that the trial court vacate the conviction and sentence 
entered on that count. 
 
5 The argument began after Swift returned home after dropping her oldest child off at school. The doorbell 
camera video, which was admitted into evidence, shows Swift leaving the home at 9:57 a.m. 
6 We find the State’s citation to Brewer v. State, 241 N.E.3d 19 (Ind. Ct. App. 2024), to be unavailing. In that 
case, we concluded at Step 2 that neither robbery nor intimidation was an included offense of the other and 
expressly declined to proceed to Step 3. Id. at 26. We then noted that the two offenses would not constitute 
a single transaction even if we reached Step 3. Id. at 26-27. Our discussion of Step 3 was, therefore, dicta. 
Moreover, the defendant in Brewer committed the robbery through one set of acts—entering the victim ’s 
camper with a gun, pointing the gun, and striking her—a nd the intimidation through a distinct, later act—an 
explicit threat to coerce her into opening a safe, made after a long standoff. In contrast, here, all of Fleener’s 
criminal acts occurred during a short span of time on the same morning, at the same house, and involving the 
same victim. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2776 | July 15, 2026 Page 13 of 13 
 
Conclusion 
[28] The State presented sufficient evidence to support Fleener’s conviction for 
criminal confinement, a Level 5 felony. Fleener’s convictions for both criminal 
confinement and domestic battery, however, constitute substantive double 
jeopardy, and we reverse Fleener’s conviction for domestic battery and remand 
with instructions that the trial court vacate the conviction and sentence entered 
on that count. 
[29] Affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded. 
Weissmann, J., and Foley, J., concur. 
ATTORNEY FOR APPELLANT 
Willow Thomas 
Marion County Public Defender Agency 
Appellate Division 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
 
ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLEE 
Theodore E. Rokita 
Attorney General of Indiana 
 
Andrew M. Sweet 
Deputy Attorney General 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
