25A-PL-2272
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/07/15/garvin_street_warehouse_llc_v._ascot_specialty_insurance_company.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10928333/garvin-street-warehouse-llc-v-ascot-specialty-insurance-company/
Caption: Garvin Street Warehouse, LLC v. Ascot Specialty Insurance Company
Date: 2026-07-15

Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 1 of 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE 
Court of Appeals of Indiana 
 
Garvin Street Warehouse, LLC and KSAB, LLC, 
Appellants-Plaintiffs 
v. 
Bridgeway Insurance Company, Ascot Specialty Insurance 
Company, Certain Underwriters at Lloyd’s of London, 
Insurance Effected with Ascot Syndicate No. 1414, Certain 
Subscribing Lloyd’s Underwriters, Trisura Specialty Insurance 
Company, General Security Indemnity Company of Arizona, 
Western World Insurance Company, and National Fire & 
Marine Insurance Company, 
Appellees-Defendants 
July 15, 2026 
Court of Appeals Case No. 
25A-PL-2272 
Appeal from the Vanderburgh Superior Court 
The Honorable Thomas A. Massey, Judge 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 2 of 24 
 
Trial Court Cause No. 
82D07-2409-PL-5402 
Opinion by Chief Judge Tavitas 
Judge Foley concurs. 
Judge Weissmann concurs in result with separate opinion. 
Tavitas, Chief Judge. 
Case Summary 
[1] In this Commercial Court case, Garvin Street Warehouse, LLC, and KSAB, 
LLC (collectively, “Garvin”) appeal the trial court’s denial of Garvin’s motion 
for partial summary judgment and the grant of a cross-motion for judgment on 
the pleadings filed by the defendant insurers (“Insurers”).1 After the sprinkler 
system at Garvin’s warehouse malfunctioned, Garvin attempted to have the 
system repaired. Before the repairs could be completed, however, the 
warehouse caught fire and was destroyed. Insurers denied Garvin’s claims 
pursuant to a Protective Safeguards Endorsement (“PSE”) of the policy, which 
required Garvin to notify Insurers of issues with the sprinkler system within 
forty-eight hours—a requirement Garvin failed to satisfy . Garvin then filed a 
complaint against Insurers. 
 
1 Insurers include Bridgeway Insurance Company, Ascot Specialty Insurance Company, Certain 
Underwriters at Lloyd’s of London, Insurance Effected with Ascot Syndicate No. 1414, Certain Subscribing 
Lloyd’s Underwriters, Trisura Specialty Insurance Company, General Security Indemnity Company of 
Arizona, Western World Insurance Company, and National Fire & Marine Insurance Company. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 3 of 24 
 
[2] Garvin filed a motion for partial summary judgment, arguing that Insurers were 
required to demonstrate prejudice due to Garvin’s failure to comply with the 
PSE. In response, Insurers filed a cross-motion for judgment on the pleadings. 
The trial court found that Insurers were not required to demonstrate prejudice 
and, thus, denied Garvin’s motion for partial summary judgment and granted 
Insurers’ motion for judgment on the pleadings. We affirm the trial court.
2 
Issue 
[3] On appeal, we address the following issues: 
I. Whether the trial court properly denied Garvin’s 
motion for partial summary judgment. 
II. Whether the trial court properly granted Insurers’ cross-
motion for judgment on the pleadings. 
Facts 
[4] The facts here are undisputed. Garvin owns a warehouse in Evansville, and 
Insurers are the primary and excess insurers of the property. On December 23, 
2022, a maintenance contractor discovered that one of the twenty risers in 
Garvin’s warehouse sprinkler system was frozen and broken. On December 27, 
2022, the contractor met with a sprinkler services company, which was unable 
 
2 We held oral argument on this matter on May 11, 2026. We thank counsel for their presentations. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 4 of 24 
 
to complete the repairs at that time. The repairs were rescheduled for January 
2, 2023. On December 31, 2022, the warehouse caught fire and was destroyed.3 
[5] After Garvin notified Insurers of the fire, Insurers denied the claim because 
Garvin failed to comply with the PSE portion of the commercial insurance 
policies, which provided: 
 
A. The following is added to the Commercial Property 
Conditions: 
Protective Safeguards 
 
3 Appellants’ Brief states that a “riser” is “a vertical pipe that supplies water to elevated horizontal pipes with 
sprinkler heads.” Appellants’ Br. p. 8 n.3. Appellants’ Brief further states: 
The Amended Complaint refers to the burst pipe as the same as a riser, stating that one of 
twenty risers froze and broke. Technically, it was a horizontal pipe that froze, which required 
the riser supplying water to the broken pipe to be shut off. The riser was not the pipe that froze. 
Id. at p. 11 n.7. 
 

Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 5 of 24 
 
1. As a condition of this insurance, you are required to maintain 
the protective devices or services listed in the Schedule above. 
2. The protective safeguards to which this endorsement applies 
are identified by the following symbols: 
“P-1” Automatic Sprinkler System , including related 
supervisory services. 
Automatic Sprinkler System means: 
a. Any automatic fire protective or extinguishing system . . . . 
* * * * * 
“P-9”, the protective system described in the Schedule. 
B. The following is added to the Exclusions section . . . 
We will not pay for loss or damage caused by or resulting from 
fire if, prior to the fire, you: 
1. Knew of any suspension or impairment in any protective 
safeguard listed in the Schedule above and failed to notify us of 
that fact; or 
2. Failed to maintain any protective safeguard listed in the 
Schedule above, and over which you had control, in complete 
working order. 
If part of an Automatic Sprinkler System or Automatic 
Commercial Cooking Exhaust And Extinguishing System is shut 
off due to breakage, leakage, freezing conditions or opening of 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 6 of 24 
 
sprinkler heads, notification to us will not be necessary if you can 
restore full protection within 48 hours. 
Appellants’ App. Vol. III pp. 45-46 (emphasis in original). It is undisputed that 
Garvin did not notify Insurers of the issue with the sprinkler system within 
forty-eight hours as required by the PSE. 
[6] In June 2024, Garvin filed a complaint against Insurers for declaratory 
judgment, breach of contract, and reformation.
4 Garvin alleged that Insurers 
were required to demonstrate actual prejudice from Garvin’s failure to notify 
them of the issue with the sprinkler system within forty-eight hours. Garvin 
argued that Insurers were not prejudiced and that, “[e]ven if notice of the riser 
issue had been provided, the insurers would not have actually done anything 
differently.” Appellants’ App. Vol. II p. 82. 
[7] In March 2025, Garvin filed a motion for partial summary judgment. 5 Garvin 
argued that, under Miller v. Dilts, 463 N.E.2d 257 (Ind. 1984), Insurers must 
“prove actual prejudice when policyholders fail to communicate with them and 
violate the cooperation clause.” Appellants’ App. Vol. II p. 174. Garvin 
contended that “[t]he same analysis should apply when determining whether 
the insurer can properly deny a claim when a policyholder does not notify the 
insurer within 48 hours that a small portion of the automatic sprinkler system 
 
4 Garvin amended the complaint in February 2025 to correct a party. The policies were attached to the 
amended complaint as exhibits. 
5 Garvin designated the affidavit of Stewart Klipsch, a member of KSAB, LLC, which owns Garvin Street 
Warehouse, LLC. The policies were attached to the affidavit. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 7 of 24 
 
was temporarily inoperable.” Id. Garvin argued: “Allowing carriers to deny 
coverage based on a lack of notice even though they are not prejudiced is 
simply unjust.” Id. at 178. Garvin, however, admitted that “Indiana law has 
never addressed this question head on . . . .” Id. at 184. 
[8] In response to Garvin’s motion for partial summary judgment, Insurers filed a 
response and a cross-motion for judgment on the pleadings. Insurers argued 
that Garvin did not comply with the PSE when it failed to provide timely notice 
of the impairment of the system to Insurers. Insurers argued that the prejudice 
cases cited by Garvin involved post-loss policy conditions, such as failure to 
cooperate and failure to provide timely notice of a claim after the insured had 
incurred a loss, and that these cases have not been applied to pre-loss policy 
conditions. 
[9] After a July 2025 hearing, the trial court entered an order on August 13, 2025, 
denying Garvin’s motion for partial summary judgment and granting Insurers’ 
cross-motion for judgment on the pleadings. The trial court found that Insurers 
were not required “to show prejudice by [Garvin’s] failure to notify before 
[Insurers] can deny coverage under the Policy.” Id. at 41. Because Insurers 
were not required to show that they were prejudiced, Garvin’s failure to notify 
Insurers of the problem with the sprinkler system alone precluded coverage. 
Garvin now appeals. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 8 of 24 
 
Discussion and Decision 
I. The trial court properly denied Garvin’s motion for partial summary 
judgment. 
A. Standard of Review 
[10] Garvin appeals the denial of its motion for partial summary judgment. “We 
review summary judgment decisions de novo, and Trial Rule 56(C) supplies the 
framework.” Cave Quarries, Inc. v. Warex LLC, 240 N.E.3d 681, 684 (Ind. 2024). 
“The moving party is entitled to summary judgment only if the evidence it 
designates in support of its motion ‘shows that there is no genuine issue as to 
any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter 
of law.’” Id. at 684-85 (quoting Ind. Trial Rule 56(C)). The purpose of 
summary judgment is to withdraw issues from the jury only when there are no 
genuine material factual issues for the jury to decide. Id. at 685. “Summary 
judgment is available when the nonmovant cannot prove its claim based on the 
undisputed evidence[.]” Id. (emphasis in original). 
[11] The summary judgment movant has the initial burden of making a prima facie 
showing that no genuine issue of material fact exists and that it is entitled to 
judgment as a matter of law. Isgrig v. Trs. of Indiana Univ., 256 N.E.3d 1238, 
1244 (Ind. 2025). The burden then shifts to the non-moving party to show the 
existence of a genuine issue of material fact. Id. On appellate review, we 
“draw all reasonable inferences in favor of the non-moving party.” Wilson v. 
Anonymous Defendant 1, 183 N.E.3d 289, 293 (Ind. 2022). 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 9 of 24 
 
[12] Here, the parties’ arguments require that we interpret the language of the 
insurance policy. “In Indiana, insurance contracts are subject to the same rules 
of interpretation as other contracts.” Ebert v. Illinois Cas. Co., 188 N.E.3d 858, 
864 (Ind. 2022). “Ordinarily, we construe ambiguous policy provisions in favor 
of the insured, especially if the ‘provisions limiting coverage are not clearly and 
plainly expressed.’” Id. (quoting Meridian Mut. Ins. Co. v. Auto-Owners Ins. Co., 
698 N.E.2d 770, 773 (Ind. 1998)). “On the other hand, we give clear and 
unambiguous language in a policy its plain and ordinary meaning.” Id. “A 
policy is unambiguous if reasonable persons cannot honestly differ as to its 
meaning.” Id. 
B. Insurers were not required to show prejudice. 
[13] Garvin argues that Insurers were required to show that Insurers were prejudiced 
by Garvin’s failure to comply with the PSE requirements. Protective safeguards 
endorsements commonly found in insurance policies require an insured to 
maintain various protective services, such as sprinkler systems, fire alarms, 
burglar alarms, and watchman services. Holiday Hosp. Franchising, Inc. v. AMCO 
Ins. Co., 983 N.E.2d 574, 580 n.7 (Ind. 2013). Generally, these safeguards are 
required under policies in exchange for reduced premiums on property damage 
coverage. Id. “An endorsement is ancillary to an insurance policy and it must 
be read together, construed, and reconciled with the policy to give effect to the 
whole.” Stevenson v. Hamilton Mut. Ins. Co., 672 N.E.2d 467, 473 (Ind. Ct. App. 
1996), trans. denied. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 10 of 24 
 
[14] Proof of prejudice as it relates to notice of pre-loss conditions, such as issues 
with protective safeguards endorsements, has not been considered by Indiana 
courts. Indiana cases, however, have extensively discussed the requirement of 
prejudice to the insurance company in the context of post-loss notice and post-
loss cooperation provisions. Post-loss notice provisions require the insured to 
timely inform the insurance company of claims for insurance coverage and 
lawsuits against the insured, which “assist the insurance company by giving it 
an opportunity to make a timely and adequate investigation during its 
preparation for settlement or trial.” Paint Shuttle, Inc. v. Cont’l Cas. Co., 733 
N.E.2d 513, 521 (Ind. Ct. App. 2000), trans. denied. On the other hand, a post-
loss “cooperation clause essentially requires the insured to assist the insurance 
company in its preparation for settlement or trial.” Id. “An insured’s 
responsibilities under the cooperation clause of an insurance policy involve 
attending hearings and trials, assisting in effecting settlement, securing and 
giving evidence, and obtaining the attendance of witnesses.” Id. 
[15] In Miller v. Dilts, 463 N.E.2d 257 (Ind. 1984), our Supreme Court considered 
three cases involving these post-loss notice provisions. In each case, the insured 
failed to give prompt notice of accidents or lawsuits, and the Court considered 
“whether there is a difference between a duty to give prompt notice and a duty 
to cooperate in an automobile insurance policy.” Id. at 260. 
[16] “[T]he duties to notify and to cooperate are conditions precedent to the 
insurance company’s liability to its insured.” Id. at 260-61. The Miller Court 
noted that, where an insured fails to comply with an insurance policy’s 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 11 of 24 
 
cooperation clause, the insurance company “must show actual prejudice from 
an insured’s noncompliance with the policy’s cooperation clause before it can 
avoid liability under the policy.” Id. at 261 (emphasis added). The issue in 
Miller, however, was whether insurance companies must also show “actual 
prejudice” where the insured fails to comply with a post-loss notice provision, 
rather than a post-loss cooperation clause. 
[17] The Miller Court noted that federal courts have considered the issue in the 
context of Indiana law and determined that the lack of prompt post-loss notice 
gives rise to a presumption of prejudice to the insurance company. The Court 
found the federal decisions “to be sound and well grounded in Indiana law.” 
Id. at 263. “[L]ate notice given to an insurer places it in a position that could 
have been avoided through timely notice, and that the ‘most cooperative 
insured cannot erase this prejudice suffered by the insurer’ in situations where 
the scene of the accident changes, or witnesses move away or have their 
memories lapse, due to the passage of time.” Id. at 265 (quoting Indiana Ins. Co. 
v. Williams, 448 N.E.2d 1233, 1238 (Ind. Ct. App. 1983) (Hoffman, J., 
dissenting), vacated sub nom., Miller, 463 N.E.2d 257). 
[18] The Court held: 
[T]he notice provisions in insurance policies are not equivalent to 
the cooperation clauses and do not serve the same objectives. 
Failure to cooperate can come about in many ways, some of 
which may be technical and inconsequential, thereby resulting in 
no prejudice to the insurance company. An insurance company 
must show actual prejudice from an insured’s noncompliance 
with the policy’s cooperation clause before it can avoid 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 12 of 24 
 
liability under the policy. . . . The same cannot be said of the 
notice provision because, as Judge Hoffman stated, “[n]otice is a 
threshold requirement which must be met before an insurer is 
even aware that a controversy or matter exists which requires the 
cooperation of the insured.” The notice requirement is 
“material, and of the essence of the contract.” [London Guarantee 
& Acc. Co. v. Siwy, 66 N.E. 481, 482 (Ind. Ct. App. 1903)]. The 
requirement of prompt notice gives the insurer an opportunity to 
make a timely and adequate investigation of all the 
circumstances surrounding the accident or loss. This adequate 
investigation is often frustrated by a delayed notice. Prejudice to 
the insurance company’s ability to prepare an adequate defense 
can therefore be presumed by an unreasonable delay in 
notifying the company about the accident or about the filing of 
the lawsuit. This is not in conflict with the public policy theory 
that the court should seek to protect the innocent third parties 
from attempts by insurance companies to deny liability for some 
insignificant failure to notify. The injured party can establish 
some evidence that prejudice did not occur in the particular 
situation. Once such evidence is introduced, the question 
becomes one for the trier of fact to determine whether any 
prejudice actually existed. The insurance carrier in turn can 
present evidence in support of its claim of prejudice. Thus, both 
parties are able to put forth their respective positions in the legal 
arena. 
Id. at 265-66 (emphasis added). The Court, thus, held that, in situations of an 
insured’s noncooperation, the insurance company is required to demonstrate 
actual prejudice. An insured’s failure to give prompt notice of a claim, 
however, raises a presumption of prejudice to the insurance company and that 
presumption may be rebutted by the insured. 
[19] Following Miller, our Supreme Court considered related arguments in several 
opinions. In Morris v. Econ. Fire & Cas. Co., 848 N.E.2d 663 (Ind. 2006), after a 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 13 of 24 
 
claim was submitted, the insurance company demanded that the insureds 
produce certain documents and records and submit to an examination under 
oath, and the insureds refused to do so. On appeal, our Supreme Court 
clarified that this case did not involve a “cooperation clause”; rather, this case 
involved an “entirely separate condition that explicitly requires the policyholder 
to perform specific duties.” Morris, 848 N.E.2d at 666. The Court held: “While 
disputes regarding alleged breaches of an insured’s duty under a separate 
‘cooperation clause’ may necessitate consideration of resulting prejudice to the 
insurance company, such prejudice is not a necessary consideration in 
determining the enforceability of other insurance policy provisions.” Id. 
(citing Miller, 463 N.E.2d at 265). The Court concluded that the insureds 
“breached the contract as a matter of law.”6 Id. at 666-67. 
[20] In Sheehan Construction Co., Inc. v. Continental Casualty Co., 938 N.E.2d 685 (Ind. 
2010), on rehearing, our Supreme Court again applied Miller where the insured 
failed to notify the insurance company of a claim for almost two years. Because 
the notice of claim was untimely, prejudice to the insurance company was 
presumed, and the insured failed to present any evidence rebutting that 
presumption. Id. at 689. Accordingly, the Court held that summary judgment 
was properly granted to the insurance company. See also Stacy v. ASI Select Ins. 
Corp., 242 N.E.3d 525, 534 (Ind. Ct. App. 2024) (“Because ASI was prevented 
 
6 The Court noted that the insureds did not “alternatively contend that the breach was immaterial.” Id. at 
667. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 14 of 24 
 
from meaningfully investigating the claim due to the unreasonably late notice, 
Stacy failed in rebutting the presumption of prejudice in favor of ASI.”). 
[21] Our Supreme Court’s holdings, thus, provide: (1) where the post-loss notice of 
claim is untimely, prejudice to the insurance company is presumed and may be 
rebutted by the insured; (2) where the insured violates a cooperation clause of 
the policy, the insurance company must demonstrate actual prejudice; and (3) 
prejudice is not a necessary consideration in determining the enforceability of 
other insurance policy provisions. 
[22] Here, we are faced with the insured’s failure to provide the insurance company 
with a required pre-loss notice of a broken sprinkler system. Garvin argues that 
we should apply the post-loss actual prejudice requirements as outlined in 
Miller. Insurers, however, argue that this situation is distinguishable from the 
post-loss situations discussed in Miller. Insurers contend that this is not a 
forfeiture situation where coverage attached and then was lost through a 
technical failure of some kind; rather, here, Garvin never had coverage for the 
fire because the PSE’s conditions were not met. 
[23] Insurers contend that “Indiana courts have a long, consistent history of 
enforcing unambiguous exclusions as they are written, without considering 
prejudice.” Appellees’ Br. p. 37. We agree. Our Supreme Court has held: 
“Insurance companies are free to limit their liability in a manner not 
inconsistent with public policy as reflected by case or statutory law. If a plainly 
expressed exception, exclusion or limitation in an insurance policy is not 
contrary to public policy, it is entitled to construction and enforcement as 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 15 of 24 
 
expressed.” Allstate Ins. Co. v. Boles, 481 N.E.2d 1096, 1098 (Ind. 1985) (internal 
citation omitted). 
[24] Our Supreme Court applied such an exclusion in Huff v. Travelers Indemnity Co., 
363 N.E.2d 985 (Ind. 1977). There, a “provision of the policy excluded 
freezing losses occurring while the home was vacant, unless the insured 
exercised due diligence in maintaining heat in the building or unless the water 
systems were drained.” Huff, 363 N.E.2d at 993. The Court held: 
Conditions requiring that certain precautions be taken against 
loss are valid and must be complied with in order for the insured 
to recover under the policy, unless the provision has been 
waived. The term due diligence implies that the insured must 
exercise whatever precautions are reasonably necessary to protect 
against the risk. Whether the precautions taken by Huff 
constituted due diligence is a factual question left to the fact 
finder unless no reasonable man could differ as to the result. 
Clearly reasonable minds could differ as to whether Huff had 
exercised due diligence with respect to maintaining heat in the 
building. 
Id. at 994 (internal citation omitted). The Court, thus, enforced a pre-loss 
exclusion without requiring the insurance company to demonstrate prejudice. 
[25] Our Courts have routinely applied the plain language of such limitations in 
insurance policies without consideration of prejudice. See, e.g., Mid-Am. Fire & 
Cas. Co. v. Shoney’s, Inc., 843 N.E.2d 548, 552 (Ind. Ct. App. 2006) (enforcing a 
business pursuit exclusion as written), trans. denied; Williams v. Safe Auto Ins. Co., 
980 N.E.2d 326, 330 (Ind. Ct. App. 2012) (enforcing an exclusion for 
unlicensed drivers); Sheehan Const. Co. v. Cont'l Cas. Co., 935 N.E.2d 160, 171 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 16 of 24 
 
(Ind. 2010) (discussing an exclusion in a construction insurance policy), opinion 
adhered to as modified on reh’g, 938 N.E.2d 685 (Ind. 2010); Holiday Hosp. 
Franchising, 983 N.E.2d at 576 (enforcing an exclusion for acts of molestation or 
abuse of a person in the hotel’s care); Boles, 481 N.E.2d at 1098 (answering a 
certified question and holding that an exclusion “against coverage for injuries 
sustained by persons related to the insured by blood, marriage, or adoption, 
residing in his household” was “clear and unambiguous” and did not 
“contravene public policy”); Hartford Live Stock Ins. Co. v. Everett, 169 N.E. 473 
(Ind. App. 1930) (directing a verdict for the insurance company where the 
insurance policy for a racehorse provided that the insurance company would 
not be liable for the death of the animal if it was subject to an operation of any 
kind without the written consent of the insurance company, and the racehorse 
died after a procedure on its leg). 
[26] Applying the clear language of the policy in a pre-loss case without requiring 
the insurance company to demonstrate prejudice is also supported by federal 
court decisions applying Indiana law. Frankenmuth Mutual Insurance Co. v. Fun 
F/X II, Inc., 601 F. Supp. 3d 330 (N.D. Ind. 2022) (“Frankenmuth I”), and 
Frankenmuth Mutual Insurance Co. v. Fun F/X II Inc., 61 F.4th 514 (7th Cir. 2023) 
(“Frankenmuth II”), interpreted Indiana law and found for the insurance 
company in similar circumstances. In Frankenmuth II, 61 F.4th 514, an 
insurance policy exclusion required the insured to notify the insurance 
company of a suspension or impairment in the building’s automatic sprinkler 
system. It was undisputed that, after the insured learned that the sprinkler 
system lacked water supply, the insured failed to notify the insurance 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 17 of 24 
 
company.7 The building was later damaged in a fire, and the insurance 
company denied the insured’s claim. The Seventh Circuit found that the 
language of the exclusion was unambiguous and that the exclusion barred 
coverage for the damages. The Seventh Circuit did not require the insurance 
company to show prejudice. 
[27] Given these decisions, we conclude that when considering these types of pre-
loss conditions in an insurance policy: (1) we must apply the clear and 
unambiguous language of the PSE provision; and (2) prejudice is not a 
consideration in the analysis. We conclude that the prejudice analysis applied 
in Miller is not applicable here. Accordingly, the trial court properly denied 
Garvin’s motion for partial summary judgment on this issue. 
II. The trial court properly granted Insurers’ cross-motion for 
judgment on the pleadings. 
A. Standard of Review 
[28] Given our determination that Insurers are not required to demonstrate 
prejudice, we must now determine whether the trial court properly granted 
Insurers’ cross-motion for judgment on the pleadings. Indiana Trial Rule 12(C) 
provides: “After the pleadings are closed but within such time as not to delay 
the trial, any party may move for judgment on the pleadings.” “A motion for 
 
7 In the lower court opinion, the District Court noted that the business owner’s conduct deprived the 
insurance company of its contractual right to its detriment. The insurance company “could have 
implemented emergency measures to verify water supply restoration, increased premiums, cancelled the 
policy, or at least not renewed the policy . . . .” Frankenmuth I, 601 F. Supp. 3d at 343. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 18 of 24 
 
judgment on the pleadings under Trial Rule 12(C) tests the sufficiency of a 
claim or defense presented in the pleadings and should be granted ‘only where it 
is clear from the face of the complaint that under no circumstances could relief 
be granted.’” KS&E Sports v. Runnels, 72 N.E.3d 892, 898 (Ind. 2017) (quoting 
Veolia Water Indianapolis, LLC v. Nat’l Trust Ins. Co., 3 N.E.3d 1, 5 (Ind. 2014)). 
We “base our ruling solely on the pleadings,” and “we accept as true the 
material facts alleged in the complaint.” Id. 
[29] A trial court should grant a motion for judgment on the pleadings “only when it 
is clear from the face of the pleadings that the plaintiff cannot in any way 
succeed under the operative facts and allegations made therein.” Bayer Corp. v. 
Leach, 147 N.E.3d 313, 315 (Ind. 2020). “[W]hen a pleaded claim provides no 
circumstances in which relief can be granted, there is no need to put either the 
parties or the court through costly and time-consuming litigation.” Id. We 
review a Trial Rule 12(C) ruling “de novo.” KS&E Sports, 72 N.E.3d at 898. 
B. Garvin violated the clear and unambiguous requirements of the 
PSE. 
[30] The PSE at issue here provided that, “[a]s a condition of this insurance,” 
Garvin was required to maintain an automatic sprinkler system. Appellants’ 
App. Vol. III p. 45. The PSE further provided: 
B. [ ] We will not pay for loss or damage caused by or resulting 
from fire if, prior to the fire, you: 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 19 of 24 
 
1. Knew of any suspension or impairment in any 
protective safeguard listed in the Schedule above and failed 
to notify us of that fact; or 
2. Failed to maintain any protective safeguard listed in the 
Schedule above, and over which you had control, in 
complete working order. 
If part of an Automatic Sprinkler System or Automatic 
Commercial Cooking Exhaust And Extinguishing System is shut 
off due to breakage, leakage, freezing conditions or opening of 
sprinkler heads, notification to us will not be necessary if you can 
restore full protection within 48 hours. 
Id. at 46 (emphasis added). 
[31] Garvin argues that the phrase “maintain . . . in complete working order” as 
found in Section (B)(2) is ambiguous. Id. We need not, however, reach that 
issue because Section (B) is written in the disjunctive, and Section (B)(1) is clear 
and unambiguous. Moreover, the relevant facts as alleged in the amended 
complaint are undisputed. Garvin knew of the suspension or impairment of the 
automatic sprinkler system. Under the PSE, notification to Insurers was 
unnecessary if Garvin restored full protection within forty-eight hours, but 
Garvin was unable to restore the system within forty-eight hours. Accordingly, 
Garvin was required to notify Insurers of the issues with the sprinkler system, 
but Garvin did not provide that notice. The PSE provision clearly provided 
that Insurers would “not pay for loss or damage caused by or resulting from fire 
if” Garvin failed to comply with the provisions of Section (B). Id. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 20 of 24 
 
[32] Under these circumstances, it is clear from the face of the pleadings that, under 
no circumstances, could relief be granted to Garvin. Accordingly, Insurers 
were entitled to judgment on the pleadings. 
Conclusion 
[33] We conclude that the trial court properly denied Garvin’s motion for partial 
summary judgment and properly granted Insurers’ cross-motion for judgment 
on the pleadings. Accordingly, we affirm. 
[34] Affirmed. 
Foley, J., concurs. 
Weissmann, J., concurs in result with separate opinion. 
ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLANTS 
Gregory M. Gotwald 
Mary Claire Tuohy 
Plews Shadley Racher & Braun LLP 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
 
ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLEES 
Kyle A. Lansberry 
Lewis Wagner & Trimble 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
 
Henry M. Mascia 
Rivkin Radler LLP 
New York, New York 
 
Michael A. Troisi 
Michael P. Welch 
Evan H. Krinick 
Cheryl F. Korman 
Rivkin Radler LLP 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 21 of 24 
 
Uniondale, New York 
 
David E. Walker 
Danielle M. Towe 
Walker Wilcox Matousek LLP 
Chicago, Illinois 
 
 
Weissmann, Judge, concurring in result. 
[35] I agree that, to enforce the PSE exclusion, Insurers were not required to show 
prejudice from Garvin’s failure to timely notify them of the impairment to his 
warehouse’s sprinkler system. I write separately, however, because I do not 
reach that conclusion by distinguishing between pre-loss and post-loss policy 
breaches. Rather, I find the operative distinction to be between covenants and 
conditions precedent, as those terms are traditionally understood in contract 
law. 
[36] Covenants are contractual promises to act or refrain from acting in specified 
ways. Covenant, Black’s Law Dictionary (12th ed. 2024). They impose legal duties 
on the promising party to perform accordingly, id., and they grant their 
beneficiaries the right to pursue remedies if those duties are breached. Duty, 
Black’s Law Dictionary (12th ed. 2024). Conditions precedent work differently. 
They specify events that must occur before a promise becomes a covenant. 
Condition, Black's Law Dictionary (12th ed. 2024). And until those events occur, 
the promise does not impose on the promising party a duty to perform. Id. 
Conditions precedent cannot be “breached” in the ordinary sense; they can only 
go unfulfilled. See Town of Plainfield v. Paden Eng’g Co., 943 N.E.2d 904, 909 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 22 of 24 
 
(Ind. Ct. App. 2011) (“A condition precedent is . . . a condition that must be 
fulfilled before the duty to perform a specific obligation arises.”). 
[37] This case involves a condition precedent. Under the policy, Insurers generally 
promised to pay Garvin for any fire loss, including a loss that occurred while 
Garvin knew his warehouse’s sprinkler system was impaired. But the PSE 
exclusion unambiguously conditioned the Insurers’ would-be duty to perform 
on that promise on Garvin notifying Insurers that such an impairment existed. 
Because Garvin did not fulfill that condition precedent, the promise never 
became a covenant, and the policy never imposed on Insurers a legal duty to 
pay for the fire loss. 
[38] Miller v. Dilts, 463 N.E.2d 257 (Ind.1984), does not change this calculus because 
the prejudice considerations discussed in that case arose in the context of 
covenants.
8 The insurer in Miller sought to avoid an existing duty to defend its 
insured against a third-party liability claim based on the insured’s prior breach 
of their duty to notify the insurer of such a claim. Though not set forth in the 
Court’s opinion, “[it] is well established that, when one party to a contract 
commits the first material
9 breach of that contract, it cannot seek to enforce the 
 
8 Although our Supreme Court characterized “the duties to notify and to cooperate” at issue in Miller as 
“conditions precedent to [the] insurance company’s liability to its insured,” the facts of the case and the 
Court’s refence to the insurer’s “liability,” rather than “duty,” suggest that the provisions giving rise to those 
“duties” were covenants. 463 N.E.2d at 260-61 (emphasis added). But see Morris v. Econ. Fire & Cas. Co., 848 
N.E.2d 663, 666 (Ind. 2006) (finding prejudice irrelevant where insureds “breached” policy “condition” that 
“explicitly require[d] policyholder to perform specific duties”). 
9 As Garvin correctly observes, the prejudice considerations discussed in Miller are “essentially the 
implementation of the materiality doctrine.” Appellants’ Br., p. 21; see also Motorists Mut. Ins. Co. v. Johnson, 
218 N.E.2d 712, 715 (Ind. Ct. App. 1966) (“A technical or inconsequential lack of cooperation has often 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 23 of 24 
 
provisions of the contract against the other party if that other party breaches the 
contract at a later date.” TKG Assocs., LLC v. MBG Monmouth, LLC, 259 N.E.3d 
306, 316 (Ind. Ct. App. 2025) (cleaned up; emphasis added). The Court 
therefore deemed prejudice applicable but found it could be presumed. 
[39] Unlike the insurer in Miller, the Insurers here do not seek to avoid liability for 
the subject fire loss by claiming Garvin was the first to materially breach their 
respective duties under the policy. Insurers claim to have no liability because 
they never owed Garvin the duty he alleges they breached. The prejudice 
considerations discussed in Miller therefore do not apply. 
[40] This case is more akin to Dreaded, Inc. v. St. Paul Guardian Ins. Co., 904 N.E.2d 
1267 (Ind. 2009). There, an insurer promised to defend its insured against third-
party liability claims, and the insured promised to notify the insurer if any 
accident occurred that could give rise to such a claim. When the insured 
notified the insurer of a third-party liability claim three years after the accident, 
the insurer agreed to defend the insured moving forward but declined to 
indemnify the insured for its pre-notice defense costs. The insured then sued the 
insurer for breach of contract, arguing that the insurer was required to prove 
actual prejudice from the delayed notice to avoid its pre-notice duties. 
[41] Emphasizing that the insurer was not seeking to avoid its post-notice duty to 
defend, the Dreaded Court ruled that the policy’s notice provision “function[ed] 
 
been held insufficient to void the policy . . . . Non-cooperation must be material. Prejudice must be shown by 
insurer.”). 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2272 | July 15, 2026 Page 24 of 24 
 
as a condition precedent” to the duty to defend, generally. Id. at 1271 n.1, 1272-
73. The Court therefore found that the insurer’s duty to defend did not arise 
until the insured notified the insurer of the claim. Id. The Court further 
observed that “prejudice is irrelevant” to this inquiry and affirmed the entry of 
summary judgment in favor of the insurer on the insured’s breach of contract 
claim. Id. 
[42] The same logic applies here: because Garvin never fulfilled the condition 
precedent to Insurer’s promise to pay for a fire loss that occurred while Garvin 
knew his warehouse’s sprinkler system was impaired, Insurers’ duty to pay for 
the loss never arose. Prejudice is irrelevant to this inquiry. 
[43] Though other doctrines may address inequities arising from conditions 
precedent and policy exclusions, those questions are not before us. Garvin 
raised only whether the prejudice considerations discussed in Miller apply to 
this case, and given its facts, they do not. Because I reach that conclusion 
without resort to the pre-loss/post-loss distinction the majority draws, I concur 
in result.
10 
 
10 I also note that the majority opinion seems to overstate our Supreme Court’s stance on the prejudice 
issue. The majority accurately quotes Morris v. Econ. Fire & Cas. Co., 848 N.E.2d 663, 666 (2006), as 
stating: “While disputes regarding alleged breaches of an insured’s duty under a separate ‘cooperation 
clause’ may necessitate consideration of resulting prejudice to the insurance company, such prejudice is 
not a necessary consideration in determining the enforceability of other insurance policy 
provisions.” Supra ¶ 19 (emphasis in original). The majority then repeats the bolded language in a 
summary of the Court’s holdings on the issue. Supra ¶ 21. But in Tri-Etch, Inc. v. Cincinnati Ins Co., 909 
N.E.2d 997 (Ind. 2009), the Court explained that this language from Morris “applies to some, but not 
necessarily all provisions in the policy ‘other’ than the duty to cooperate.” Id. at 1005. Thus, to the extent 
the majority relies on the bolded language as a definitive, all-inclusive proposition of law, I disagree. 
