25A-PC-2706
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/06/23/lydia_theresa_conley_v._state_of_indiana.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10878590/lydia-theresa-conley-v-state-of-indiana/
Caption: Lydia Theresa Conley v. State of Indiana
Date: 2026-06-23

Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 1 of 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE 
Court of Appeals of Indiana 
 
Lydia Theresa Conley, 
Appellant-Petitioner 
v. 
State of Indiana, 
Appellee-Respondent 
June 23, 2026 
Court of Appeals Case No. 
25A-PC-2706 
Appeal from the Lake Superior Court 
The Honorable Kathleen A. Sullivan, Magistrate 
Trial Court Cause No. 
45G03-2406-PC-11 
Opinion by Judge Mathias 
Judges Kenworthy and DeBoer concur. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 2 of 31 
 
Mathias, Judge. 
[1] Lydia Conley appeals the post-conviction court’s denial of her petition for post-
conviction relief. Conley raises three issues for our review, which we restate as 
follows: 
1. Whether her trial counsel performed reasonably when he failed 
to object to a witness’s testimony that Conley had told the victim 
that Conley was going to shoot the victim sometime before the 
victim was found shot to death. 
2. Whether her trial counsel performed reasonably when he did 
not object to certain surveillance videos and did not proffer a 
supplemental reasonable-theory-of-innocence jury instruction. 
3. Whether the post-conviction court erred when it denied 
Conley’s petition. 
[2] We agree with Conley that her trial counsel’s failure to object to the witness’s 
testimony was unreasonable, and, had he lodged a hearsay objection to that 
testimony, the trial court would have been required to sustain the objection. 
However, we conclude that Conley has not met her burden to show that her 
trial counsel acted unreasonably with respect to the surveillance videos and the 
supplemental jury instruction, and we conclude that her counsel’s failure to 
object to the witness’s testimony is, on this record, insufficient to show that the 
post-conviction court erred when it denied her petition. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 3 of 31 
 
Facts and Procedural History 
[3] In 2018, Conley began dating Delilah Martinez, and, in the summer of 2019, 
Conley and her daughter (Felicia) moved into Martinez’s Hammond1 residence 
with Martinez’s children (including her daughter, Desha, who was around 
eighteen years old). Conley and Martinez’s relationship was described as 
“toxic” early on, and it only “got worse” over time. Trial Tr. Vol. 3, p. 174. 
Among other problems, Conley was also in a romantic relationship with 
Madeline Mendoza, a relationship that Conley had been in since 2005. 
[4] In October 2019, Martinez learned of Conley’s relationship with Mendoza, and 
Martinez ended her relationship with Conley. Around the same time, Mendoza 
learned about Martinez, and Mendoza also ended her relationship with Conley. 
Conley “moved out” of Martinez’s home (although Felicia did not), and 
Martinez quickly “move[d] on.” Id. at 178. In particular, around the time of her 
breakup with Conley, Martinez began dating Lucas Xavier Mercado. Mercado 
was married at the time, and, when his wife learned of the affair sometime later, 
she was “not happy.” Trial Tr. Vol. 4, p. 41. 
[5] Between October 24 and October 26, 2019, Conley sent Martinez a slew of text 
messages that, when read aloud, cover thirteen pages of the trial transcript.2 See 
Trial Tr. Vol. 5, pp. 195-208. Among other things, Conley repeatedly asked if 
 
1 Although legally in Hammond, Martinez’s residence had a Whiting address. 
2 This does not include messages Conley sent to Martinez through apps. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 4 of 31 
 
Martinez was “with someone,” and, if so, whether that person was “a girl.” Id. 
at 196. Conley also repeatedly lamented the loss of the relationship and a desire 
to reconcile. At one point, Martinez responded and told Conley, “[i]f you don’t 
stop [I’m going to] block you.” Id. at 201. Conley replied, “[b]lock me because 
I’m broken[?]” Id. at 202. 
[6] By the early evening hours of October 26, Martinez had had her fill of the text 
messages and told Conley, “I’m on my way to make a police report . . . .” Id. at 
205. Conley’s text messages turned more aggressive after that, with Conley 
saying, among other things: “F*ck you, . . . I don’t care what you do”; “I don’t 
want no men around my daughter”; and, at 10:07 p.m. on October 26, “I’m 
sleeping. I have to work. Attend to your little boy.” Id. at 205-07. 
[7] But Conley did not go to sleep and, instead, texted Martinez again shortly 
before midnight, asking Martinez to “call” and then accusing Martinez of being 
“with him,” an apparent reference to Mercado. Id. at 208. And, at 2:26 a.m. on 
October 27, Conley texted Martinez: “Check your message on Facebook, 
clown.” Id. Just a few minutes before that text, Conley had said to Martinez on 
Facebook: “Damn . . . you move so fast with a kid who could date your 
daughter, but it’s cool. Enjoy yourself in life. I’m out. . . . Don’t call me when 
that [racial slur] cheating on you.” Trial Tr. Vol. 6, p. 10. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 5 of 31 
 
[8] Meanwhile, Desha was dating Jose Echabarria.3 Unfortunately, Desha 
suspected Jose of “cheating,” and Desha told Martinez of her suspicion. Trial 
Tr. Vol. 3, p. 181. In the evening hours of October 25, Martinez and Mercado 
accompanied Desha to a party where they expected to find Jose, but Jose was 
not there. Upon arriving at the party, Mercado “grabbed a brick and threw it 
through the window.” Id. at 182. They then left and went to Jose’s house; Jose 
was there with several family members and other acquaintances. Mercado “got 
out [of] the car” and “punched [Jose] in the face.” Id. at 183. When an older 
family member stepped in, Mercado punched him too. They then left Jose’s 
house and went back to Martinez’s house. 
[9] Not long after, Jose messaged Desha about Mercado. Jose was “upset” and 
“wanted to confront” Mercado. Id. at 184-85. Desha said she “did not” know 
who Mercado was and had only just met him through her mother. Id. at 184. 
Sometime on October 26, Jose told Desha that he gave Desha’s address 
(Martinez’s residence) to one of his brothers. Id. at 246. But Jose considered 
Martinez like “a mother” to him, and he was clear that he was not “upset” with 
Martinez and did not “blame[ her] at all” for Mercado’s behavior. Id. at 185-86. 
[10] October 26 was also the day that Conley’s text messages with Martinez turned 
more aggressive. That day, Conley moved Felicia out of Martinez’s residence 
using Conley’s 2011 brown Buick sedan. Around 7:38 that evening, Conley 
 
3 When he spelled his own name at trial, Jose did not specify the use of any accent marks. See Trial Tr. Vol. 
5, pp. 78-79. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 6 of 31 
 
asked Monica Graham,4 Conley’s now-sister-in-law who lives in Chicago, if 
Conley could borrow Graham’s 2013 gray Chevy Malibu for a few hours. 
Graham had never previously lent her car to Conley, and Graham informed 
Conley that the Malibu had tire-pressure issues and might be out of oil. But 
Conley insisted on needing to use the Malibu despite the issues, and so Graham 
relented. 
[11] The evening of October 26, Martinez was supposed to go to a Halloween party 
with Vanessa Vera, a friend from work. Vera took her children to Martinez’s 
residence for Desha to babysit them, but Martinez was not there. Vera spoke 
with Martinez on the phone sometime “between six or seven” that evening; 
Martinez said she had “bumped into [Conley]” at some unspecified point 
earlier that day and the two had “interchanged some words.” Trial Tr. Vol. 4, 
pp. 28-29. Vera then went out without Martinez. 
[12] Sometime between 10:00 and 10:40 that night, Martinez called Vera. See id. at 
29-31. Martinez said she had decided to not go out because she did not “feel 
good,” did not “feel right,” and was “scared for [her] life to be honest . . . .” Id. 
at 29. Vera followed up with Martinez on Snapchat and asked Martinez if she 
was “okay” and if Vera “need[ed] to leave” the party. Id. at 30. Martinez 
responded by saying that Conley “had threatened to shoot her and the guy she 
 
4 In 2019, Graham’s last name was Jones, and the record alternates between referring to her as Graham and 
as Jones. We follow the name she gave for herself at trial. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 7 of 31 
 
was seeing [Mercado] . . . .” Id. at 31. But Martinez told Vera that Vera did not 
need to leave, and Martinez was “just going to stay home . . . .” Id. at 30. 
[13] Around 3:00 a.m. on October 27, Desha and Martinez’s neighbor awoke to 
gunshots being fired. Both immediately called 9-1-1. Desha saw a four-door 
sedan darker than Conley’s Buick leaving the residence and her mother lying on 
the ground outside the residence. Martinez had been shot several times. 
Responding paramedics transported her to a nearby hospital, where she later 
died from her wounds. 
[14] Desha informed officers that either Conley or someone in Jose’s family might 
have been the shooter. At the hospital with Martinez, Desha sent several text 
messages to Conley about the shooting; at one point, Conley responded: “They 
can come check my car . . . . I was nowhere near [Martinez]” at the time of the 
shooting. Trial Tr. Vol. 3, p. 211. In a later conversation with Hammond Police 
Department Detective Brian Webber, Conley “offered [the] OnStar records for 
[the location of] her vehicle,” the Buick, but Conley “never” informed 
Detective Webber that she had borrowed Graham’s Malibu on the night in 
question. Trial Tr. Vol. 5, p. 246. 
[15] The investigation into Martinez’s murder lasted several months. Officers 
investigated Jose and his family, Mendoza, Mercado, and Mercado’s wife. To 
varying degrees, they all cooperated with the investigation, and officers 
eventually excluded each of them as a possible suspect. See id. at 84-85 (Jose 
cooperated); id. at 175-77 (Mercado excluded); id. at 223 (Mendoza excluded); 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 8 of 31 
 
Trial Tr. Vol. 6, pp. 41-44 (Mercado’s wife excluded); id. at 45-49 (Jose’s family 
excluded). 
[16] The course of the investigation led officers to identify Graham’s vehicle as the 
vehicle used in the perpetration of the murder. Among other data, a Hammond 
license plate reader had recorded Graham’s Malibu traveling near Martinez’s 
residence at a time proximate to the shooting. Further, two surveillance videos, 
one from an alley near Martinez’s residence and one from a nearby gas station, 
showed a vehicle resembling Graham’s Malibu near Martinez’s residence 
around the time of the 9-1-1 calls (we will refer to these two particular videos as 
“the surveillance videos”). Those recordings led officers to Graham, and 
Graham showed officers her messages with Conley in which Graham had 
allowed Conley to borrow the Malibu on the night in question. Based on this 
and other information, officers excluded Graham as a suspect. Trial Tr. Vol. 6, 
p. 41. 
[17] Thus, the investigation came to a focus on Conley. Officers learned that Conley 
had obtained a new cell phone and a new cell-phone number on October 31, 
2019, shortly after Martinez’s murder. She also set up a new Google account on 
November 1. Officers never recovered Conley’s prior cell phone. 
[18] However, through mobile carriers, officers were able to obtain the historical 
cell-site location information for Conley’s prior cell phone. That information 
showed that Conley’s prior cell phone connected with a cell tower near 
Graham’s residence on the evening of October 26 and then moved to a cell 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 9 of 31 
 
tower that covered Martinez’s residence at the time of the murder. Conley’s 
prior cell phone then connected with towers moving away from Martinez’s 
residence in a timeframe consistent with the post-shooting 9-1-1 calls. And the 
movements of Conley’s prior cell phone matched the license-plate reader and 
the two surveillance-video recordings of Graham’s Malibu. 
[19] Further, upon learning of Conley’s new Google account, officers were able to 
obtain her internet history. In particular, on November 1, 2019, Conley visited 
internet sites titled, “How to prevent police from tracking my phone,” and 
“What your cell phone can’t tell the police.” Id. at 71-72. From November 2019 
through January 2020, Conley searched several terms relating to police 
investigations using cell-tower information, probable cause, out-of-state arrest 
warrants, Indiana criminal statutes of limitation (there is no statute of limitation 
in Indiana for murder, see Ind. Code § 35-41-4-2(d) (2019)), and how to tell if 
your cell phone is being tracked. Conley also downloaded a document titled 
“The Law of Homicide” along with the Indiana Rules of Evidence. Trial Tr. 
Vol. 6, p. 83. And, about thirty-four hours before Martinez’s murder, Conley 
asked a friend on Facebook to “[l]ook out for Felicia if anything happens to 
me.” Id. at 21. 
[20] On June 12, 2020, the State charged Conley with Martinez’s murder. The State 
later amended its information to include a firearm enhancement. At the 
commencement of the initial phase of her jury trial, Conley’s trial counsel did 
not dispute that Conley had hurt feelings over her breakup with Martinez. See 
Trial Tr. Vol. 3, pp. 69-70. But, Conley’s counsel continued, there were 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 10 of 31 
 
multiple suspects who may have wanted to kill Martinez, and he emphasized 
that Conley’s defense would be to attack the quality of the State’s investigations 
into those other suspects. See id. at 67. 
[21] The State presented substantial evidence to the jury of Conley’s guilt. The 
State’s evidence included Conley’s motive for the killing, as evidenced by her 
many messages to Martinez leading up to the murder; Conley’s next-morning 
assertion that her car’s location information would prove her innocence along 
with Conley’s corresponding use of Graham’s car and not informing officers of 
her use of Graham’s car; the location information of Conley’s prior cell phone 
and the alignment of that information with the license-plate reader and the 
surveillance videos of Graham’s car; Conley’s apparent disposal of the prior cell 
phone and acquisition of a new cell phone and a new Google account shortly 
after the murder; and Conley’s internet history following the murder. The State 
also explained how it had investigated numerous other suspects and why it had 
eventually excluded all of them. During the State’s case-in-chief, Conley’s trial 
counsel stipulated to the admission of the surveillance videos, which relieved 
the State of its burden of having to establish a foundation for the admission of 
that evidence. 
[22] Also during the State’s case-in-chief, Vera testified about the night of Martinez’s 
death, without objection, as follows: 
I said, “Are you okay?” 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 11 of 31 
 
She said, “Yeah, I’m fine,” she said, “but I’m just not going to go 
out. I’m just going to stay right here with your kids,” . . . . 
* * * 
Q [by the State:] Did she tell you about any threats she received? 
A So right after I hung up on her when I told her like “I’ll 
just text you,” [and] she told me that her ex-girlfriend [Conley] had 
threatened to shoot her and the guy that she was seeing, and I 
somewhat remember telling her like “Don’t listen to her. Like, 
she’s probably just in her feelings,” and then I think we just left it 
at that from what I recall, and like I mentioned, the last thing 
that I got from her was a video of her on Snapchat and my son 
playing together. 
Trial Tr. Vol. 4, pp. 29, 31 (emphasis added). Conley’s counsel then cross-
examined Vera on why she no longer had the messages with Martinez and had 
to recall them from memory. On redirect, the State then asked Vera the 
following, again without objection: 
Q Okay. And you testified earlier that you received a 
Snapchat from Delilah about the defendant threatening to kill 
her, shoot her— 
A Yes. 
Q —the day before she was murdered. 
A Yes, she added that in there. 
Q You didn’t feel the need to screenshot that message? 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 12 of 31 
 
A No. 
Q Why not? 
A Because I never thought it would happen. I just thought 
her ex-girlfriend was just in her feelings, like I want to say like 
any other ex maybe. 
Id. at 47. 
[23] During closing argument, the State recounted its case against Conley. That 
included, without objection, Vera’s testimony that Martinez had told Vera, on 
the night of the shooting, that Conley had threatened to shoot Martinez and 
Mercado. See Trial Tr. Vol. 6, pp. 219-20. Conley’s counsel, in turn, 
emphasized all the other suspects who might have wanted to kill Martinez or 
Mercardo and the need for the State to prove its case against Conley beyond a 
reasonable doubt. In rebuttal, the State began, again without objection: “The 
defendant said she was going to shoot [Martinez], and she did shoot 
[Martinez].” Id. at 240-41. The rest of the State’s rebuttal then exhaustively 
recapped the State’s evidence in support of the murder charge. 
[24] The jury found Conley guilty of Martinez’s murder. Conley then waived her 
right to a jury trial on the firearm enhancement, and the trial court found her 
guilty of using a firearm in the commission of Martinez’s murder. The court 
then sentenced Conley to a total term of seventy years. On direct appeal, we 
affirmed her conviction after she argued that the trial court erred when it 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 13 of 31 
 
excluded certain evidence pertaining to Mendoza. Conley v. State, No. 22A-CR-
1748, 2023 WL 3580862 (Ind. Ct. App. May 22, 2023) (mem.), trans. denied. 
[25] Thereafter, Conley filed her petition for post-conviction relief, which she later 
amended. In her amended petition, Conley alleged that she had received 
ineffective assistance of trial counsel for three reasons: (1) he failed to object to 
Vera’s testimony that Conley had told Martinez that Conley was going to shoot 
her sometime before Martinez was shot to death; (2) he failed to challenge the 
evidentiary foundation for the surveillance videos; and (3) he failed to tender a 
“reasonable theory of innocence” jury instruction. Appellant’s App. Vol. 2, p. 
43. 
[26] At an ensuing evidentiary hearing, Conley’s trial counsel testified that he did 
not recall Vera’s testimony or why he would not have objected to it. Tr. Vol. 2, 
pp. 41-42. He similarly testified that he had no recollection of the surveillance 
videos at issue or why he had stipulated to their admission specifically. 
However, he suggested that his typical practice for stipulations is to give them 
when he is satisfied that doing so would avoid needlessly having the State call 
more witnesses. See id. at 33. And, regarding the jury instruction, he testified 
that he believed his emphasis on the beyond-a-reasonable-doubt standard was 
covered by the instructions given. 
[27] Following the evidentiary hearing, the post-conviction court concluded that, 
had Conley’s trial counsel objected to Vera’s testimony, the objection would 
have been overruled. The court also found that Conley’s trial counsel simply 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 14 of 31 
 
“save[d] time” by stipulating to the surveillance videos. Appellant’s App. Vol. 
2, p. 213. And the court agreed with Conley’s trial counsel that Conley’s post-
conviction concerns about a “reasonable theory of innocence” instruction were 
meritless because the instructions given to the jury “incorporate[d] some of the 
same concepts . . . .” Id. at 216. Accordingly, the post-conviction court denied 
Conley’s petition. 
[28] This appeal ensued. 
Standard of Review 
[29] Conley appeals the post-conviction court’s denial of her petition for post-
conviction relief. As our Supreme Court has explained: 
Post-conviction proceedings are civil proceedings in which the 
defendant must establish [her] claims by a preponderance of the 
evidence. Post-conviction proceedings do not offer a super-
appeal[;] rather, subsequent collateral challenges to convictions 
must be based on grounds enumerated in the post-conviction 
rules. Those grounds are limited to issues that were not known at 
the time of the original trial or that were not available on direct 
appeal. Issues available but not raised on direct appeal are 
waived, while issues litigated adversely to the defendant are res 
judicata . . . . 
Because the defendant is appealing from the denial of post-
conviction relief, [s]he is appealing from a negative judgment and 
bears the burden of proof. Thus, the defendant must establish 
that the evidence, as a whole, unmistakably and unerringly 
points to a conclusion contrary to the post-conviction court’s 
decision. In other words, the defendant must convince this Court 
that there is no way within the law that the court below could 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 15 of 31 
 
have reached the decision it did. We review the post-conviction 
court’s factual findings for clear error[ ] but do not defer to its 
conclusions of law. 
Wilkes v. State, 984 N.E.2d 1236, 1240 (Ind. 2013) (citation modified). 
[30] Conley’s post-conviction arguments are focused on allegations of ineffective 
assistance of trial counsel. To prevail on such claims: 
[The post-conviction petitioner] must show (1) that [her] 
counsel’s performance fell short of prevailing professional norms, 
and (2) that counsel’s deficient performance prejudiced [her] 
defense. Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 104 S. Ct. 2052, 
80 L. Ed. 2d 674 (1984). A showing of deficient performance 
under the first of these two prongs requires proof that legal 
representation lacked an objective standard of reasonableness, 
effectively depriving the defendant of [her] Sixth Amendment 
right to counsel. To demonstrate prejudice, the defendant must 
show a reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s errors, the 
[trial] would have resulted in a different outcome. A reasonable 
probability is a probability sufficient to undermine confidence in 
the outcome. 
When assessing the counsel’s performance, we rely on some 
basic guidelines. First, we start by strongly presuming that, 
throughout the proceedings, counsel exercised reasonable 
professional judgment and rendered adequate legal assistance. 
Second, defense counsel enjoys considerable discretion when 
developing legal strategies for a client, demanding deference 
during judicial review. Third, counsel’s isolated mistakes, poor 
strategy, inexperience, and instances of bad judgment do not 
necessarily render representation ineffective. 
Wilson v. State, 157 N.E.3d 1163, 1177 (Ind. 2020) (citation modified). 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 16 of 31 
 
1. Trial counsel’s failure to object to Vera’s testimony was 
unreasonable. 
[31] We first consider Conley’s argument that her trial counsel rendered ineffective 
assistance when he failed to object to Vera’s testimony regarding Martinez’s 
statements to Vera prior to the murder.5 To show ineffective assistance for 
counsel’s failure to object, the post-conviction petitioner first “must prove that 
an objection would have been sustained if made . . . .” Gibson v. State, 133 
N.E.3d 673, 692 (Ind. 2019). Here, there is no dispute between the parties that 
Vera’s testimony contained hearsay. Hearsay is an out-of-court statement 
offered to prove the truth of the matter asserted, Ind. Evidence Rule 801(c), and 
hearsay is presumptively inadmissible, see Evid. R. 802. 
[32] However, our Evidence Rules allow for the admission of hearsay evidence 
under certain, limited exceptions. The only exception proffered by the State as a 
basis for admitting Vera’s testimony is under Evidence Rule 803(3). That Rule 
provides in relevant part that the following out-of-court statements may be 
admissible: 
A statement of the declarant’s then-existing state of mind (such 
as motive, design, intent, or plan) or emotional, sensory, or 
physical condition (such as mental feeling, pain, or bodily 
health), but not including a statement of memory or belief to 
prove the fact remembered or believed . . . . 
 
5 Given our holding under the hearsay rules, we need not consider Conley’s additional arguments under 
other Evidence Rules or the trial court’s orders on motions in limine. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 17 of 31 
 
Evid. R. 803(3). 
[33] We initially note that the portion of Vera’s testimony that might be captured by 
Rule 803(3) requires discernment. The parties on appeal treat Vera’s 
recollection of Martinez’s statements as either entirely captured by or entirely 
outside of Rule 803(3), but, on this record at least, we doubt that assumption. 
Vera’s testimony about Martinez’s October 26, 2019, statements consisted of 
two key parts. First, Vera testified that Martinez had said, in a phone call while 
Vera was at the Halloween party, that Martinez was not going out and was 
instead staying at home because Martinez did not “feel good” or “feel right” 
and Martinez was “scared for [her] life.” Trial Tr. Vol. 4, p. 29. That part of 
Vera’s testimony was hearsay that might have been admissible to prove the truth 
of the matters asserted under Rule 803(3)’s state-of-mind exception. 
[34] But Vera’s testimony went further than simply relaying Martinez’s possible 
state of mind. Vera also testified as to why Martinez had that state of mind, 
testifying that, after that phone call, Martinez said in Snapchat messages that 
Conley “had threatened to shoot her” and Mercado. Id. at 31. Insofar as that 
additional testimony may have had admissible relevance, it would not have 
been for the truth of the matter asserted but instead to explain Martinez’s state of 
mind. See Williams v. State, 930 N.E.2d 602, 609 (Ind. Ct. App. 2010) 
(“Statements providing context for other admissible statements are not hearsay 
because they are not offered for their truth.”) (quoting United States v. Tolliver, 
454 F.3d 660, 666 (7th Cir. 2006)), trans. denied. That is, Vera’s testimony about 
the alleged threat is best viewed as not hearsay at all; its admissibility as 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 18 of 31 
 
relevant evidence, however, would only have been possible if the purported 
state-of-mind evidence were admissible. See id. And, because Conley’s trial 
counsel did not object to the hearsay component of Vera’s testimony, he also 
did not request a limiting instruction regarding the proper—and improper —
scope of the nonhearsay component of her testimony, nor did he request to 
exclude the nonhearsay component under Indiana Evidence Rule 403. 
[35] This brings us to the parties’ arguments on appeal. As our Supreme Court has 
explained: 
Rule 803(3) creates a hearsay exception for statements of the 
declarant’s then-existing state of mind at the time the statement 
was made. State of mind, as that term is defined, may include 
emotion, sensation, physical condition, intent, plan, motive, 
design, mental feeling, pain, and bodily health. 
In criminal cases involving out-of-court statements of a victim’s 
state of mind, this Court has identified three “instances where 
such statements may be admissible.” Ford v. State, 704 N.E.2d 
457, 459-60 (Ind. 1998). The first is to respond “when the 
defendant puts the victim’s state of mind in issue.” Hatcher v. 
State, 735 N.E.2d 1155, 1161 (Ind. 2000); see, e.g., Ford, 704 
N.E.2d at 459-60 (victim’s statement to witness that “she was 
unhappy and that she wanted to leave but she was afraid that if 
she left [the defendant] again he would kill her” was admissible 
as indicative of her state of mind). . . . The second—“to explain 
physical injuries suffered by the victim,” Hatcher, 735 N.E.2d at 
1161—this Court applied in Nicks v. State , 598 N.E.2d 520, 525 
(Ind. 1992), to admit remarks of a murder victim “to demonstrate 
the victim’s explanation of prior injuries inflicted by the 
defendant.” . . . The third is . . . “[t]o show the intent of the 
victim to act in a particular way.” Hatcher, 735 N.E.2d at 1161. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 19 of 31 
 
D.R.C. v. State, 908 N.E.2d 215, 226 (Ind. 2009). 
[36] Here, the post-conviction court appears to have concluded that Vera’s 
testimony that “Martinez decided to stay home because she didn’t feel right and 
had been threatened by [Conley]” was admissible under the third scenario 
described above, namely, to show Martinez’s intent to act in a certain way. See 
Appellant’s App. Vol. 2, p. 212. But the post-conviction court’s analysis is 
overinclusive of both the hearsay and the nonhearsay components of Vera’s 
testimony. That is, while the statement that “Martinez decided to stay home 
because she didn’t feel right” might have been admissible under Rule 803(3), 
the nonhearsay explanation for why Martinez felt that way would not have 
been captured by the Rule. 
[37] And a more nuanced analysis of Vera’s testimony shows that no part of it was 
admissible under Rule 803(3). Rule 803(3) applies only to evidence of a 
declarant’s “then-existing” state of mind—that is, the declarant’s state of mind 
at a time reasonably contemporaneous with his or her statement. See Hicks v. 
State, 690 N.E.2d 215, 223 (Ind. 1997). Rule 803(3) does not apply to evidence 
of a state of mind that had been held by the declarant at some unknown time 
prior to the declarant’s statement. See id. 
[38] In Hicks, for example, the declarant told the witness that the declarant “was still 
upset with [the defendant]” based on a conversation that was, at the time the 
declarant spoke to the witness, four hours old. Id. Our Supreme Court held that 
the witness’s testimony was not admissible under Rule 803(3) because “the gist” 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 20 of 31 
 
of the declarant’s statement to the witness was “about how upset [the declarant] 
felt at the time of her conversation with [the defendant], four hours before, and 
not of her ‘then existing’ state of mind . . . .” Id. 
[39] So too here. Vera first spoke to Martinez sometime between 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 
p.m. on October 26, 2019. In that conversation, Martinez told Vera that, at 
some unknown time earlier that day, Martinez had spoken to Conley, and the 
two had “interchanged some words.” Trial Tr. Vol. 4, p. 29. Several hours after 
that first conversation with Vera, Martinez again spoke with Vera and told her 
that, based on the earlier conversation with Conley, Martinez was not going to 
go out because Martinez did not “feel good” or “feel right” and Martinez was 
“scared for [her] life.” Id. That is, “the gist” of Martinez’s second phone call 
with Vera was that Martinez was “still upset” from the prior conversation she 
had had with Conley. Hicks, 690 N.E.2d at 223. But there is no evidence in the 
trial record or in the post-conviction record as to when on October 26, 2019, the 
conversation between Martinez and Conley took place. There is also no dispute 
that the relationship between Martinez and Conley was “toxic.” Trial Tr. Vol. 
3, p. 174. 
[40] Had Conley’s trial counsel objected to the purported state-of-mind evidence as 
inadmissible hearsay, the State would have been required to make an 
affirmative showing that Martinez’s statements to Vera were reasonably 
contemporaneous with Martinez’s conversation with Conley. See Hicks, 690 
N.E.2d at 223; see also 13 Robert Lowell Miller, Jr., Ind. Prac., Indiana 
Evidence § 803.103A (4th ed. Aug. 2025 update) (noting that, for a statement to 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 21 of 31 
 
be admissible under Rule 803(3), it must, among other things, have been made 
at a time “reasonably contemporaneous with the mental state” such that the 
declarant “had no time to reflect, that is, no time to fabricate or misrepresent” 
her state of mind). But we have been presented with no reason to conclude that 
the State could have made such a showing. There is no evidence that 
Martinez’s statements to Vera in the initial phone call, between 6:00 p.m. and 
7:00 p.m., were reasonably contemporaneous with Martinez’s conversation 
with Conley; that is only all the more true for Martinez’s statements to Vera in 
the second phone call several hours later. Thus, the alleged state-of-mind 
evidence was not admissible under Rule 803(3), and a hearsay objection against 
Vera’s hearsay testimony would have been sustained. And, as the hearsay 
component of Vera’s testimony was inadmissible, Martinez’s still-later 
Snapchat messages to Vera regarding the alleged threat from Conley had no 
relevance and were also inadmissible. 
[41] Even if we were to conclude that Martinez’s Snapchat messages to Vera about 
Conley’s alleged threat carried some contemporaneous and implied state-of-
mind evidence with it, as the post-conviction court appears to have concluded, 
the statement regarding the alleged threat was still inadmissible under Rule 
803(3). And on this point our case law is clear. In D.R.C., the State charged the 
defendant with murdering his wife. At trial, one of the wife’s friends testified 
that, on the day of the murder, the wife had said that she “was expecting her 
husband home between 7:00 and 7:30” that evening. D.R.C., 908 N.E.2d at 225. 
The witness’s testimony, admitted over the defendant’s hearsay objection, 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 22 of 31 
 
placed the defendant at the time and place of the murder and undermined his 
alibi defense. On appeal, the State argued that the witness’s testimony was 
admissible under Rule 803(3) to show why the wife was “at home at 7:30 p.m.” 
Id. at 228. That is, the State argued that the witness’s testimony carried, by 
implication, a representation of the declarant’s state of mind. 
[42] Our Supreme Court rejected the State’s argument and held that Rule 803(3) 
may be used to admit statements that “prove or explain acts or conduct of the 
declarant,” but the Rule is not an end-around “to prove a third-party’s conduct.” 
Id. (emphases added). As our Supreme Court cautioned, the declarant in such 
situations cannot know the defendant’s or another third-party’s intent “without 
perceiving and remembering some past fact,” i.e., something the third party 
“said or did” to express that intent to the declarant. Id. at 227. The declarant’s 
relaying of that past fact to a person who later becomes a witness “is thus no 
more reliable than any other classic form of hearsay, and this unreliability 
erodes the basis for admitting state-of-mind declarations in the first place.” Id. 
[43] In such a scenario, our Supreme Court continued, the declarant is not stating 
his or her own state of mind but instead is providing a “statement of memory or 
belief,” which is then improperly offered by a witness “to prove the fact 
believed . . . .” Id. (quoting United States v. Cohen, 631 F.2d 1223, 1225 (5th Cir. 
1980) (“[T]he state-of-mind exception does not permit the witness to relate any 
of the declarant’s statements as to why [the declarant] held the particular state of 
mind, or what [the declarant] might have believed that would have induced the 
state of mind.”) (emphasis added; first alteration original to D.R.C.)). And our 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 23 of 31 
 
Supreme Court concluded that, because its reasoning “compels excluding 
explicit references” to a third party’s conduct, its reasoning “applies even more 
forcefully to implication,” such as the implied state-of-mind the State sought to 
invoke through the D.R.C. witness’s testimony. Id. 
[44] Vera’s testimony regarding what Martinez had said about Conley’s alleged 
threat is the type of third-party reference our Supreme Court disapproved of in 
D.R.C. Martinez’s recollection to Vera necessarily turned on Martinez’s 
memory or belief of the fact remembered—the alleged threat by Conley at some 
unknown time earlier that day. And such testimony is excluded by both Rule 
803(3)’s plain terms and by our Supreme Court’s reasoning in D.R.C. Thus, the 
post-conviction court’s analysis on this issue is contrary to law. 
[45] Still, the State argues that Vera’s testimony was admissible because the 
relationship between Conley and Martinez was at issue. The State’s assessment 
appears to be a reference to our Supreme Court’s statement that hearsay may be 
admissible under Rule 803(3) “when the defendant puts the victim’s state of 
mind in issue.” Id. at 226 (quotation marks omitted). But the State conflates the 
whole of the relationship between Conley and Martinez with Martinez’s 
specific state of mind on a specific occasion, which are not equivalent 
propositions. Rule 803(3) does not permit all out-of-court statements relating to 
a defendant’s relationship to a victim. Cf. Willey v. State, 712 N.E.2d 434, 443 
(Ind. 1999) (“Motive and intent of the defendant are potentially relevant to the 
admissibility of prior ‘bad acts’ under Evidence Rule 404(b), but [they] do not 
constitute an exception to the hearsay rule.”). Further, it was the State’s case 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 24 of 31 
 
that put Conley’s relationship with Martinez at issue; Conley’s defense was that 
the State failed to properly investigate other suspects. The State’s argument here 
is without merit. 
[46] The State also asserts that Conley’s trial counsel acted with a reasonable 
strategy in not objecting to Vera’s testimony because it allowed the jury to hear 
that Vera thought Conley was “just in her feelings” about the break-up. 
Appellee’s Br. at 35 (quoting Trial Tr. Vol. 4, p. 47). The State’s strategy theory 
is not supported by the testimony of Conley’s trial counsel to the post-
conviction court, who could not recall a reason for not objecting to Vera’s 
testimony. And even if the State’s supposed theory could be called a strategy, it 
was not a reasonable one. That Conley was an upset former partner of Martinez 
was not disputed; meanwhile, in exchange for that unneeded evidence, the 
State suggests that a reasonable attorney would let the jury hear the otherwise-
inadmissible testimony from Vera that Conley had threatened to shoot 
Martinez sometime before Martinez was shot to death. No reasonable defense 
counsel would have made the choice the State proposes here, and we reject it. 
[47] We therefore conclude that the post-conviction court’s assessment that Conley’s 
trial counsel acted reasonably in not objecting to Vera’s testimony is contrary to 
law. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 25 of 31 
 
2. Conley’s trial counsel acted reasonably in stipulating to the 
admissibility of the surveillance videos and in not seeking a 
supplemental jury instruction. 
[48] Before turning to the second step of the Strickland analysis, we briefly consider 
Conley’s two additional arguments of ineffective assistance from her trial 
counsel. First, Conley asserts that her trial counsel acted unreasonably when he 
stipulated to the admission of the surveillance videos. Because the State had not 
listed on its witness list people who could establish a proper foundation for 
those videos, had her trial counsel objected, Conley continues, the surveillance 
videos would not have been admissible. 
[49] The post-conviction court found that the stipulations by Conley’s trial counsel 
here simply “save[d] time.” Appellant’s App. Vol. 2, p. 213. That finding is 
supported by the testimony of Conley’s counsel, in which he suggested that his 
usual practice is to stipulate to evidence when he is satisfied that the State 
would be able to establish a proper foundation for the evidence. And the 
implication from that testimony is that, had Conley’s trial counsel informed the 
State that he was not going to stipulate to the admission of the surveillance 
videos, the State would have added the necessary witnesses to its witness list or 
otherwise sought permission from the trial court to establish the necessary 
foundations for those videos. Accordingly, the post-conviction court’s 
resolution of this claim is not contrary to law. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 26 of 31 
 
[50] Second, Conley argues that her trial counsel unreasonably failed to request a 
supplemental “reasonable theory of innocence” jury instruction. Appellant’s Br. 
at 46. As our Supreme Court has explained: 
[W]hen the trial court determines that the defendant’s conduct 
required for the commission of a charged offense, the actus reus, is 
established exclusively by circumstantial evidence,[6] the jury 
should be instructed as follows: In determining whether the guilt of 
the accused is proven beyond a reasonable doubt, you should require that 
the proof be so conclusive and sure as to exclude every reasonable theory 
of innocence. 
Hampton v. State, 961 N.E.2d 480, 491 (Ind. 2012) (italics in original). Our 
Supreme Court added: 
Such a supplemental instruction is a safeguard urging jurors to 
carefully examine the inferences they draw from the evidence 
presented, thereby helping to assure that the jury’s reasoning is 
sound. Additionally, it serves to “reiterat[e] the magnitude of the 
[‘proof beyond a reasonable doubt’] standard to juries when the 
evidence before them is purely circumstantial.” In this regard, the 
“reasonable theory of innocence” instruction informs the jury 
that if a reasonable theory of innocence can be made of the 
circumstantial evidence, then there exists a reasonable doubt, and 
the defendant is entitled to the benefit of that doubt. 
Such a “reasonable theory of innocence” instruction, when 
appropriate, is not satisfied by the instruction on reasonable 
doubt. The State argues that . . . that the “reasonable theory of 
 
6 There is no dispute in this appeal that the State’s case against Conley was established exclusively by 
circumstantial evidence. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 27 of 31 
 
innocence” instruction is a way of restating “proof beyond a 
reasonable doubt” [and] renders the instruction “duplicitous.” To 
the contrary, providing the jury with an additional cautionary 
instruction in evaluating circumstantial evidence not only 
supports but further enhances the concept of requiring proof 
beyond a reasonable doubt. It admonishes the jury to tread 
lightly where the evidentiary gap between logical certainty and 
guilt is more tenuous. 
Id. at 486-87 (first two alterations original to Hampton; footnote and citations 
omitted). 
[51] Conley’s trial counsel testified to the post-conviction court that he did not 
request a supplemental reasonable-theory-of-innocence instruction to be given 
to the jury because he thought the instructions that were given, along with his 
emphasis during closing argument on the other possible suspects, sufficed to get 
the same essential ideas to the jury. The trial court gave the following 
instruction to the jury: 
Under the law of this State, a person charged with a crime is 
presumed to be innocent. This presumption of innocence 
continues in favor of the Defendant throughout each stage of the 
trial, and you should fit the evidence presented to the presumption that 
the Defendant is innocent if you can reasonably do so. 
If the evidence lends itself to two reasonable interpretations, you must 
choose the interpretation consistent with the Defendant’s innocence. If 
there is only one reasonable interpretation, you must accept that 
interpretation and consider the evidence with all the other 
evidence in making your decision. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 28 of 31 
 
To overcome the presumption of innocence, the State must prove 
the Defendant guilty of each element of the crime charged 
beyond a reasonable doubt. . . . 
Appellant’s Direct Appeal App. Vol. 3, p. 47 (emphasis added). The trial court 
similarly instructed the jury: 
The burden is upon the State to prove beyond a reasonable doubt 
that the Defendant is guilty of the crime charged. It is a strict and 
heavy burden. The evidence must overcome any reasonable doubt 
concerning the Defendant’s guilt, but it does not mean that a 
Defendant’s guilt must be proved beyond all possible doubt. 
A reasonable doubt is a fair, actual, and logical doubt based upon 
reason and common sense. A reasonable doubt may arise either 
from the evidence or from a lack of evidence. Reasonable doubt 
exists when you are not firmly convinced of the Defendant’s guilt 
after you have weighed and considered all the evidence. 
A Defendant must not be convicted on suspicion or speculation. 
It is not enough for the State to show that the Defendant is 
probably guilty. On the other hand, there are very few things in 
this world that we know with absolute certainty. The State does 
not have to overcome every possible doubt. 
The State must prove each element of the crime by evidence that 
firmly convinces each of you and leaves no reasonable doubt. 
The proof must be so convincing that you can rely and act upon 
it in this matter of the highest importance. 
If you find that there is a reasonable doubt that the Defendant is 
guilty of the crime, you must give the Defendant the benefit of 
that doubt and find the Defendant not guilty of the crime under 
consideration. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 29 of 31 
 
Id. at 48 (emphasis added). 
[52] We are not persuaded by Conley’s argument that her trial counsel’s failure to 
request a supplemental reasonable-theory-of-innocence instruction amounted to 
constitutionally deficient performance. We do agree with Conley that ideally her 
trial counsel would have requested the supplemental instruction for the reasons 
explained by our Supreme Court in Hampton. But the representation guaranteed 
by the Sixth Amendment does not require ideal representation; it requires 
minimally competent representation. See Ward v. State, 969 N.E.2d 46, 51 (Ind. 
2012). And Conley’s trial counsel used the evidence and instructions that were 
before the jury to make the same essential points that would have been covered 
by a supplemental reasonable-theory-of-innocence instruction. Accordingly, she 
received constitutionally sufficient performance from her counsel on this issue. 
3. The post-conviction court did not err in denying Conley’s 
petition. 
[53] Having concluded that Conley’s trial counsel deficiently failed to challenge 
Vera’s testimony but reasonably stipulated to the surveillance videos and 
reasonably proceeded without the supplemental jury instruction, we thus turn 
to the second prong of the Strickland analysis. Again, this part of the analysis 
requires Conley to demonstrate a “reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s 
errors, the [trial] would have resulted in a different outcome. A reasonable 
probability is a probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome.” 
Wilson, 157 N.E.3d at 1177. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 30 of 31 
 
[54] Vera’s inadmissible testimony was unquestionably prejudicial, and, as 
explained above, trial counsel allowing the jury to hear her testimony about 
Conley’s alleged threat cannot be rationalized or justified. That said, looking to 
the record as a whole, our confidence in the jury’s verdict against Conley is not 
undermined by her counsel’s mistake. The State’s case against Conley was not 
just compelling, it was overwhelming. Conley’s motive for the murder was 
thoroughly demonstrated by her many messages to Martinez leading up to the 
shooting. Just hours after the shooting, Conley, without prompting, texted 
Desha that Conley’s car-location information would prove her innocence. 
Conley said likewise to officers. Conley conveniently failed to mention to 
investigators that she had borrowed Graham’s car. Thus, the State’s evidence 
made clear that, not only did Conley have a motive for killing Martinez, she 
had attempted to set up an alibi and attempted to hide her use of Graham’s car. 
[55] Further, shortly after the murder, Conley inexplicably needed a new cell phone. 
While her prior phone was never recovered, the location information of her 
prior phone made clear that Conley had traveled from Graham’s residence to 
Martinez’s residence. Conley was there at the time of the murder and left at a 
time consistent with the 9-1-1 calls. Conley’s prior cell-phone location 
information also aligned with the license-plate reader and the surveillance 
videos of Graham’s car. And Conley’s internet history following the murder 
spoke to a guilty mind. Further, despite Conley’s defense, the State thoroughly 
explained how it had investigated the numerous other suspects and why it had 
eventually excluded all of them as suspects. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-2706 | June 23, 2026 Page 31 of 31 
 
[56] Accordingly, we conclude that there is no reasonable probability that, but for 
trial counsel’s mistake with respect to Vera’s testimony, the result of Conley’s 
trial would have been different. We therefore affirm the post-conviction court’s 
denial of her petition for post-conviction relief. 
Conclusion 
[57] For all of these reasons, we affirm the post-conviction court’s judgment. 
[58] Affirmed. 
Kenworthy, J., and DeBoer, J., concur. 
ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLANT 
Amy E. Karozos 
Public Defender of Indiana 
Lindsay Van Gorkom 
Deputy Public Defender 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
 
ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLEE 
Theodore E. Rokita 
Attorney General of Indiana 
Ian McLean 
Supervising Deputy Attorney General 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
 
