25A-CR-2176
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/06/16/andrew_t._masterson_v._state_of_indiana.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10875748/andrew-t-masterson-v-state-of-indiana/
Caption: Andrew T. Masterson v. State of Indiana
Date: 2026-06-16

Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2176 | June 16, 2026 Page 1 of 12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE 
Court of Appeals of Indiana 
 
Andrew T. Masterson, 
Appellant-Defendant 
v. 
State of Indiana, 
Appellee-Plaintiff 
June 16, 2026 
Court of Appeals Case No. 
25A-CR-2176 
Appeal from the Martin Circuit Court 
The Honorable Isha E. Wright-Ryan, Judge 
Trial Court Cause No. 
51C01-2207-F3-89 
Opinion by Judge Vaidik 
Judges Bailey and Scheele concur. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2176 | June 16, 2026 Page 2 of 12 
 
Vaidik, Judge. 
Case Summary 
[1] Andrew T. Masterson’s sentence was modified to a community-corrections 
placement on the condition that he reside at a particular recovery house. The 
recovery house discharged him over two contested drug screens—despite a 
retest the next day being negative—and the State sought revocation of the 
community-corrections placement because Masterson was no longer at the 
program the trial court’s order required. The trial court found that Masterson 
violated the conditions of his placement, even though it questioned the 
recovery-house director’s credibility and recognized that the discharge was not 
Masterson’s fault. Masterson appeals, challenging only whether a violation 
occurred. We hold that the State proved a violation: under Woods v. State, 892 
N.E.2d 637 (Ind. 2008), a probationer’s lack of fault does not bear on whether a 
violation occurred but only on the sanction imposed. Constrained by Woods, we 
affirm. 
Facts and Procedural History 
[2] In January 2023, Masterson and the State entered into a plea agreement under 
which Masterson would plead guilty to Level 4 felony dealing in 
methamphetamine, the State would dismiss several other charges, and 
Masterson would be sentenced to six years in the Department of Correction 
(DOC). The agreement also provided that upon Masterson’s successful 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2176 | June 16, 2026 Page 3 of 12 
 
completion of Purposeful Incarceration, the trial court would consider a 
sentence modification. 
[3] After successfully completing Purposeful Incarceration, Masterson sought to 
modify his sentence. In August 2024, the trial court found that Masterson was 
“eligible for Martin County Community Corrections for post-conviction home 
detention with residence at Behind the Wire Ministry,” a recovery house for 
men in Loogootee. Appellant’s App. Vol. 2 p. 28. The court ordered that 
Masterson 
shall remain in full compliance with all rules and regulations of 
the Martin County Community Corrections release program and 
Behind the Wire Ministries including the Defendant shall obtain 
a mental health and substance abuse assessment through a local 
mental health provider and attend, participate in, and 
successfully complete any treatment recommendations. 
Id. at 29. 
[4] Masterson was released from the DOC and placed at Behind the Wire on 
October 7. Behind the Wire had a drug-screening policy. Under that policy, 
upon a positive drug screen a resident was given the option to pay $50 to have 
the sample sent to a laboratory; if it came back negative, the $50 was refunded. 
See Tr. p. 26. But if it came back positive, the resident was dismissed from the 
program. See id. 
[5] On Sunday, December 28, Joshua Jackson, Behind the Wire’s assistant 
director, administered two instant urine drug screens to Masterson, which were 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2176 | June 16, 2026 Page 4 of 12 
 
positive for morphine. Masterson challenged the positive results and asked that 
the sample be sent to a laboratory for confirmatory testing according to Behind 
the Wire’s policy. Jackson called Scott Highberger, Behind the Wire’s director, 
to request permission to send the sample to a laboratory, but Highberger said 
no. See id. at 20-21. 
[6] Highberger then contacted Danielle Murphy, the director of Martin County 
Community Corrections, and said he wanted Masterson removed from the 
facility “immediately” because he had submitted two positive drug screens and 
was being terminated from the program. Id. at 32. Because it was a Sunday 
evening, Murphy told Highberger that Masterson would have to stay there 
overnight and that Highberger would have to bring him to her office in the 
morning. 
[7] The next morning, December 29, Masterson went to Murphy’s office, where 
two drug screens—oral and urine —were administered and sent to a laboratory ; 
both were negative for all substances. That same day, Masterson was dismissed 
from Behind the Wire. See Appellee’s App. Vol. 2 p. 36. 
[8] The next day, December 30, the State filed a petition to revoke Masterson’s 
community-corrections placement because he “violated the terms and 
conditions of Martin County Community Corrections by being 
dismissed/terminated from Behind the Wire Ministries Program immediately 
due to two positive drug screens.” Id. at 37. A fact-finding hearing was held in 
July 2025. Jackson testified that on the same day he received a subpoena to 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2176 | June 16, 2026 Page 5 of 12 
 
testify at the hearing, Highberger called him and asked him to testify that 
Behind the Wire “did not have a policy in place yet for laboratory testing,” even 
though it did. Tr. p. 23. Jackson also testified that because “Behind the Wire is 
a Level III certified . . . recovery residence,” it is required to “follow NARR, 
National Alliance of Recovery Residences’ ethical policies.” Id. at 20. One of 
those policies provides: 
When a positive drug test result is contested by a resident—
particularly in a non-lab testing situation such as in a recovery-
house-administered urine screen—a process must be in place for 
the resident to prove that the results are inaccurate. 
Ideally, such verification shall take place prior to the resident 
being asked to vacate the residence. 
Ex. p. 6. 
[9] Murphy testified that “Masterson was not violated from Community 
Corrections for failed drug screens”; rather, he “was violated due to his 
modification order stipulating Behind the Wire.” Tr. p. 37. She explained that 
she could not “force” Highberger to keep Masterson in the program and that 
her “hands [were] tied” by the trial court’s modification order listing Behind the 
Wire as the place where Masterson had to reside. Id. at 37, 38. She said that 
once Highberger decided to terminate Masterson from the program, even if she 
disagreed with his decision, she had “no choice” but to seek revocation. Id. at 
38. She explained that, as the community-corrections director, she couldn’t 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2176 | June 16, 2026 Page 6 of 12 
 
have requested a modification of Masterson’s placement, but Masterson could 
have. See id. at 41-42. 
[10] The State argued that a “strict liability” standard applied and that because 
Masterson did not complete the Behind the Wire program—even if through no 
fault of his own—he was in violation of his placement at Behind the Wire. Id. at 
45. The trial court found that Masterson violated the conditions of his 
placement at Behind the Wire. The court didn’t base its decision on the failed 
drug screens—in fact, the court said it was not considering them at all , see id. at 
48. Rather, the court based its decision on the fact that Masterson was 
discharged from Behind the Wire and that “anytime any individual decides 
they want to go to a rehabilitation program, they are at the discretion of the 
director to be there”: 
I am very disappointed with this situation, but I have to stand on 
the fact that I issued an order because of a request from your 
client to go to Behind the Wire. That’s where he wanted to go. I 
granted his modification, allowed him to go to Behind the Wire, 
through supervision of Community Corrections. 
And I’m not relying on Mr. Highberger today. I find his 
character in question as of what I heard today on the record 
under oath. But I’m relying on Community Corrections, and the 
director saying, I was called by the facility to immediately 
terminate him, I had no other option but to do that. So, orders 
can read better in the future. We’re all practicing law around 
here, right? So, I do think that as far as I’m concerned, my orders 
will read very differently, as I will give Community Corrections 
the authority to make sure this doesn’t happen again, in this 
circumstance. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2176 | June 16, 2026 Page 7 of 12 
 
But it was the order, and it was what happened, and I do find 
[by] a preponderance of the evidence that he did violate the terms 
and conditions of Community Corrections. So, I do believe a 
disposition is necessary. 
. . . . 
I now have a serious concern about this facility. On the record 
today I was told that the director of the program tampered with 
witness testimony before coming to my court to testify to me. So, 
I have a real problem, a real problem, with that. And I don’t 
know that I’ll ever order anybody to Behind the Wire again. 
Id. at 48, 50, 52. The court proceeded to disposition, and the parties agreed that 
Masterson would serve his remaining time on work release through Wabash 
Valley Regional Community Corrections. Id. at 55. 
[11] Masterson now appeals. 
Discussion and Decision 
[12] A defendant’s placement in community corrections may be revoked if he 
violates the terms of that placement. Ind. Code § 35-38-2.6-5. A community-
corrections revocation proceeding is treated the same as a probation-revocation 
proceeding and follows a two-step process: (1) the trial court must make a 
factual determination that a violation occurred and (2) if a violation is proven, 
the court must determine whether it warrants revocation. Woods v. State, 892 
N.E.2d 637, 640 (Ind. 2008); Cox v. State, 706 N.E.2d 547, 549 (Ind. 1999), reh’g 
denied. Masterson only challenges the trial court’s step-one determination, 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2176 | June 16, 2026 Page 8 of 12 
 
arguing the State presented insufficient evidence to prove he violated the 
conditions of his community-corrections placement at Behind the Wire. The 
State must prove the alleged violation by a preponderance of the evidence. 
Treece v. State, 10 N.E.3d 52, 56 (Ind. Ct. App. 2014), trans. denied. 
[13] Masterson claims that the trial court erred in finding that he violated his 
placement at Behind the Wire based on the two positive drug screens because 
they were not reliable and he tested negative the very next day. See Appellant’s 
Br. p. 12. But the trial court did not find that Masterson violated his placement 
based on those drug screens; the court disregarded them entirely. Instead, the 
court found that Masterson violated the conditions of his placement at Behind 
the Wire because he was dismissed from the program. 
[14] To the extent Masterson argues that the trial court applied an improper “strict 
liability” standard in finding that he violated the conditions of his placement at 
Behind the Wire, see id. at 10, this argument fails, too. In Woods, our Supreme 
Court explained: 
In one sense all probation requires “strict compliance.” That is to 
say probation is a matter of grace. And once the trial court 
extends this grace and sets its terms and conditions, the 
probationer is expected to comply with them strictly. If the 
probationer fails to do so, then a violation has occurred. 
892 N.E.2d at 641 (citation omitted). Revocation, however, is not automatic, 
and a defendant must be given an opportunity to explain why his probation or 
community corrections should not be revoked: 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2176 | June 16, 2026 Page 9 of 12 
 
[T]he very notion that violation of a probationary term will result 
in revocation no matter the reason is constitutionally suspect. For 
example, failure to pay a probation user fee where the 
probationer has no ability to pay certainly cannot result in a 
probation revocation. And what of a probationer not reporting 
to his probation officer because he was in a coma in a hospital? 
Or consider a failed urinalysis test because of prescription 
medication a probationer is taking on orders from his treating 
physician. 
Id. (citations omitted, emphasis added). The Court stated that lack of volition or 
willfulness is not a “defense” but rather should be considered in determining an 
appropriate sanction once a violation is found. Id. (citing United States v. Warner, 
830 F.2d 651, 657-58 (7th Cir. 1987) (“While good faith and lack of willfulness 
does not preclude finding a probation violation, defendant could and did raise 
his alleged good faith before the court as a factor for the court to consider in 
deciding whether to revoke probation.”)). 
[15] In Trejo v. State, 211 N.E.3d 591 (Ind. Ct. App. 2023), reh’g denied, trans. denied, 
this Court addressed a similar situation. There, the trial court found that the 
defendant violated his probation by failing to meet with his probation officer 
and ordered him to serve 2.5 years of his previously suspended sentence. The 
defendant claimed that “he could not meet with the probation department 
because he was in the custody of United States Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement (ICE).” Id. at 592. We affirmed the trial court’s finding that the 
defendant violated his probation because 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2176 | June 16, 2026 Page 10 of 12 
 
“lack of volition” is “not a defense” to an alleged probation 
violation. Woods, 892 N.E.2d at 641. It is only a factor for the 
trial court to consider in fashioning the appropriate sanction once 
a violation is found. . . . Trejo’s inability to meet with the 
probation department because he was in ICE custody at the 
time has no bearing on whether the probation violation 
occurred. Instead, his alleged inability to comply with Standard 
Condition 1 bears on the trial court’s sanction for the violation, 
which Trejo does not challenge. 
Id. at 593 (citation omitted, emphasis added). 
[16] Here, Masterson doesn’t dispute that he was discharged from Behind the Wire, 
the program where the trial court’s modification order required him to reside as 
a condition of his community-corrections placement. His discharge was 
therefore a violation of that condition. As in Trejo, Masterson’s contention that 
the discharge was not his fault—that he was terminated over contested drug 
screens—does not bear on whether a violation occurred; it is relevant only to 
the appropriate sanction, if any, once a violation is found. See Woods, 892 
N.E.2d at 641; Trejo, 211 N.E.3d at 593. Because the State proved by a 
preponderance of the evidence that Masterson violated the conditions of his 
placement, the trial court did not err in its step-one determination. We 
acknowledge that this violation will appear on Masterson’s record even though 
his dismissal from Behind the Wire was entirely attributable to Highberger’s 
questionable conduct. But we are constrained by Woods to hold that a violation 
occurred. Woods recognizes that a probationer who misses an appointment 
because he is in a coma has nonetheless committed a violation, with his 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2176 | June 16, 2026 Page 11 of 12 
 
condition bearing only on the sanction. If there is a change to Woods, it must 
come from our Supreme Court.1 We therefore affirm. 
[17] Affirmed. 
Bailey, J., and Scheele, J., concur. 
ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLANT 
Robert T. Miles 
Justin W. Roberts 
David J. Noetzel, Certified Legal Intern 
Kolb Roellgen & Traylor LLP 
Vincennes, Indiana 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 The State cites to other jurisdictions that have ruled similarly. For example, in State ex rel. Nixon v. Campbell, 
906 S.W.2d 369 (Mo. 1995), reh’g denied, the defendant was convicted of rape and sentenced to seven years. 
Execution of the sentence was suspended upon the condition that he complete a two-year inpatient sex-
offender program at the state hospital. Shortly thereafter, the state canceled the program, and the prosecutor 
sought to revoke the defendant’s probation. The trial court found that the defendant violated his probation 
and ordered him to serve his sentence in prison. On appeal, the Missouri Supreme Court held, “There can be 
no question that [the defendant] violated the terms of his probation. The court had conditioned his probation 
upon completion of a two-year sex offender program. The state has now discontinued this program and [the 
defendant] cannot comply with the terms of his probation.” Id. at 371. The court went on to address whether 
the defendant’s probation was properly revoked and concluded that it was, reasoning that the defendant still 
needed inpatient treatment that was only available in prison. See also State v. Baxter, 563 A.2d 721, 729-30 
(Conn. App. Ct. 1989) (“Although a finding of a violation of a condition of probation should not lead to a 
rote revocation of probation[,] there is no constitutional requirement, except in the circumstance of [failing to 
pay a fee or fine], that the trial court must first find that the violation was willful, before probation may be 
revoked.” (citation omitted)). 
Other states, however, require a probation violation to be willful. See, e.g., Bazzle v. State, 434 P.3d 1090, 1099 
(Wyo. 2019); Stringfield v. State, 254 So. 3d 1127, 1128 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2018). 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CR-2176 | June 16, 2026 Page 12 of 12 
 
ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLEE 
Theodore E. Rokita 
Attorney General 
Jennifer B. Anwarzai 
Deputy Attorney General 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
