25A-PL-1182
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/06/04/whitesell_precision_components_inc._v._autoform_tool__manufacturing_llc.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10880955/whitesell-precision-components-inc-v-autoform-tool-manufacturing-llc/
Caption: Whitesell Precision Components Inc. v. Autoform Tool & Manufacturing LLC and Hitachi Automotive Systems Inc.
Date: 2026-06-04

Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 1 of 23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE 
Court of Appeals of Indiana 
 
Whitesell Precision Components Inc., 
Appellant-Plaintiff 
v. 
Autoform Tool & Manufacturing LLC, 
Appellee-Defendant 
and 
Hitachi Automotive Systems Inc., 
Defendant 
June 4, 2026 
Court of Appeals Case No. 
25A-PL-1182 
Appeal from the Marion Superior Court 
The Honorable Heather A. Welch, Senior Judge 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 2 of 23 
 
Trial Court Cause No. 
49D01-1610-PL-36015 
Opinion by Judge DeBoer 
Judges Brown and Altice concur. 
DeBoer, Judge. 
Case Summary 
[1] Whitesell Precision Components Inc. (Whitesell) and Autoform Tool & 
Manufacturing LLC (Autoform) have been engaged in nearly a decade of 
litigation arising out of a contract dispute. After three interlocutory appeals and 
just as many bench trials, the case has returned to this Court for the fourth time, 
now after the entry of final judgment in which both Whitesell and Autoform 
prevailed on competing breach of contract claims. Because Whitesell’s 
damages were larger than Autoform’s, the net damages award was in 
Whitesell’s favor. On appeal, Whitesell argues that because Autoform 
committed the first material breach of contract, it should have been precluded 
from recovering damages on its breach of contract counterclaims. We agree 
and thus reverse the trial court’s judgment in Autoform’s favor on that claim 
and remand with instructions for the court to recalculate the net damages 
award. 
[2] Autoform cross-appeals the trial court’s denial of its motion to correct error 
regarding its request for attorneys’ fees, arguing in part that the court erred in 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 3 of 23 
 
concluding it was not a “prevailing party” under Indiana Code section 34-52-1-
1. Because we find Autoform’s breach of contract counterclaim must fail since 
Autoform was the first to materially breach the parties’ contract, we affirm the 
trial court’s denial of the motion to correct error. 
Facts and Procedural History 
The Parties’ Contractual Relationships 
[3] In the first interlocutory appeal in this case, the panel described the parties and 
their relationship as follows: 
Whitesell is in the business of manufacturing and distributing 
engineered, specialty, and standard components and parts used in 
various industries, including in the assembly and manufacture of 
automobiles. Autoform is in the business of manufacturing 
components used in the assembly and manufacture of 
automobiles. Autoform use[d] injector cups supplied by 
Whitesell to produce fuel rail assemblies that Autoform [sold] to 
Hitachi America, Ltd. (“Hitachi”). Hitachi place[d] fuel injectors 
into Autoform’s fuel rail assemblies, and the finished products 
[were] installed into automobiles. 
Whitesell Precision Components, Inc. v. Autoform Tool & Mfg., LLC, 110 N.E.3d 380, 
381-82 (Ind. Ct. App. 2018) (footnote omitted), trans. denied. Hitachi, 
Autoform, and Whitesell were in a “directed-buy” relationship, meaning 
Hitachi required Autoform to purchase injector cups from Whitesell, if 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 4 of 23 
 
Whitesell complied with certain conditions.1 Among other conditions, 
Whitesell was required to sell injector cups (1) that satisfied Hitachi’s 
specifications, and (2) for a competitive price approved by Hitachi. 
[4] In late 2013, Hitachi approved Whitesell’s initial proposal to sell injector cups 
for $2.47 per unit. Before production began, Hitachi told Autoform that it may 
need to scale back its estimated production volume. Autoform then requested 
an updated price quote from Whitesell, and Whitesell provided a low-volume 
quote of $2.74 for each injector cup. When production began in late 2014, 
Hitachi instructed Autoform to purchase the injector cups at the high-volume 
price of $2.47, but in June 2015, the anticipated low-volume production 
scenario became a reality, and Hitachi began issuing contracts to Autoform that 
contemplated the low-volume price of $2.74. However, Autoform did not 
inform Whitesell of that development and instead continued to purchase 
injector cups at the high-volume price. In essence, this meant Autoform 
pocketed the 27-cent difference between the $2.74 paid by Hitachi and the $2.47 
Autoform paid to Whitesell. 
 
1 In a directed-buy arrangement, “the customer requires that its direct supplier (the ‘Tier 1 Supplier’) 
purchase from a specific sub-supplier (the ‘Tier 2 Supplier’) certain raw materials, parts[,] or components . . . 
for integration into the product that the Tier 1 Supplier sells to the customer . . . .” Kathleen E. Wegrzyn, 
Best Practices for Customers Structuring Directed-Buy Arrangements, THE NATIONAL LAW REVIEW (Jan. 30, 2019), 
https://natlawreview.com/article/best-practices-customers-structuring-directed-buy-arrangements 
[https://perma.cc/8V3R-M2F6]. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 5 of 23 
 
Whitesell Demands the Low-Volume Price 
[5] In early 2016, Whitesell realized that though Autoform was paying the high 
production volume price, the number of injector cups it ordered tracked the 
low-volume production estimates. Accordingly, Whitesell demanded that 
Autoform pay the $2.74 price, retroactive to when the low-volume shipments 
began to account for the “alleged ‘payment shortfall’ of $343,154.15.” 
Appellant’s Appendix Vol. 2 at 228. Autoform refused, and Whitesell 
threatened to stop shipments if Autoform did not agree to its demands by 
October 1. That deadline was extended while they attempted to reach a 
resolution, but in September, Whitesell filed a complaint for breach of contract 
against Autoform. Whitesell voluntarily dismissed that complaint only to re-
file it on October 11—the same day on which Autoform filed its own complaint 
alleging breach of contract, and other claims, against Whitesell. The parties 
agreed to consolidate their claims under Whitesell’s action, and Autoform re-
filed its claims as counterclaims. 
Temporary Restraining Order and Preliminary Injunction 
[6] In December, Whitesell stopped shipping injector cups to Autoform after 
negotiations between the parties broke down. On the 27th, Autoform filed a 
motion for a temporary restraining order (a TRO) and asked the trial court to 
order Whitesell to continue selling injector cups at “$2.47[] . . . [for] all of 
Autoform’s future orders[.]” Appellee’s App. Vol. 2 at 13. In its brief 
supporting the TRO request, Autoform argued that Whitesell’s claims were “a 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 6 of 23 
 
bad faith attempt to manufacture a retroactive price increase[.]”2 It further 
argued that it would suffer irreparable harm if Whitesell was not ordered to 
continue supplying it with injector cups because it operated on a “just-in-time” 
inventory system.3 Whitesell opposed the TRO, arguing it would “force[] 
[Whitesell] to continue shipping injector cups at a lower price than agreed . . . 
.”4 After a hearing, the trial court issued a TRO in early January 2017 requiring 
Whitesell to continue selling injector cups at the high-volume price. The parties 
later agreed to convert the TRO to a preliminary injunction. 
[7] After securing the preliminary injunction, Autoform began accusing Whitesell 
of supplying it with injector cups that did not conform with Hitachi’s 
specifications. In October 2017, the court entered a pre-trial order permitting 
Autofom to “debit Whitesell’s account for each defective injector cup 
delivered.” Whitesell Precision Components, 110 N.E.3d at 383. In early 2018, 
Whitesell moved to dissolve the preliminary injunction, arguing Autoform had 
been given adequate time to find a new supplier, and performing under what 
Whitesell characterized as an inequitable injunction was causing it to suffer 
 
2 Autoform’s Brief in Support of Emergency Motion for Temporary Restraining Order at 2, Whitesell Precision 
Components, Inc. v. Autoform Tool & Mfg., LLC (Dec. 27, 2016) (No. 49D01-1610-PL-36015). 
Though neither party included this filing (or several other relevant documents) in their respective appendices, 
all documents filed with the trial court in this case are part of the record on appeal. Ind. Appellate Rule 27. 
We’ve accessed several of those documents using our Odyssey Case Management System. 
3 Autoform’s Brief in Support of Emergency Motion for Temporary Restraining Order, supra note 2, at 4. 
4 Plaintiff’s Response to Defendant’s Emergency Motion for Temporary Restraining Order at 14, Whitesell 
Precision Components (Jan. 3, 2017) (No. 49D01-1610-PL-36015). 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 7 of 23 
 
additional damages. The trial court denied Whitesell’s motion, crediting 
Autoform’s claim that it would take more than a year for it to find a new 
supplier and reasoning Whitesell had adequate legal remedies if judgment was 
ultimately entered against Autoform. This Court affirmed that denial in an 
interlocutory appeal. Id. at 387. 
[8] In January 2021, Hitachi gave Autoform permission to purchase injector cups 
from a new supplier. Thereafter, Autoform moved to dissolve the preliminary 
injunction. Whitesell opposed that motion and argued that before dissolving 
the preliminary injunction, the trial court should impose several conditions. 
These included modifying the injunction’s price to $2.74, with Autoform 
required to post a bond that accounted for the 27-cent difference between the 
low-volume and high-volume prices for all injector cup shipments made after 
injunctive relief was entered in 2017. 
2021 Bench Trial on the Price Dispute 
[9] On March 3 and 4, 2021, while the motion to dissolve the preliminary 
injunction was pending, the court held a two-day bench trial on the parties’ 
numerous claims and counterclaims. The parties agreed to bifurcate the issues 
of liability and damages, with the 2021 bench trial focused on liability only. 
They also agreed that Autoform’s claims regarding “nonconformities in 
Whitesell’s [i]njector [c]ups” would be stayed until the court determined 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 8 of 23 
 
whether those claims were subject to arbitration.5 Appellant’s App. Vol. 3 at 4. 
The 2021 trial also addressed a motion for default judgment Whitesell filed 
against Autoform for its alleged litigation misconduct, including allegations that 
Autoform failed to produce responsive documents in discovery and submitted 
false and misleading evidence to secure the TRO and preliminary injunction. 
Two months later, in May, the court held another hearing on whether to 
dissolve the injunction. 
[10] The trial court entered two separate orders on August 10, which did five things 
relevant to this appeal. First, the court denied Whitesell’s motion for default 
judgment, reasoning Autoform’s conduct did not justify such a harsh sanction 
and “Whitesell ha[d] a remedy to recover its legal expenses through seeking 
reasonable attorney’s fees” later in the proceedings. Id. at 39. Second, the court 
found as follows: 
Whitesell’s initial filling of the purchase orders is understandable 
since the $2.47 figure was a previous quotation based on 
anticipated orders from Hitachi. Once it became apparent that 
the actual order volumes tracked the lower volume estimate, 
Whitesell reasonably demanded that it be compensated based on 
the [i]njector [c]up figure it quoted for the lower volume scenario, 
 
5 Whitesell moved to compel arbitration in January 2018. The trial court denied that motion in August 2018 
after finding unresolved questions of fact about whether the parties had entered into an arbitration agreement. 
This Court affirmed that finding in a second interlocutory appeal. Whitesell Precision Components, Inc. v. 
Autoform Tool & Mfg., LLC, 129 N.E.3d 830 (Table), 2019 WL 2588359, at *5 (Ind. Ct. App. June 25, 2019) 
(unpublished). While the panel’s opinion left open the possibility that Whitesell could compel arbitration 
after the trial court resolved those questions of fact, id. at *5 n.5, the court ultimately concluded that the 
parties had not agreed to arbitration. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 9 of 23 
 
which Hitachi had accepted since [the low volume] revised part 
projections became real. 
While there was no one governing document for the [i]njector 
[c]up price, . . . the [p]arties were bound by a contractual 
arrangement through the course of performance. That course of 
performance established the price per [i]njector [c]up at $2.74 
once Hitachi deemed that bid from Whitesell “[c]ompetitive” in 
light of the anticipated readjustment of . . . estimated orders 
beginning July 1, 2015. 
Id. at 44. Third, the court ruled that Autoform was liable to Whitesell for 
breach of contract because it had failed to pay the high-volume price after July 
1, 2015, but found in Autoform’s favor on several other theories of relief 
Whitesell raised. Fourth, the court characterized Autoform’s argument that 
Whitesell had not complied with certain contractual conditions as “irrelevant 
since Autoform first materially breached th[e] agreement by failing to remit the 
full [i]njector [c]up price . . . .” Id. at 45. Finally, the court granted Autoform’s 
motion to dissolve the injunction, subject to certain conditions designed to 
protect Whitesell from further harm. Autoform challenged those conditions in 
a third interlocutory appeal, and this Court affirmed. Autoform Tool & Mfg., LLC 
v. Whitesell Precision Components, Inc., 197 N.E.3d 852 (Table), 2022 WL 
10861415, at *8 (Ind. Ct. App. Oct. 19, 2022) (unpublished). 
2023 Bench Trial on the Alleged Manufacturing Defects 
[11] In March and April 2023, the trial court held a three-day bench trial regarding 
liability on the counterclaims raised by Autoform that had not been addressed 
during the 2021 bench trial. Those included claims for breach of contract, 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 10 of 23 
 
declaratory judgment, and unjust enrichment related to the alleged deficiencies 
in Whitesell’s injector cups. The parties also addressed Whitesell’s claim for 
attorneys’ fees under Indiana Code section 34-52-1-1(b), which it filed after the 
court denied its request for default judgment in 2021. Again, the parties agreed 
to address damages at a later date. 
[12] In its September findings of fact and conclusions of law, the trial court 
concluded that Whitesell had breached its contract with Autoform in several 
respects after making unauthorized changes to its manufacturing processes that 
caused issues with the quality of its injector cups. It also rejected Whitesell’s 
argument that Autoform, having first materially breached the parties’ contract, 
was precluded from recovering damages for Whitesell’s subsequent breaches. 
On that issue, the court reasoned as follows: 
60. The Court . . . reaffirms its finding from the August 
2021 order that Autoform committed the first material breach of 
their contract. Autoform’s initial breach occurred first because 
Autoform failed to pay the contract price for the [i]njector [c]ups 
prior to any of Whitesell’s breaches with respect to part quality. 
61. Typically, this would mean that Autoform would be 
unable to enforce the contract against Whitesell in return. . . . 
62. [But] [i]n cases where parties intend to continue 
their relationship beyond an initial breach, the Indiana Court of 
Appeals has held that, in such instances, the non-breaching party 
has two alternative courses of action following the breach: (1) 
terminate the contract or (2) continue on with the contract, so 
long as the non-breaching party also fulfills its obligations under 
the contract to avoid an inequitable result. Watson Water Co., Inc. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 11 of 23 
 
v. Indiana-Am. Water Co., Inc., 85 N.E.3d 840, 849 (Ind. Ct. App. 
2017) (citing [Se.] Land Dev. Ltd v. Primrose Mgmt. L.L.C., . . . 952 
N.E.2d 563, 571 (Ohio Ct. App. 2011)) [reh’g denied]. As stated 
in Watson Water, if the non-breaching party opts to continue with 
the contract, that party is still obligated to perform their 
contractual obligations. 
63. The Court finds that because Whitesell and 
Autoform continued their contractual relationship, Whitesell 
remained obligated to uphold its obligations to manufacture the 
[i]njector [c]up using the agreed upon [manufacturing] 
process[es]. By changing [them] without authorization from 
Autoform or Hitachi, Whitesell breached this obligation. Even 
with Autoform’s breach over the price, the Court finds it would 
be inequitable not to allow Autoform to seek actual damages for 
Whitesell’s unauthorized changes in the [i]njector [c]up 
manufacturing process. 
Appellant’s App. Vol. 3 at 130-31. 
[13] Regarding Whitesell’s attorneys’ fee request, the court found that Whitesell was 
entitled to recover fees it incurred in litigating the parties’ dispute over price. In 
relevant part, the court reasoned as follows: 
[E]ffective July 1, 2015, Autoform knew that Hitachi had 
approved and would be paying Whitesell’s $2.74 [i]njector [c]up 
price. Autoform, however, hid that information from Whitesell 
and, later, the Court. . . . 
By May 2016, Whitesell began asserting it should be paid its 
$2.74 price. Autoform instead argued that Whitesell was seeking 
a price “increase.” If Autoform had been forthright and paid 
Whitesell the price Autoform should have been paying all along, 
this litigation could have been avoided at the outset. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 12 of 23 
 
When Whitesell told Autoform it would not ship [i]njector [c]ups 
if Autoform didn’t pay the $2.74 price retroactively, Autoform 
turned to this Court to seek injunctive relief. . . . Autoform hid 
from the Court and Whitesell the fact that Hitachi had approved 
and been paying Whitesell’s $2.74 price. The Court would have 
considered that fact on whether Autoform was likely to prevail 
on the merits or in setting the price to be paid during the term of 
the TRO and agreed preliminary injunction. 
. . . During [the] discovery process, Autoform offered an expert 
opinion from Jeoff Burris, who didn’t know any better, and 
[deposition] testimony from Autoform’s Tim Parys, who did, 
that Hitachi had not approved Whitesell’s $2.74 price. 
Id. at 136-37 (internal citations omitted). Accordingly, the court concluded 
Autoform had litigated the price dispute in bad faith. But the court reached a 
different conclusion regarding the fees Whitesell incurred in defending against 
Autoform’s defect-related counterclaims. Specifically, it found that Whitesell 
had itself engaged in misconduct by presenting “untruthful testimony” and 
“withhold[ing] information regarding the manufacturing process that may have 
terminated this litigation earlier.”
6 Id. at 138-39. Accordingly, the court ruled 
that Whitesell could “not recover attorney’s fees for work on the part quality 
issues.” Id. at 139. 
 
6 The trial court had already sanctioned Whitesell for that misconduct in March 2023, which included an 
award of attorneys’ fees to Autoform for preparing and taking certain depositions. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 13 of 23 
 
Autoform’s Request for Attorneys’ Fees 
[14] In October 2023, Autoform moved to amend the court’s May 2023 sanctions 
order, see supra note 6, “to further sanction Whitesell, pursuant to Ind. Code § 
34-52-1-1, for maintaining frivolous, unreasonable, or groundless defenses to 
Autoform’s quality counterclaim and/or litigating those defenses in bad faith.” 
Appellee’s App. Vol. 2 at 69. The court denied that motion in January 2024, 
reasoning Autoform’s fee request was “premature because Autoform ha[d] not 
been deemed a prevailing party because the amount of damages actually 
suffered by Autoform, if any, ha[d] not been determined.” Id. at 176. 
Additionally, the court found “no basis to expand the scope of the sanctions 
against Whitesell that the Court previously awarded to Autoform . . . .” Id. at 
177. 
2024 Bench Trial on the Parties’ Damages 
[15] In November 2024, the trial court held a bench trial to determine the parties’ 
respective damages. In its April 2025 order, the court awarded Whitesell 
$5,136,165.77 in damages for Autoform’s breach of contract, $1,312,585.51 in 
damages related to the 2021 order dissolving the preliminary injunction, and 
$1,129,962.51 in attorneys’ fees, for a total award of $7,578,713.79. To 
Autoform, the court awarded $2,588,267.25: $60,000 in attorneys’ fees pursuant 
to the sanctions order and $2,528,267.25 in damages on its breach of contract 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 14 of 23 
 
counterclaim.7 After offsetting the parties’ damages and giving Autoform credit 
for sums it had already paid, the court calculated a net damages award to 
Whitesell totaling $4,313,130.03. 
[16] Autoform filed a motion to correct error, arguing that because it was awarded 
damages on its counterclaims, it was a “prevailing party” under Indiana Code 
section 34-52-1-1 and should be awarded additional attorneys’ fees under that 
statute. The court denied that motion, reasoning in part that “[w]hile Autoform 
was awarded damages, it received no judgment . . . as its [damages] were used 
to offset Whitesell’s . . . , resulting in a final damages award only to Whitesell.” 
Appellee’s App. Vol. 3 at 54. Thus, the court found Autoform could not “be 
considered the prevailing party.” Id. 
Discussion and Decision 
1. Whitesell’s First Material Breach Defense 
[17] The sole issue raised by Whitesell on appeal is whether the trial court erred in 
ruling in Autoform’s favor on its breach of contract counterclaim, even though 
it found Autoform committed the first material breach of contract. To support 
that contention, Whitesell cites the well-established rule “that ‘[w]hen one party 
 
7 In the trial court’s conclusions of law, it determined “Whitesell must pay Autoform damages that total 
$2,588,267.05.” Appellant’s App. Vol. 2 at 219 (emphasis added). However, due to an apparent 
typographical error, the court’s judgment listed Autoform’s damages as “2,588,267.25.” Id. at 221 (emphasis 
added). We note this de minimis 20-cent discrepancy only to explain the difference between the values used 
by Whitesell in its briefs (which cited the court’s judgment) and by Autoform (which cited the court’s 
conclusions of law). 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 15 of 23 
 
to a contract commits the first material breach of that contract, it cannot seek to 
enforce the provisions of the contract against the other party if that other party 
breaches the contract at a later date.’” TKG Assocs., LLC v. MBG Monmouth, 
LLC, 259 N.E.3d 306, 316 (Ind. Ct. App. 2025) (quoting A House Mechs., Inc. v. 
Massey, 124 N.E.3d 1257, 1262 (Ind. Ct. App. 2019)) (alteration in original), 
reh’g denied. 
[18] We begin by noting that Whitesell’s opening brief does not set forth “the 
applicable standard of review” as required by Appellate Rule 46(A)(8)(b). Nor 
did Whitesell contest in its reply brief Autoform’s assertion that the first 
material breach rule is an affirmative defense, meaning Whitesell is appealing 
from a negative judgment. Because Whitesell did not contest it, we assume for 
the purposes of this discussion that the negative judgment standard of review 
applies to Whitesell’s appeal. A prior panel of this Court summarized that 
standard of review as follows: 
A judgment entered against a party who bore the burden of proof 
at the trial court is a negative judgment. Smith v. Dermatology 
Assocs. of Fort Wayne, P.C., 977 N.E.2d 1, 4 (Ind. Ct. App. 2012). 
On appeal, we will not reverse a negative judgment unless it is 
contrary to law. Id. When determining whether a judgment is 
contrary to law, we consider the evidence in the light most 
favorable to the appellee, together with all the reasonable 
inferences to be drawn therefrom. Id. A party appealing from a 
negative judgment must show that the evidence points unerringly 
to a conclusion different than that reached by the trial court. Id. 
When a trial court enters findings of fact and conclusions of law 
thereon pursuant to Indiana Trial Rule 52, we apply the 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 16 of 23 
 
following two-tiered standard of review: whether the evidence 
supports the findings and whether the findings support the 
judgment. Tompa v. Tompa, 867 N.E.2d 158, 163 (Ind. Ct. App. 
2007). The trial court's findings and conclusions will be set aside 
only if they are clearly erroneous, that is, if the record contains 
no facts or inferences supporting them. Id. A judgment is clearly 
erroneous when a review of the record leaves us with a firm 
conviction that a mistake has been made. Id. We neither 
reweigh the evidence nor assess the credibility of the witnesses, 
but we consider only the evidence most favorable to the 
judgment. Id. We review conclusions of law de novo. Id. 
Sri Shirdi Saibaba Sansthan of Tri State, Inc. v. Farmers State Bank of Alto Pass, 194 
N.E.3d 55, 59-60 (Ind. Ct. App. 2022), trans. denied. 
[19] Despite finding that Autoform committed the first material breach of contract 
(which Autoform does not challenge on appeal), the trial court concluded it 
could still recover damages for Whitesell’s subsequent breaches under this 
Court’s opinion in Watson Water Company. According to the trial court, that 
opinion stands for the proposition that “if the non-breaching party opts to 
continue with the contract, that party is still obligated to perform their 
contractual obligations.” Appellant’s App. Vol. 3 at 131. According to 
Whitesell, the court’s reasoning “stem[med] from a misreading of” this Court’s 
opinion. Appellant’s Brief at 14. In turn, Autoform contends the trial court 
properly cited Watson Water Company for “hornbook law” that has been adopted 
by Indiana and “virtually every other jurisdiction[.]” Appellee’s Br. at 39. 
Despite the confidence with which Autoform makes these sweeping claims, 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 17 of 23 
 
Whitesell is right that Watson Water Company does not stand for the proposition 
the trial court cited. 
[20] Watson Water Company involved a water supply agreement between two water 
utility companies: Watson Water Company Inc. (Watson) and Indiana-
American Water Company Inc. (IAWC). 85 N.E.3d at 844. Under the 
agreement, Watson was obligated to purchase a minimum yearly volume of 
water from IAWC for forty years. Id. The agreement included a right-of-first-
refusal clause providing that if Watson wanted to purchase additional volumes 
from another supplier, IAWC had the right to match the third-party supplier’s 
terms. Id. at 845-46. When Watson failed to purchase the minimum volumes, 
IAWC sued for breach of contract and for a declaration that Watson was 
required to continue purchasing the minimum water volumes through the end 
of the contract’s forty-year term. Id. at 846-47. 
[21] After the trial court awarded IAWC contract damages and the requested 
declaratory relief, Watson appealed, arguing in part that it had found a third-
party supplier that offered better terms than IAWC, so it should be permitted to 
terminate the contract due to IAWC’s failure to match the third-party’s terms. 
Id. at 848-49. Further asserting the prior breach doctrine did not prevent it from 
enforcing the right-of-first-refusal clause, Watson cited an Ohio Court of 
Appeals opinion for the notion “that the prior breach doctrine is applicable only 
when the non-breaching party treats the contract as terminated not continuing.” 
Id. at 849 (citing Se. Land Dev., 952 N.E.2d at 571). First, the panel found that 
Watson had not accurately expressed that case’s holding, as 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 18 of 23 
 
[a] fair reading . . . suggests that the Ohio court held that the non-
breaching party may select whether to (1) terminate the contract 
or (2) continue on with the contract, so long as the non-breaching 
party also fulfills its obligations under the contract to avoid an 
inequitable result. 
Id. Second, the panel neither adopted the Ohio court’s holding nor did it give 
any indication that Indiana recognized the same rule or one similar to it. 
Instead, the panel concluded that the right-of-first-refusal clause did not give 
Watson the right to terminate the contract and, in any event, “Watson did not 
properly avail itself of the [right-of-first-refusal] clause” so IAWC had not 
breached it. Id. 
[22] In short, Watson Water Company’s discussion of Southeast Land Development was 
merely a recitation of and response to Watson’s argument. The panel rejected 
Watson’s framing of the issue and consequently did not reach the issue of first 
material breach, rendering the discussion of Ohio law mere dicta. Therefore, 
the trial court here clearly erred when it concluded that Watson Water Company 
expressed a controlling legal principle on the issue of first material breach. 
[23] We also note that Southeast Land Development involved Ohio’s version of the 
doctrine of repudiation (also referred to as anticipatory breach), a wholly 
separate doctrine from first material breach. See 952 N.E.2d at 569 (“If an 
anticipatory breach of contract is found to occur, the injured party has the 
option of either terminating the contract and suing the breaching party 
immediately or continuing the contract and suing the breaching party for 
damages after the time for performance has passed.”). Under Indiana law, the 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 19 of 23 
 
doctrine of repudiation comes into play when a party makes a “positive, 
absolute, and unconditional” statement repudiating a contract before the time 
for performance. Metro Holdings One, LLC v. Flynn Creek Partner, LLC, 25 
N.E.3d 141, 160 (Ind. Ct. App. 2014), trans. denied. In such a case, the non-
breaching party has “three options for recourse . . . .” Fischer v. Heymann, 12 
N.E.3d 867, 872 (Ind. 2014), reh’g denied. 
First, she could treat the contract as rescinded and recover in 
quantum meruit as far as [she had] performed. Second, she could 
keep the contract alive for the benefit of [all] parties, remaining at 
all times ready, willing, and able to perform [her] part of the 
contract; then, at the time fixed for performance, . . . sue and 
recover according to the terms of the contract. Or third, she 
could treat the breach or repudiation as putting an end to the 
contract for all purposes of performance and sue at once to 
recover the damages due from the wrongful refusal to carry out 
the contract according to its terms. 
Id. (internal quotation marks and citations omitted) (alterations in original). 
[24] Throughout its argument, Autoform conflates the doctrine of repudiation with 
the doctrine of first material breach without explaining why our precedents 
related to repudiation should inform our first material breach analysis. 
Moreover, despite claiming at one point in its argument that Fisher’s three 
options apply after one party learns of the other’s first material breach, 
Autoform contradicts itself by claiming the non-breaching party only has two 
options for how to proceed: 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 20 of 23 
 
OPTION 1: The non-breaching party can end the contract, cease 
performing, and sue the breaching party for damages. This 
option discontinues both parties’ obligations under the contract 
going forward. 
OPTION 2: The non-breaching party can keep the contract in 
effect, retain the benefit and bargain of that contract, and sue the 
breaching party for damages resulting from the original breach. 
This option, however, requires both parties to continue 
performing under the contract, and if either party thereafter fails 
to meet its continuing contractual obligations going forward, a 
separate action for breach and damages may be maintained. 
Appellee’s Br. at 37. And as Autoform would have it, “[t]he doctrine of prior 
material breach does not apply when the non-breaching party chooses Option 
2.” Id. at 38. 
[25] Autoform claims its proposed “two option” rule finds support in the 
Restatement (Second) of Contracts, as well as in an Illinois Supreme Court 
opinion recognizing “an exception to [Illinois’] first-to-breach rule.” PML Dev. 
LLC v. Vill. of Hawthorn Woods, 226 N.E.3d 1163, 1174, 1175 (Ill. 2023) (“[T]he 
non-breaching party may lose its right to assert the first-to-breach rule if it 
accepts the benefits of the contract despite the other party’s material breach.”). 
But Autoform has not cited (and we have not found) any Indiana authority 
recognizing a similar exception. And we decline Autoform’s tacit invitation to 
recognize that exception here because the record does not support a finding that 
Whitesell “elect[ed] to continue with the contract” after learning of Autoform’s 
breach. Id. at 1175. Quite the opposite, after becoming suspicious of 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 21 of 23 
 
Autoform’s low-volume purchases, Whitesell demanded throughout 2016 that 
Autoform pay the low-volume price, and when the parties were unable to 
informally resolve the price dispute, Whitesell initiated litigation and ultimately 
discontinued shipments. Whitesell only resumed shipping injector cups when 
Autoform procured the TRO and, later, the preliminary injunction through 
false testimony and a sham expert report that hid from Whitesell and the trial 
court that Hitachi approved Whitesell’s proposed $2.74 price effective July 
2015. 
[26] Accordingly, even if we were to accept Autoform’s logic, Whitesell clearly 
attempted to invoke “Option 1” by terminating the parties’ contractual 
relationship and immediately suing for breach in late 2016. Therefore, as the 
party guilty of the first material breach, Autoform would have no right to 
recover against Whitesell for its subsequent breaches, which occurred after 
injunctive relief was entered in 2017. See Williamson v. U.S. Bank Nat’l Ass’n, 55 
N.E.3d 906, 914 (Ind. Ct. App. 2016) (“[A] party first guilty of a material 
breach of contract may not maintain an action against the other party or seek to 
enforce the contract against the other party should that party subsequently 
breach the contract.” (quoting Klepper v. ACE Am. Ins. Co., 999 N.E.2d 86, 96 
(Ind. Ct. App. 2013), reh’g denied, trans. denied). We thus reverse and remand 
the trial court’s judgment in Autoform’s favor on its breach of contract 
counterclaim with instructions for the court to enter judgment in Whitesell’s 
favor on that claim and recalculate the net damages award accordingly. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 22 of 23 
 
2. Autoform’s Motion to Correct Error 
[27] On cross-appeal, Autoform contends the trial court erred in denying its motion 
to correct error regarding its request for attorneys’ fees under Indiana Code 
section 34-52-1-1. Under that statute, a 
court may award attorney’s fees as part of the cost to the 
prevailing party, if the court finds that either party: 
(1) brought the action or defense on a claim or defense that is 
frivolous, unreasonable, or groundless; 
(2) continued to litigate the action or defense after the party’s 
claim or defense clearly became frivolous, unreasonable, 
or groundless; or 
(3) litigated the action in bad faith. 
Ind. Code § 34-52-1-1(b). According to Autoform, the court’s conclusion that it 
was not a prevailing party and could not recover fees under this statute was 
erroneous because “Autoform prevailed on its breach of contract counterclaim[] 
. . . .” Appellee’s Br. at 52. However, because we’ve reversed the trial court’s 
judgment in Autoform’s favor on that counterclaim, we affirm its conclusion 
that Autoform is not a prevailing party for purposes of the statute. See River 
Ridge Dev. Auth. v. Outfront Media, LLC, 146 N.E.3d 906, 913 (Ind. 2020) (“[I]f a 
party does not receive a favorable judgment, then it is not a ‘prevailing 
party.’”). 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion - 25A-PL-1182 | June 4, 2026 Page 23 of 23 
 
Conclusion 
[28] For these reasons, we (1) reverse and remand the judgment in favor of 
Autoform on its breach of contract counterclaim with instructions for the trial 
court to enter judgment in Whitesell’s favor on that claim and to recalculate the 
net damages award accordingly, and (2) affirm the trial court’s denial of 
Autoform’s motion to correct error. 
[29] Reversed in part, affirmed in part, and remanded with instructions. 
Brown, J., and Altice, J., concur. 
ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLANT WHITESELL PRECISION COMPONENTS 
INC. 
Andrew W. Hull 
Michael R. Limrick 
Evan D. Carr 
Hoover Hull Turner LLP 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
 
ATTORNEY FOR APPELLEE AUTOFORM TOOL & MANUFACTURING LLC 
Maggie L. Smith 
Frost Brown Todd LLP 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
