25A-CT-3139
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/05/27/kenneth_nirenberg_v._staci_reuer.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10876525/kenneth-nirenberg-v-staci-reuer/
Caption: Kenneth Nirenberg v. Staci Reuer
Date: 2026-05-27

Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CT-3139 | May 27, 2026 Page 1 of 12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I N T H E 
Court of Appeals of Indiana 
 
Kenneth and Laura Nirenberg, 
Appellants-Plaintiffs 
v. 
Staci Reuer, 
Appellee-Defendant 
May 27, 2026 
Court of Appeals Case No. 
25A-CT-3139 
Appeal from the LaPorte Superior Court 
The Honorable Richard R. Stalbrink, Jr., Judge 
Trial Court Cause No. 
46D02-2011-CT-1933 
Opinion by Judge Bradford 
Judges Pyle and Kenworthy concur. 

Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CT-3139 | May 27, 2026 Page 2 of 12 
 
Bradford, Judge. 
Case Summary 
[1] With Staci Reuer’s permission, Justin Trumble maintained a deer stand on her 
property and, in November of 2018, shot a deer three times from the stand. 
The deer ran onto the property of Reuer’s neighbors, Kenneth and Laura 
Nirenberg (“the Nirenbergs”). The next day, Trumble encountered Laura while 
on her property to retrieve the deer. In 2022, the Nirenbergs filed an amended 
complaint against Reuer and Trumble based on the events which had taken 
place in November of 2018. Against Reuer, the Nirenbergs alleged negligence 
per se, negligence, liability for the tortious conduct of another, private nuisance, 
and intentional infliction of emotional distress (“IIED”). The trial court 
granted Reuer summary judgment on all of the Nirenbergs’ counts. The 
Nirenbergs contend that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment for 
Reuer on their allegations of negligence and liability for Trumble’s tortious acts. 
We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand with instructions. 
Facts and Procedural History 
[2] In November of 2018, Reuer allowed Trumble to hunt on her property, which is 
approximately two acres in size. Reuer had informed Trumble of a fence 
between her property and the Nirenbergs’ property which she believed was on 
the property line. Trumble maintained a deer stand on Reuer’s property and, at 
some point, shot a deer three times. Trumble located the deer’s carcass on the 
Nirenbergs’ property the next day, November 19, 2018. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CT-3139 | May 27, 2026 Page 3 of 12 
 
[3] On November 19, 2018, Trumble entered the Nirenbergs’ property to retrieve 
the deer. Reuer had given Trumble permission to access her property. Reuer 
informed Trumble that the Nirenbergs “probably would not appreciate him on 
their property.” Appellants’ App. Vol. III p. 60. Trumble encountered Laura 
Nirenberg while on her property to retrieve the deer, and Laura “felt 
threatened” by the encounter. Appellants’ App. Vol. III p. 110. On July 28, 
2022, the Nirenbergs filed an amended complaint against Reuer including 
negligence per se; negligence, including premises liability negligence; and 
liability for the tortious conduct of another. The Nirenbergs also made a 
number of claims against Trumble and several claims with no specific 
defendant designated, including private nuisance and IIED. 
[4] On May 29, 2024, Reuer moved for summary judgment and filed a 
memorandum in support of her motion requesting that the trial court grant 
judgment in her favor on all claims brought against her, including negligence 
per se, negligence, liability for the tortious conduct of another, private nuisance, 
and IIED. Regarding the negligence claim against her, Reuer argued that 
Indiana Code section 14-22-10-2.5, “the Indiana Recreational Use Statute [(the 
“IRUS”)] serves as a total bar to [the Nirenbergs’] claims against” her and the 
harm allegedly suffered by the Nirenbergs had not been foreseeable. Regarding 
the claim against her for liability for the tortious conduct of another, Reuer 
argued that because her only participation in Trumble’s activities was to grant 
him permission to hunt on her property, she could not be held liable for 
Trumble’s conduct as a matter of law. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CT-3139 | May 27, 2026 Page 4 of 12 
 
[5] On June 24, 2024, the Nirenbergs filed a response brief arguing that the IRUS 
did not apply for several reasons, including that Reuer’s conduct was “illegal” 
because her property had been zoned for residential use and “hunting is not 
explicitly allowed” by the LaPorte County Joint Zoning Ordinance 
(“Ordinance”). Appellants’ App. Vol. II p. 109. The Nirenbergs also argued 
that Reuer’s actions were malicious and Reuer’s foreseeability, private 
nuisance, and IIED arguments were inappropriate for summary judgment. 
[6] On August 30, 2024, the trial court conducted a hearing on a motion to strike 
and on Reuer’s motion for summary judgment. On January 13, 2025, the trial 
court entered an order granting Reuer’s motion for summary judgment. On the 
negligence claim, the trial court concluded, in part, that Article 1, Section 39, of 
the Indiana Constitution and the IRUS precluded Reuer from liability for 
Trumble’s alleged actions, granting Reuer summary judgment on that count. In 
granting Reuer summary judgment on the claim for liability for Trumble’s 
tortious conduct, the trial court concluded that Reuer’s participation in any 
alleged tortious act of Trumble’s was so slight that she was not liable for his 
actions. The Nirenbergs moved for reconsideration of the order granting 
Reuer’s motion for summary judgment, which motion was denied. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CT-3139 | May 27, 2026 Page 5 of 12 
 
Discussion and Decision1 
[7] The Nirenbergs contend that the trial court erred in granting summary 
judgment for Reuer on their allegations of negligence and liability for Trumble’s 
tortious acts.2 
We review a trial court’s summary judgment decision de novo, 
using the same standard as the trial court. Summary judgment is 
appropriate if the designated evidentiary matter shows that there 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving 
party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. 
The moving party bears the burden of making a prima facie 
showing that there are no genuine issues of material fact and that 
the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law .... If the 
movant satisfies that burden, the burden then shifts to the non-
moving party to designate and produce evidence of facts showing 
the existence of a genuine issue of material fact. A fact is 
‘material’ if its resolution would affect the outcome of the case, 
and an issue is ‘genuine’ if a trier of fact is required to resolve the 
parties’ differing accounts of the truth .... We must construe all 
factual inferences in favor of the non-moving party, and all 
doubts as to the existence of a material issue must be resolved 
 
1 The Nirenbergs filed a request for oral argument on April 15, 2026, which Reuer opposed. 
Contemporaneous with this memorandum decision, we deny their request. 
2 The Nirenbergs do not challenge the trial court’s grant of summary judgment for Reuer on any of the other 
counts, which we therefore affirm. Furthermore, there seems to be no dispute that Reuer had no control over 
the Nirenbergs’ land and no authority to allow Trumble onto that land. To the extent that the Nirenbergs 
contend that their negligence claim based on premises liability should remain, we disagree. “In premises 
liability cases, whether a duty is owed depends primarily upon whether the defendant was in control of the 
premises when the accident occurred. […] Only the party who controls the land can remedy the hazardous 
conditions which exist upon it and only the party who controls the land has the right to prevent others from 
coming onto it.” Rhodes v. Wright, 805 N.E.2d 382, 385–86 (Ind. 2004) (quotations and citations omitted). 
While the Nirenbergs’ premises liability claim appears to be improper, we note that the Nirenbergs did not 
appear to limit their claim to premises liability but also alleged ordinary negligence. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CT-3139 | May 27, 2026 Page 6 of 12 
 
against the moving party. 
 
The Indiana Supreme Court has explained, Indiana consciously 
errs on the side of letting marginal cases proceed to trial on the 
merits, rather than risk short-circuiting meritorious claims. As a 
result, while the non-moving party has the burden on appeal of 
showing the Court that the grant of summary judgment was 
erroneous, we carefully assess the trial court’s decision to ensure 
the non-movant was not improperly denied a trial. 
Force v. New China Hy Buffet LLC, 217 N.E.3d 1275, 1277–78 (Ind. Ct. App. 
2023) (quotations and citations omitted). 
[8] It is often said that summary judgment is rarely appropriate in 
negligence actions, because of their fact-sensitive nature and 
because they are governed by a standard of the objective 
reasonable person, which is a standard best applied by a jury. 
However, a defendant may obtain summary judgment in a 
negligence action when the undisputed facts negate at least one 
element of the plaintiff’s claim. When a summary judgment 
movant designates evidence establishing prima facie that there 
are no genuine issues of material fact and that the movant is 
entitled to judgment as a matter of law, the responding party may 
not rest upon the mere allegations of his or her pleadings. 
Hale v. SS Liquors, Inc, 956 N.E.2d 1189, 1191–92 (Ind. Ct. App. 2011) 
(quotations and citations omitted). 
I. The IRUS Does Not Bar Reuer from Liability 
[9] The Nirenbergs contend that the trial court erred in granting summary 
judgment to Reuer under the IRUS because her conduct either fell outside the 
scope of the IRUS or fell under the subsection (d) exceptions. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CT-3139 | May 27, 2026 Page 7 of 12 
 
[10] At the time relevant to this appeal, the IRUS provided that 
(a) A person who goes upon or through the premises, including 
caves, of another: 
(1) with or without permission; and 
(2) either: 
(A) without the payment of monetary consideration; 
or 
(B) with the payment of monetary consideration 
directly or indirectly on the person’s behalf by an 
agency of the state or federal government; 
for the purpose of hunting, fishing, trapping, or preparing to 
hunt, fish, or trap, does not have an assurance that the premises 
are safe for that purpose. 
(b) The owner of the premises does not: 
(1) assume responsibility; or 
(2) incur liability; 
for an injury to a person or property caused by an act or failure to 
act of other persons using the premises. 
[…] 
(d) This section does not excuse the owner or occupant of 
premises from liability for injury to a person or property caused 
by a malicious or an illegal act of the owner or occupant. 
 
Ind. Code § 14-22-10-2.5. 
[11] The Nirenbergs contend that by permitting Trumble to hunt on her property, 
which was residentially zoned under the Ordinance, Reuer was engaging in an 
illegal act which triggered the subsection (d) exception to the IRUS. The 
Ordinance provides, for the residentially-zoned districts in this case, that “[u]se 
and development of land and buildings shall only be for the following specific 
uses, unless otherwise provided for in this Ordinance. Uses are grouped into 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CT-3139 | May 27, 2026 Page 8 of 12 
 
major categories and only those uses listed under each category are permitted.” 
Appellants’ App. Vol. III p. 118. The Ordinance also provides that uses not 
listed in the table are also not permitted. Hunting is not listed in the table 
provided. 
[12] The Nirenbergs cite Section 2.07 of the Ordinance, which provides that the 
Ordinance 
is an inclusive type of ordinance and not an exclusive type. 
Therefore, if any certain use or uses, or any departure from 
developmental standards, are not specifically and expressly 
permitted by any provision that is anywhere in this Joint Zoning 
Ordinance, then those certain uses and/or departure from 
developmental standards are not permitted anywhere within the 
County of LaPorte. 
Appellants’ App. Vol. III p. 116. 
[13] Because hunting was not explicitly allowed by the Ordinance’s provisions 
relating to single family residential districts, i.e., the zoning district which 
Reuer’s property was located, the Nirenbergs contend that it was prohibited. 
We agree. The Ordinance is clear on the permitted uses for residentially zoned 
districts in the county, and hunting is not listed as one of them. The term 
“illegal” may be defined as “contrary to or violating a law or rule or regulation 
or something else (as an established custom) having the force of law.” 
WEBSTER’S THIRD NEW INTERNATIONAL DICTIONARY 1126 (Phillip Babcock 
Gove et al. eds., G. & C. Merriam Company 1964). By permitting hunting on 
her property, Reuer acted contrary to the Ordinance, which has the force of 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CT-3139 | May 27, 2026 Page 9 of 12 
 
law, rendering her conduct “illegal” for purposes of the IRUS. Therefore, 
under subsection (d), the IRUS was not applicable to bar her from liability.3 
II. The Trial Court Erred in Concluding that the 
Nirenbergs’ Injuries Were Not Foreseeable as a Matter of 
Law 
[14] The Nirenbergs contend that the trial court erred in granting Reuer’s motion for 
summary judgment as to their negligence claim by improperly weighing the 
evidence and determining that their injuries were not foreseeable as a matter of 
law.4 “Summary judgment should not be granted when it is necessary to weigh 
the evidence.” Hughley v. State, 15 N.E.3d 1000, 1005 (Ind. 2014) (quotation 
and citation omitted). Initially, we note that Reuer concedes that the “[t]rial 
court weighed the evidence and found the Nirenbergs’ argument unconvincing” in 
deciding proximate cause. Appellee’s Br. p. 16 (emphasis added). It is well-
 
3 We further agree with the Nirenbergs that no conflict exists between the Ordinance and Article 1, Section 
39, of the Indiana Constitution (delineating that the “people have a right […] to hunt,”) as subsection (d) of 
Section 39 explicitly provides that the section “shall not be construed to limit the application of any provision 
of law relating to trespass or property rights.” Reuer appears to concede that the Ordinance is a law relating 
to property rights, arguing that “[t]he fact that a zoning ordinance is a law that relates to property rights and 
trespass does not mean that Reuer is liable for the actions of third parties.” Appellee’s Br. p. 17. 
Furthermore, because we have determined that the IRUS is not applicable in this case, we need not address 
the Nirenbergs’ arguments related to standing, although Reuer appears to concede that the Nirenbergs “have 
no private right of enforcement under the [Ordinance.]” Appellee’s Br. p. 17; Appellants’ Br. p. 23. 
4 Citing Goodwin v. Yeakle’s Sports Bar & Grill, Inc., 62 N.E.3d 384 (Ind. 2016), Reuer asserts that the trial 
court assessed foreseeability in determining the “bounds” of her duty of reasonable care. Appellee’s Br. p. 
14. In Goodwin, the Indiana Supreme Court determined that a bar owed no duty to its patrons after a 
shooting inside of the bar because the shooting was not foreseeable as a matter of law. 62 N.E.3d at 394. In 
granting summary judgment to Reuer on the Nirenbergs’ negligence claim, however, the trial court 
determined that Reuer did owe the Nirenbergs a duty of reasonable care. As there appears to be no dispute 
that Reuer owed the Nirenbergs a duty of reasonable care, and the trial court concluded as much, the trial 
court’s conclusion that Reuer had not foreseen Trumble’s actions and thus had not breached any duty 
appears to have been a conclusion on breach and proximate cause, not duty, as Reuer would suggest. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CT-3139 | May 27, 2026 Page 10 of 12 
 
settled that issues of breach and foreseeability, as a component of proximate 
cause, are more appropriately left for the determination of a trier of fact. See, 
e.g., Ousley v. Bd. of Comm’rs of Fulton Cnty., 734 N.E.2d 290, 293 (Ind. Ct. App. 
2000) (“‘[I]ssues of negligence, […] causation and reasonable care are more 
appropriately left for the determination by a trier of fact.’”) (citation omitted), 
trans. denied; Patterson v. Seavoy, 822 N.E.2d 206, 213 (Ind. Ct. App. 2005) (“The 
determination of whether a breach of duty occurred is a factual question[.]”). 
[15] In response to Reuer’s motion for summary judgment, the Nirenbergs 
designated, inter alia, evidence that Reuer had foreseen the possibility of a deer 
running onto her other neighbors’ property and had known that Trumble did 
not possess the deer he had shot when she permitted him to return to her 
property to retrieve the deer. We express no opinion as to whether such 
evidence is sufficient to prove that Reuer proximately caused the Nirenbergs’ 
alleged injuries or breached her duty of care, but, given that we must construe 
all factual inferences in favor of the Nirenbergs, we conclude that their 
designated evidence was sufficient to create a genuine issue of material fact on 
the questions of breach and foreseeability. 
III. The Trial Court Erred in Granting Summary Judgment 
for Reuer on the Nirenbergs’ Claim for Liability for the 
Tortious Acts of Another 
[16] The Nirenbergs contend that, in granting Reuer summary judgment on their 
third claim against her, the trial court improperly weighed the evidence to 
determine that Reuer’s participation in any alleged tortious act of Trumble was 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CT-3139 | May 27, 2026 Page 11 of 12 
 
so slight that she is not liable for his actions. In Hellums v. Raber, 853 N.E.2d 
143, 146 (Ind. Ct. App. 2006), a panel of this court adopted the Restatement 
(Second) of Torts § 876 (1979), which states, in relevant part, that “[f]or harm 
resulting to a third person from the tortious conduct of another, one is subject to 
liability if he […] gives substantial assistance to the other in accomplishing a 
tortious result and his own conduct, separately considered, constitutes a breach 
of duty to the third person.” 
[17] Reuer essentially concedes, again, that the trial court weighed the evidence in 
making its determination, arguing that the Nirenbergs “are issuing an invitation 
for this Court to impermissibly reweigh the evidence that the Trial Court 
considered in making its determination[.]” Appellee’s Br. p. 19. Again, 
“[s]ummary judgment should not be granted when it is necessary to weigh the 
evidence.” Hughley, 15 N.E.3d at 1005 (quotation and citation omitted). The 
Nirenbergs designated evidence showing that Reuer had permitted Trumble to 
hunt on her land without oversight, restrictions, or knowledge of her property 
boundaries, and after discovering that the deer had run from her property, 
Reuer had allowed Trumble back to retrieve the deer. Again, expressing no 
opinion as to whether the designated evidence is sufficient to prove that Reuer 
had provided Trumble with substantial assistance, given that we must construe 
all factual inferences in favor of the Nirenbergs, we conclude that their 
designated evidence was sufficient to create a genuine issue of material fact on 
the question. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-CT-3139 | May 27, 2026 Page 12 of 12 
 
[18] We affirm the trial court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of Reuer as it 
relates to all of the Nirenbergs’ claims except for negligence and liability for the 
tortious acts of another, and we reverse the trial court’s decision on those issues 
and remand for proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
[19] We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand with instructions. 
Pyle, J., and Kenworthy, J., concur. 
ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLANTS 
Briana N. Nirenberg 
BN Legal PLLC 
Lansing, Michigan 
Shaw R. Friedman 
Friedman & Associates, P.C. 
LaPorte, Indiana 
 
ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLEE 
Jeffrey R. Oberlies 
Olivia Daily 
Amundsen Davis LLC 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
