25A-PC-1682
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/05/14/evan_j_schaffer_v._state_of_indiana.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10858811/evan-j-schaffer-v-state-of-indiana/
Caption: Evan J Schaffer v. State of Indiana
Date: 2026-05-14

Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-1682 | May 14, 2026 Page 1 of 16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE 
Court of Appeals of Indiana 
 
Evan J. Schaffer, 
Appellant-Petitioner 
v. 
State of Indiana, 
Appellee-Respondent 
May 14, 2026 
Court of Appeals Case No. 
25A-PC-1682 
Appeal from the Lawrence Superior Court 
The Honorable John M. Plummer III, Judge 
Trial Court Cause No. 
47D01-2402-PC-000267 
Opinion by Judge Felix 
Judges May and Mathias concur. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-1682 | May 14, 2026 Page 2 of 16 
 
Felix, Judge. 
Statement of the Case 
[1] After Evan Schaffer was convicted of murder, he filed a petition for post-
conviction relief (“PCR”), alleging he received ineffective assistance of trial and 
appellate counsel. During the evidentiary hearing on the petition, the PCR 
court questioned one of Schaffer’s three trial attorneys about the PCR court’s 
duty to report all three trial attorneys to the Indiana Supreme Court 
Disciplinary Commission for their alleged mistakes during Schaffer’s trial, 
repeatedly interrupted PCR counsel’s objections to this line of questioning, and 
implicitly threatened to refer Schaffer’s trial attorneys to the Disciplinary 
Commission. The PCR court denied Schaffer’s petition. Schaffer now appeals, 
raising two issues for our review, one of which is dispositive and restated as 
follows: Whether the PCR court denied him a fair hearing. 
[2] We reverse and remand for a new hearing. 
Facts and Procedural History 
[3] At approximately 1:00 a.m. on April 23, 2017, after a night of drinking and 
fishing, Schaffer went to a McDonald’s restaurant in Bedford, Indiana. Schaffer 
v. State, 140 N.E.3d 896, No. 18A-CR-2960, slip op. at ¶¶ 2–3 (Ind. Ct. App. 
Jan. 29, 2020) (mem.), trans. denied. In the drive-through line, someone 
seemingly honked at Schaffer, and Schaffer responded by getting out of his 
vehicle, walking to Justin Lampkins’s truck, and punching him through the 
open window of his truck. Id. at ¶ 4. The incident escalated; at some point, 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-1682 | May 14, 2026 Page 3 of 16 
 
Schaffer “pulled a pistol and was waving it around.” DA Tr. Vol. VIII at 141. 1 
Lampkins exited his truck with a “tire-knocker,” approached Schaffer, “put his 
hand on Schaffer’s neck, and pushed Schaffer backward.” Schaffer, 140 N.E.3d 
896, No. 18A-CR-2960, slip op. at ¶ 5. Schaffer then shot and killed Lampkins. 
Id. 
[4] In 2018, a jury found Schaffer guilty of murder, pointing a firearm as a Level 6 
felony, carrying a handgun without a license as a Class A misdemeanor, and 
battery as a Class B misdemeanor. Schaffer, 140 N.E.3d 896, No. 18A-CR-2960, 
slip op. at ¶¶ 8–9. The trial court sentenced Schaffer to 63.5 years of 
incarceration. Id. at ¶ 9. At trial and sentencing, David Shircliff (“David”), 
Jennifer Shircliff (“Jennifer”), and Bruce Andis (“Andis”) (collectively, “Trial 
Attorneys”) represented Schaffer. On direct appeal, where Schaffer was 
represented by Lisa Johnson, this court affirmed Schaffer’s conviction. Id. at ¶¶ 
35–36. 
[5] On February 17, 2021, Schaffer filed a PCR petition pro se, which he later twice 
amended through counsel. Schaffer alleged in relevant part that he received 
ineffective assistance of counsel and alleged his Trial Attorneys as well as 
appellate counsel performed below an objective standard of reasonableness that 
also prejudiced him. In particular, Schaffer alleged Trial Attorneys were 
ineffective for failing to (1) request a voluntary manslaughter instruction, (2) 
 
1 Citations to the PCR record are denoted by “PCR,” and citations to Schaffer’s direct appeal record are 
denoted by “DA.” 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-1682 | May 14, 2026 Page 4 of 16 
 
consult with Schaffer about a voluntary manslaughter instruction, (3) properly 
object to the self-defense instruction, (4) lay a proper foundation for a reckless 
homicide lesser-included instruction, and (5) preserve a change of venue motion 
ruling for appeal. Schaffer made additional claims as to the effectiveness of his 
appellate counsel, including one pertaining to the self-defense jury instruction. 
[6] The PCR court summarily denied Schaffer’s first amended PCR petition. 
Schaffer then filed a motion to correct errors, arguing he was entitled to an 
evidentiary hearing on his petition. During a hearing on the motion to correct 
errors, the PCR court commented: 
I think that for a lawyer of [David’s] caliber to make the mistakes 
that you’re asserting he made, is extremely concerning . . . if he’s 
making these . . . errors along the way that results in a . . . retrial 
of a murder case. It’s very concerning to a trial court that he may 
come in here and throw himself under the bus to justify a retrial 
of this case. I have concerns about that. 
PCR Tr. Vol. II at 19. The PCR court later granted Schaffer’s motion in part, 
but it denied the motion as to the self-defense instruction claims because “any 
instructional error alleged by Evan[] Schaffer . . . would have been harmless 
error because the verdict reached by the jury was clearly supported by the 
evidence.” Id. at 199. 
[7] In February 2025, at the evidentiary hearing, Schaffer asked the PCR court to 
take judicial notice of a previous case wherein the PCR court judge found that 
Andis had rendered ineffective assistance of counsel. During a lengthy 
colloquy about its admissibility, the PCR court detailed how he had declared a 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-1682 | May 14, 2026 Page 5 of 16 
 
mistrial and referred Andis to the Disciplinary Commission for his admitted 
mistake during a trial in that separate case. 
[8] At the evidentiary hearing, David testified that he was lead trial counsel in 
Schaffer’s trial but that he delegated certain responsibilities to Jennifer and 
Andis. David confirmed that Trial Attorneys’ theory of defense was self-
defense, but that he had not committed to an all-or-nothing defense. David 
testified, among other things, that he did not consider or discuss voluntary 
manslaughter as a lesser-included offense with Schaffer because his 
understanding of voluntary manslaughter was that it “involve[d] someone 
coming into a situation like finding their wife in a compromising position with 
another man, or something like that, where all of a sudden, someone pulls out a 
gun and then shoots. And so, [he] didn’t . . . think that applied.” PCR Tr. Vol. 
II at 57. David also testified that he did not compare the self-defense statute to 
the pattern instruction because Andis was responsible for jury instructions. 
However, after comparing the differences for the PCR hearing, David believed 
an instruction using the statutory language would have changed his closing 
argument and elevated the State’s burden to rebut Schaffer’s self-defense claim. 
[9] During Jennifer’s testimony, the PCR court asked her what she thought the 
PCR court’s and her own “duty to report” was “for a licensed lawyer who 
knows that there may be a problem with preparation in such a serious case.” 
PCR Tr. Vol. II at 100. The PCR court later suggested that he “simply wanted 
to know for credibility reasons” whether the admitted mistakes rose to the level 
of a reportable disciplinary offense. Id. at 103. Schaffer objected to that 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-1682 | May 14, 2026 Page 6 of 16 
 
question. Throughout Schaffer’s objection, the PCR court repeatedly 
interrupted PCR counsel and seemed to become defensive. For instance, when 
PCR counsel argued that the standard for ineffective counsel is different than 
“not exercising reasonable diligence . . . under the ethical rules,” the PCR court 
interrupted, saying, “I don’t understand why you’re accusing the Court now of 
making these claims against the witness when I simply asked the question.” Id. 
at 105. 
[10] During another interruption, the PCR court commented about Schaffer’s PCR 
claims: 
Your claims are very egregious, frankly. We went through an 
entire murder trial, and we got now the lawyers sitting here 
telling me that they were incompetent. That’s about as egregious 
as it gets, because there’s nothing more serious in the United 
States of America than a murder trial. There just isn’t. I don’t 
know how more egregious it can possibly be to have [the] Sixth 
Amendment violated by who I thought were competent lawyers, and then 
not follow the rules of professional conduct and turn each other in if that’s 
what happened, and yet testify about it here in this courtroom. I’m 
trying to understand what my duty is at this point. 
PCR Tr. Vol. II at 107 (emphasis added). The PCR court continued to 
interrupt PCR counsel’s objections and denied conflating the right to counsel 
with the disciplinary process: 
[PCR COUNSEL]: The objections, I hope, are clear from the 
record that I think that by combining and equating the Sixth 
Amendment right to counsel with the disciplinary process -- 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-1682 | May 14, 2026 Page 7 of 16 
 
THE COURT: I’m not doing that. 
[PCR COUNSEL]: -- it’s chilling the -- 
THE COURT: No. That’s not what’s happening here. 
[PCR COUNSEL]: -- integrity of this PCR process, it chills the 
ability for Defense Counsel to stand up there and testify 
truthfully. 
THE COURT: Why? 
[PCR COUNSEL]: It -- 
THE COURT: Why in the world does that happen? She can’t 
testify truthfully because I asked a question? Why? Why do you 
say that? 
Id. at 112. 
[11] Schaffer then moved for a change of judge, which the PCR court immediately 
denied. Jennifer answered the PCR court’s question, responding that “isolated 
errors do not rise to the level of a . . . disciplinary violation.” PCR Tr. Vol. II at 
116. The PCR court commented that “sometimes [mistakes] do rise to the level 
of violations of the Indiana rules of professional responsibility” and that 
attorneys should “police” themselves “so that type of thing does not happen, 
because what would result is something like this . . . . The PCR claims get 
brought on the basis of incompetency.” Id. at 118. At the end of Schaffer’s 
case-in-chief, the State did not present any evidence. Both parties agreed to 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-1682 | May 14, 2026 Page 8 of 16 
 
submit proposed orders. Referring to the proposed orders, the PCR court said, 
“[The proposed orders] certainly assist[] the Court . . . so that I don’t have to 
retype it all again, because I’m certainly going to use some of the points that are 
made probably from each side, right, in terms of formulating the final decision 
here.” Tr. Vol. II at 163. 
[12] On June 10, the PCR court issued its findings of fact and conclusions of law 
which was a verbatim adoption of the State’s proposed order. After quoting 
several of the Indiana Professional Conduct Rules, the PCR court concluded 
that the “case has produced ethical violations under” the Rules. PCR 
Appellant’s App. Vol. III at 12. The PCR court elaborated: 
On one hand an argument being offered by the Petitioner is that 
no fewer than three of the five attorneys on this case were so 
incompetent as to violate Rule 1.1. On the other hand, and the 
argument being presented by the Respondent, is that the trial 
attorneys in this case, in an effort to get a second bite at the 
apple, have provided false and/or misleading information to the 
Court which violates Rules 3.3 and 8.4. 
Id. The PCR court also expressed concern that David and Jennifer spoke with 
Schaffer before the start of the hearing, even though PCR counsel confirmed at 
the start of the hearing that they just said “hello” to Schaffer and that she was in 
the room the entire time, PCR Tr. Vol. II at 32. The PCR court then found that 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-1682 | May 14, 2026 Page 9 of 16 
 
David’s testimony was not credible and concluded that all of the alleged errors 
were strategic decisions rather than mistakes. This appeal ensued.2 
Discussion and Decision 
The PCR Court Denied Schaffer a Fair PCR Hearing 
[13] Schaffer argues that the PCR court denied him a fair hearing on his ineffective 
assistance of counsel claims. Specifically, Schaffer argues that he was denied a 
fair hearing due to the PCR court’s (a) “commentary and questioning,” 
Appellant’s Br. at 24, and (b) summary denial of his self-defense instruction 
claims. We address each argument in turn. 
a. The PCR Court’s Commentary and Questioning 
[14] Schaffer argues that he was denied his right to an impartial judge for the PCR 
evidentiary hearing. A “trial before an impartial judge is an essential element of 
due process.” In re J.K., 30 N.E.3d 695, 699 (Ind. 2015) (quoting S.E. v. State, 
929 N.E.2d 1281, 1287 (Ind. 2010)). We presume “that a judge is unbiased and 
unprejudiced.” S.E., 929 N.E.2d at 1287 (citing Garland v. State, 788 N.E.2d 
425, 433 (Ind. 2003)). “To rebut this presumption, a defendant must establish 
from the judge’s conduct actual bias or prejudice that places the defendant in 
jeopardy.” Id. (citing Smith v. State, 770 N.E.2d 818 (Ind. 2002)). “In assessing 
a trial judge’s partiality, we examine the judge’s actions and demeanor.” Id. at 
 
2 We decline Schaffer’s invitation to listen to the PCR hearing recording. On appellate review, we base our 
decision on the written record and admitted evidence. See Norris v. Norris, 275 N.E.3d 505, 507 (Ind. 2026) 
(describing an appellate court’s “limited role”). 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-1682 | May 14, 2026 Page 10 of 16 
 
1288 (citing Timberlake v. State, 690 N.E.2d 243 (Ind. 1997)). Although in 
bench trials, “courts have considerable discretion to question witnesses sua 
sponte ‘to aid in the fact-finding process,’” J.K., 30 N.E.3d at 698 (quoting 
Taylor v. State, 530 N.E.2d 1185, 1187 (Ind. 1988)), a judge is not permitted to 
“act[] as an advocate for either party,” id. at 699. 
[15] Schaffer specifically argues that the “cumulative effect” of the PCR court’s 
comments and questions demonstrates “partiality that undermines the fairness 
of the PCR hearing.” PCR Appellant’s Br. at 31. Schaffer points to the PCR 
“court’s questioning of [Jennifer] about her ethics, the court’s comments 
anticipating that [David] would lie, and the court’s implications that [David] 
and Schaffer colluded to present false testimony in front of PCR counsel” as 
evidence in support of his claim. Id. 
[16] Here, the PCR court asked questions and made comments throughout the 
motion to correct errors hearing and evidentiary hearing that were improper. 
During the former, the PCR court made it clear that he was prejudging David’s 
credibility based purely on whether or not he admitted to making mistakes. 
The PCR court specifically contemplated that “for a lawyer of [David’s] caliber 
to make the mistakes [being alleged], is extremely concerning . . . . It’s very 
concerning to a trial court that he may come in here and throw himself under 
the bus to justify a retrial of this case.” PCR Tr. Vol. II at 19. The PCR court 
expressly stated during the hearing that “given [David’s] experience . . . that he 
would not make mistakes in a murder trial, that he would have had strategic 
strategy [sic] in mind at the time that he was making his decisions in the case.” 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-1682 | May 14, 2026 Page 11 of 16 
 
Id. at 18 (emphasis added). These comments, made before any evidence had 
been presented, showed the PCR court’s partiality, which was made clearer 
during the evidentiary hearing. 
[17] From the outset of the evidentiary hearing, the PCR court proceeded as though 
it had prejudged David’s credibility and went so far as to question PCR counsel 
about David greeting Schaffer before the hearing started. During the 
evidentiary hearing, the PCR court repeatedly interrupted PCR counsel and 
Jennifer to assert his position that the Trial Attorneys’ failure to report one 
another for ethical violations was proof that David’s testimony, wherein he 
admitted mistakes, was not credible. The PCR court’s stated belief that he has 
the “right to . . . expect [experienced] lawyers to be competent as required by 
[Rule] 1.1” and that the professional rules “create[e] a duty for the lawyer to 
report” trial mistakes, PCR Tr. Vol. II at 106–07, shows that his question to 
Jennifer about his and her duty to report was intended to impeach David’s 
testimony. The PCR court’s comments show not only a misunderstanding of 
our PCR process but also advocacy on the State’s behalf. For instance, the 
PCR court asserted that if the alleged mistakes had occurred, Trial Attorneys 
should have “follow[ed] the rules of professional conduct and turn[ed] each other in.” 
Id. at 107 (emphasis added). The PCR court admittedly believed that if 
attorneys “police[d]” themselves, then PCR claims would not be “brought on 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-1682 | May 14, 2026 Page 12 of 16 
 
the basis of incompetency.”3 Id. at 118. These comments viewed in light of the 
PCR court’s detailed explanation of how he “immediately drafted a complaint 
against Mr. Andis and immediately sent that to the [D]isciplinary [C]omission” 
after Andis admitted to a mistake during another trial, id. at 43, suggests the 
PCR court was threatening to do the same to Trial Attorneys during the PCR 
evidentiary hearing. These comments and questions suggest that the PCR court 
abandoned its position as neutral arbiter to act as an advocate on behalf of the 
State. See J.K., 30 N.E.3d at 699 (prohibiting judges from advocating for either 
party); see also Jones v. Full Spectrum Prop. Mgmt., -- N.E.3d --, 2026 WL 364352, 
at *5 (Ind. Ct. App. 2026) (reversing and remanding in part because trial court’s 
“line of questioning” gave “the impression of a trial court acting as an 
advocate” for one party), trans. not sought. 
[18] On these facts, we conclude that the cumulative effect of the PCR court’s 
comments and questions show that the PCR court failed to preside over the 
PCR hearing in an impartial manner and tainted the proceedings such that 
Schaffer was placed in jeopardy. See S.E., 929 N.E.2d at 1291 (concluding that 
the “cumulative result” of the trial court’s comments and demeanor toward the 
defense “demonstrate[d] a lack of impartiality” necessitating a new criminal 
trial). As the State Public Defender suggests, when the PCR court repeatedly 
 
3 We note that competence is the relevant inquiry for attorney discipline under Indiana Professional Conduct 
Rule 1.1 and not the standard by which to judge an ineffective assistance of counsel claim. See Bobadilla v. 
State, 117 N.E.3d 1272, 1279 (Ind. 2019) (citing Ward v. State, 969 N.E.2d 46, 51 (Ind. 2012)) (stating that 
evaluating a claim that counsel was ineffective requires proof that “counsel’s representation fell below an 
objective standard of reasonableness.”) 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-1682 | May 14, 2026 Page 13 of 16 
 
discussed his own duty to report, repeatedly interrupted PCR counsel while she 
attempted to make a record of her objection, detailed his prior history of 
reporting Andis to the Disciplinary Commission, and allegedly raised his voice 
“numerous times,” “[t]he impression left was the judge was either going to find 
counsel to be incredible or the judge was going to report counsel under Rule 8.3 
for their admitted mistakes.” Amicus Br. at 16. The PCR court’s findings and 
conclusions confirmed that impression.4 
b. Summary Denial of Self-Defense Instruction Claim 
[19] Schaffer next claims the PCR court erred by summarily denying his claims for 
ineffective assistance of counsel relating to the self-defense instruction. We 
review such claims “the same way as a motion for summary judgment.” Turner 
v. Sevier, 227 N.E.3d 978, 981 (Ind. Ct. App. 2024), reh’g denied (Apr. 11, 2024) 
(quoting Aguilar v. State, 162 N.E.3d 537, 540 (Ind. Ct. App. 2020), trans. 
denied). When the “determinative issue is a matter of law,” we review de novo. 
Id. 
[20] A post-conviction court may not summarily deny a petition for post-conviction 
relief unless “it appears from the pleadings, depositions, answers to 
interrogatories, admissions, stipulations of fact, and any affidavits submitted, 
that there is no genuine issue of material fact and the [State] is entitled to 
 
4 Because we have concluded that the PCR court’s comments and questions violated Schaffer’s right to an 
impartial judge, we do not address Schaffer’s arguments that the PCR court’s “findings [were] based on a 
fundamental misunderstanding of the law.” Appellant’s Br. at 28. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-1682 | May 14, 2026 Page 14 of 16 
 
judgment as a matter of law.” Ind. Post-Conviction Rule 1(4)(g). “If an issue 
of material fact is raised, then the court shall hold an evidentiary hearing as 
soon as reasonably possible.” Id. (emphasis added). “A hearing is mandatory 
even when the petitioner has only a remote chance of establishing his claim.” 
Evolga v. State, 722 N.E.2d 370, 372 (Ind. Ct. App. 2020) (citing Gann v. State, 
550 N.E.2d 803, 804 (Ind. Ct. App. 1990)). 
[21] In Evolga v. State, 722 N.E.2d 370 (Ind. Ct. App. 2000), the petitioner filed a 
claim for post-conviction relief, which was summarily denied by the trial court. 
The PCR petition alleged in relevant part that counsel was ineffective. Id. at 
371. This court reversed the summary denial, holding that the relevant inquiry 
is not success on the merits, but whether “there existed a genuine issue of 
material fact as to the effectiveness or adequacy of [petitioner’s] counsel.” Id. at 
373. And, because the petitioner made allegations of ineffectiveness while the 
State merely gave a general denial thereto, there were genuine issues of material 
fact, entitling the petitioner to a hearing on his petition. Id. at 374. 
[22] We address a virtually identical set of facts here. Schaffer’s second amended 
petition asserts that the Trial Attorneys were “ineffective for failing to object to 
Final Instruction 8, the only instruction on self-defense, on the basis that it was 
an improper or imprecise statement of the law.” PCR Appellant’s App. Vol. II 
at 83. As to appellate counsel, Schaffer asserted that she was ineffective for 
failing to challenge the self-defense instruction in Schaffer’s direct appeal. 
Schaffer alleged specific facts as to both assertions. However, the PCR court 
summarily denied Schaffer’s claims that Trial Attorneys and appellate counsel 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-1682 | May 14, 2026 Page 15 of 16 
 
were ineffective for failing to properly challenge the self-defense jury 
instruction. The PCR court’s rationale for doing so was that “any instructional 
error alleged . . . would have been harmless error because the verdict reached by 
the jury was clearly supported by the evidence.” PCR Appellant’s App. Vol. II 
at 199. This ruling addresses the merits of the claim instead of considering 
whether there was “an issue of material fact” as to the effectiveness of Trial 
Attorneys and appellate counsel. P-C.R. 1(4)(g). Regardless of the likelihood 
of success on the claims, Schaffer is entitled to an evidentiary hearing on his 
claims. Thus, the PCR court erred by summarily dismissing Schaffer’s self-
defense claims. 
[23] In sum, the PCR court’s comments and questions cumulatively breached the 
PCR court’s duty of impartiality such that Schaffer was placed in jeopardy, and 
the PCR court erred by denying Schaffer a hearing on his self-defense claims. 
We therefore reverse the PCR court on these issues and remand for a new 
evidentiary hearing not inconsistent with this opinion. 
[24] Reversed and remanded with instructions for a new hearing.5 
May, J., and Mathias, J., concur. 
ATTORNEY FOR APPELLANT 
 
5 Because we are remanding for a new hearing, “the parties have ten days from the date the order of the trial 
court is entered or the date the order of the court on appeal is certified” to file a motion for a new judge, Ind. 
Trial Rule 76. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PC-1682 | May 14, 2026 Page 16 of 16 
 
Stacy R. Uliana 
Uliana Law 
Bargersville, Indiana 
 
ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLEE 
Theodore E. Rokita 
Indiana Attorney General 
Justin F. Roebel 
Supervising Deputy Attorney General 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
