25A-PL-2593
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/05/07/taylor_routh_v._bernard_kappe.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10855899/taylor-routh-v-bernard-kappe/
Caption: Taylor Routh v. Bernard Kappe
Date: 2026-05-07

Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2593 | May 7, 2026 Page 1 of 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I N T H E 
Court of Appeals of Indiana 
 
Taylor Routh, 
Appellant-Plaintiff 
v. 
Bernard Kappe, Joseph K. Bernard, State of Indiana, Indiana 
Department of Transportation, Delaware County, Indiana, and 
City of Muncie, Indiana, 
Appellees-Defendants 
May 7, 2026 
Court of Appeals Case No. 
25A-PL-2593 
Appeal from the Delaware Circuit Court 
The Honorable John M. Feick, Judge 
Trial Court Cause No. 
18C04-2307-PL-82 
Opinion by Judge Bradford 

Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2593 | May 7, 2026 Page 2 of 13 
 
Judges Pyle and Kenworthy concur. 
Bradford, Judge. 
Case Summary 
[1] After having been involved in a motor vehicle collision with Joseph Bernard, 
Taylor Routh initiated a lawsuit against Bernard; Bernard Kappe; the State of 
Indiana; the Indiana Department of Transportation (“INDOT”); Delaware 
County, Indiana; and the City of Muncie.1 The State of Indiana and INDOT 
(collectively, the “State Parties”) moved for summary judgment on May 30, 
2025, arguing that they were immune from liability. The trial court granted the 
State Parties’ motion and dismissed them from the litigation. Routh contends 
on appeal that the trial court erred in doing so. Because we disagree, we affirm. 
Facts and Procedural History 
I. Overview of Relevant INDOT Rules & Procedures 
[2] By statute, INDOT must follow the Indiana Manual on Uniform Traffic 
Control Devices (“the Manual”) when determining whether to install or remove 
a traffic signal at a specific intersection. See Ind. Code § 9-21-4-1. Pursuant to 
the Manual, “[a]n engineering study of traffic conditions, pedestrian 
characteristics, and physical characteristics of the location shall be performed to 
 
1 Kappe, Delaware County, and the City of Muncie were subsequently dismissed from the litigation. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2593 | May 7, 2026 Page 3 of 13 
 
determine whether installation of a traffic control signal is justified at a 
particular location.” Appellant’s App. Vol. II p. 40. The Manual contains a list 
of nine factors (“warrants”) that INDOT must consider in making its decision 
whether to install a traffic signal at an intersection. Appellant’s App. Vol. II p. 
40. Specifically, the Manual indicates that 
[t]he investigation of the need for a traffic control signal shall 
include an analysis of factors related to the existing operation and 
safety at the study location and the potential to improve these 
conditions, and the applicable factors contained in the following 
traffic signal warrants: 
Warrant 1, Eight-Hour Vehicular Volume 
Warrant 2, Four-Hour Vehicular Volume 
Warrant 3, Peak Hour 
Warrant 4, Pedestrian Volume 
Warrant 5, School Crossing 
Warrant 6, Coordinated Signal System 
Warrant 7, Crash Experience 
Warrant 8, Roadway Network 
Warrant 9, Intersection Near a Grade Crossing[.] 
Appellant’s App. Vol. II p. 40. “The satisfaction of a traffic signal warrant or 
warrants shall not in itself require the installation of a traffic control signal.” 
Appellant’s App. Vol. II p. 40. A traffic control signal should not be installed 
unless “one or more of the [warrants] described in [the Manual] are met” and 
“unless an engineering study indicates that installing a traffic control signal will 
improve the overall safety and/or operation of the intersection.” Appellant’s 
App. Vol. II p. 40 (emphases omitted). 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2593 | May 7, 2026 Page 4 of 13 
 
II. INDOT Actions Involving the Intersection 
[3] The motor vehicle collision that gave rise to the instant action occurred at the 
intersection of State Road 32 (also known as Jackson Avenue) and Ohio 
Avenue (“the Intersection”), in Muncie, Indiana. Prior to 2017, there had been 
a traffic signal at the Intersection. 
[4] In 2017, INDOT performed a traffic count and signal warrant analysis (the 
“2017 Study”) to determine whether the Intersection met any of the nine 
warrants to justify maintaining the traffic signal as outlined within the Manual. 
The 2017 Study “was performed after Muncie Superintendent of Public Works 
Duke Campbell requested that the traffic signal be removed after traffic at the 
intersection had been reduced due to the closure of two nearby facilities.” 
Appellant’s App. Vol. II p. 35. It was determined that the Intersection “did not 
meet any of the nine warrants described in the [Manual].” Appellant’s App. 
Vol. II p. 35. “In order to justify maintaining a traffic signal at an intersection, 
at least one of those warrants must be met.” Appellant’s App. Vol. II p. 35. 
Because the Intersection did not meet any of the nine warrants, on “January 30, 
2018, INDOT removed the traffic signal at the intersection and replaced it with 
stop signs controlling approaches to State Road 32.” Appellant’s App. Vol. II 
p. 35. 
[5] “After 2017, the intersection experienced a higher[-]than[-]expected frequency 
of severe right-angle crashes and INDOT initiated a project at the intersection 
to address those crashes (the ‘[P]roject’).” Appellant’s App. Vol. II p. 35. In 
2021, Mark Muenz, a traffic-planning engineer for INDOT, “prepared an 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2593 | May 7, 2026 Page 5 of 13 
 
Engineering Assessment Report to document the engineering assessment phase 
of project development.” Appellant’s App. Vol. II p. 35. “During the 
engineering assessment phase of the project, INDOT analyzed the 
[I]ntersection’s crash history, design considerations, community/external 
stakeholder concerns, adjacent INDOT projects, financial issues and alternative 
proposals before identifying a compact urban roundabout as the preferred 
alternative.” Appellant’s App. Vol. II p. 35. “The compact urban roundabout 
proposed would cost an estimated $1,616,000.00.” Appellant’s App. Vol. II p. 
35. 
[6] “In early 2022, the INDOT Traffic Safety Management Team deliberated and 
awarded funding on the project.” Appellant’s App. Vol. II p. 36. “On June 9, 
2022, the project was approved and initially scheduled for construction in Fiscal 
Year 2027.” Appellant’s App. Vol. II p. 36. “On June 1, 2023, before the 
project was opened for bidding by designers, INDOT relinquished the 
intersection and nearby portions of State Road 32 to the City of Muncie.” 
Appellant’s App. Vol. II p. 36. 
III. The Motor-Vehicle Collision and Instant Litigation 
[7] On June 4, 2022, Routh approached the Intersection eastbound on State Road 
32. At the same time, Bernard approached the Intersection northbound on 
Ohio Avenue. Bernard’s vehicle collided with Routh’s vehicle after Bernard 
had disregarded the posted stop sign at the Intersection and proceeded through 
the Intersection without stopping. Following the collision, Routh suffered 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2593 | May 7, 2026 Page 6 of 13 
 
“serious and life-altering injuries” and was transported to IU Ball Memorial 
Hospital for immediate medical attention. Appellant’s App. Vol. II p. 16. 
[8] On July 17, 2023, Routh initiated the instant litigation claiming negligence with 
respect to the State Parties. Specifically, Routh asserted that prior to the 
collision, the State Parties had been “informed and/or aware of the hazardous 
nature of the [Intersection], but chose not to take any remedial measures such 
as installing a proper traffic light/signal to control the safety of the 
[Intersection].” Appellant’s App. Vol. II pp. 17–18. Essentially, Routh asserted 
that the State Parties had negligently removed the traffic signal and had 
negligently failed to re-install a new traffic signal after they had become aware 
of the dangerous condition caused by the lack of a traffic signal. 
[9] On May 30, 2025, the State Parties moved for summary judgment, arguing that 
they had discretionary-function immunity under Indiana Code section 34-13-3-
3(a)(7) and law-enforcement immunity under Indiana Code section 34-13-3-
3(a)(8). Routh opposed the State Parties’ request for summary judgment. 
Following a hearing on the State Parties’ motion, on October 14, 2025, the trial 
court granted the State Parties’ motion for summary judgment and “dismissed 
[the State Parties] from this matter, with prejudice.” Appellant’s App. Vol. II p. 
14. 
Discussion and Decision 
[10] Routh contends that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment in 
favor of the State Parties. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2593 | May 7, 2026 Page 7 of 13 
 
When reviewing a grant or denial of a motion for summary 
judgment our standard of review is the same as it is for the trial 
court. The moving party bears the initial burden of making a 
prima facie showing that there are no genuine issues of material 
fact and that it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. 
Summary judgment is improper if the movant fails to carry its 
burden, but if it succeeds, then the nonmoving party must come 
forward with evidence establishing the existence of a genuine 
issue of material fact. In determining whether summary 
judgment is proper, the reviewing court considers only the 
evidentiary matter the parties have specifically designated to the 
trial court. We construe all factual inferences in the non-moving 
party’s favor and resolve all doubts as to the existence of a 
material issue against the moving party. 
Reed v. Reid, 980 N.E.2d 277, 285 (Ind. 2012) (internal citations and quotation 
omitted). 
[11] After “a series of judicial decisions almost entirely abolished common law 
immunity for government entities and activities in this state[,]” the Indiana 
General Assembly passed the Indiana Tort Claims Act (“ITCA”), which 
“granted absolute immunity to governmental entities” under certain 
circumstances. F.D. v. Ind. Dept. of Child Servs., 1 N.E.3d 131, 135–36 (Ind. 
2013) (internal quotation omitted). “Pursuant to the ITCA, governmental 
entities can be subject to liability for tortious conduct unless the conduct is 
within an immunity granted by Section 3 of [the] ITCA.” Jurich v. Ind. Dep’t of 
Transp., 126 N.E.3d 846, 855 (Ind. Ct. App. 2019) (internal quotation omitted, 
brackets in original), trans. denied. In listing the exempted acts, the ITCA 
provides that a governmental entity is entitled to immunity and is not liable if a 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2593 | May 7, 2026 Page 8 of 13 
 
loss results from the performance of a discretionary function. Id.; see also Ind. 
Code § 34-13-3-3(7). “This type of immunity shields certain policy decisions 
which cannot be assessed by tort standards.” Lee by & through Estes v. 
Bartholomew Consol. Sch. Corp., 75 N.E.3d 518, 526 (Ind. Ct. App. 2017) 
(internal quotation omitted). “Whether immunity applies is a question of law 
for the court, and the party seeking immunity bears the burden of 
demonstrating that its conduct is within the protection afforded by the ITCA.” 
F.D., 1 N.E.3d at 136. 
[12] The Indiana Supreme Court has adopted the planning/operational test for 
determining what acts qualify for discretionary function immunity under the 
ITCA. Peavler v. Bd. of Comm’rs of Monroe Cnty., 528 N.E.2d 40, 46 (Ind. 1988). 
The planning/operational test “is designed to insulate only those significant 
policy and political decisions which cannot be assessed by customary tort 
standards.” City of Beech Grove v. Beloat, 50 N.E.3d 135, 138 (Ind. 2016) 
(internal quotation and brackets omitted). “This assessment requires close 
consideration of the nature of the governmental actions and the decision-
making process that was involved.” Id. “Labeling an action as planning or 
operational, without more, is insufficient to determine whether immunity 
exists.” Id. “[T]he distinction between planning and operational functions is 
only a standard, not a precise rule.” Id. 
[13] In applying the planning/operational test, 
[w]e have held that planning functions are discretionary and thus 
shielded by immunity, whereas operational functions are not. 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2593 | May 7, 2026 Page 9 of 13 
 
Planning functions involve the formulation of basic policy 
characterized by official judgment, discretion, weighing of 
alternatives, and public policy choices. On the other hand, 
operational functions involve the execution or implementation of 
already formulated policy. 
Lee, 75 N.E.3d at 526 (internal citation and quotations omitted). “The ultimate 
consideration is whether the action is one that was intended to be immune, and 
the court should look to the purposes of immunity to determine whether those 
purposes would be furthered by extending immunity to the act in question.” 
Beloat, 50 N.E.3d at 138 (internal quotation omitted). 
[14] In deciding whether the function is the type intended to benefit 
from immunity, the court should look to the purposes of 
immunity to determine whether those purposes would be 
furthered by extending immunity to the act in question. Factors 
which would, under most circumstances, point toward 
immunity, include: 
 
1. The nature of the conduct— 
a) Whether the conduct has a regulatory objective; 
b) Whether the conduct involved the balancing of 
factors without reliance on a readily ascertainable 
rule or standard; 
c) Whether the conduct requires a judgment based on 
policy decisions; 
d) Whether the decision involved adopting general 
principles or only applying them; 
e) Whether the conduct involved establishment of 
plans, specifications and schedule; and 
f) Whether the decision involved assessing priorities, 
weighing of budgetary considerations or allocation of 
resources. 
 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2593 | May 7, 2026 Page 10 of 13 
 
2. The effect on governmental operations— 
a) Whether the decision affects the feasibility or 
practicability of a government program; and 
b) Whether liability will affect the effective 
administration of the function in question. 
 
3. The capacity of the court to evaluate the propriety of the 
government’s action— 
Whether tort standards offer an insufficient 
evaluation of the plaintiff’s claim. 
 
Immunity assumes negligence but denies liability. Thus, the 
issues of duty, breach and causation are not before the court in 
deciding whether the government entity is immune. 
Peavler, 528 N.E.2d at 46. In arguing immunity, the governmental agency has 
the burden to demonstrate the discretionary nature of the decision at issue. Id. 
at 48. 
[15] In granting the State Parties’ request for summary judgment, the trial court 
found our decision in Lee v. State, 682 N.E.2d 576 (Ind. Ct. App. 1997), trans. 
denied, to be dispositive. In Lee, INDOT had conducted a multi-year study into 
two projects: the replacement of a bridge and the replacement of a dangerous 
stretch of road. 682 N.E.2d at 578–79. INDOT ultimately decided to complete 
both replacements as one project and began the necessary planning and land 
acquisition to complete the project. Id. at 579. The traffic accident at issue in 
Lee occurred prior to final approval and completion of the project. Id. Lee filed 
a wrongful death action against INDOT on behalf of her daughter, who had 
died as a result of the accident. Id. at 577. INDOT moved for—and was 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2593 | May 7, 2026 Page 11 of 13 
 
granted—summary judgment on the basis that it was immune from liability. Id. 
Lee argued on appeal that at the time of the accident, the project had moved 
beyond the planning phase and that it was therefore operational, meaning that 
INDOT was not immune from liability. Id. at 579. In affirming the trial court, 
we concluded that 
[a]fter reviewing the record, we think that the project at issue 
represents exactly the type of discretionary function that the 
legislature intended to protect. INDOT’s decision to correct the 
Wirt Curves in conjunction with the replacement of Harbatus 
Bridge was the type of discretionary decision intended to be 
shielded from liability. We will therefore not second-guess 
INDOT’s policy-oriented decision. 
Id. We reach the same conclusion in this case. 
[16] Here, INDOT had, following the Manual, decided to remove the traffic signal 
and replace it with a stop sign in 2017. It completed a second study pursuant to 
the Manual after determining that there had been more traffic accidents at the 
Intersection than had been anticipated. The Manual requires INDOT to 
consider all possible alternatives to correcting an issue, which INDOT 
apparently did when it decided that a roundabout was more appropriate for the 
Intersection than a traffic signal. Similar to the circumstances in Lee, at the time 
of Routh’s traffic collision, INDOT was in the process of completing plans for 
the Project, which will replace the stop sign with a roundabout. The planning 
phase was ongoing at the time of Routh’s traffic collision as the Project would 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2593 | May 7, 2026 Page 12 of 13 
 
not receive final approval until five days after Routh’s traffic collision and was 
not scheduled to be completed until the 2027 fiscal year. 
[17] We agree with the State Parties that the designated evidence demonstrates that 
INDOT was “in the middle of conducting a very thorough deliberation on the 
solution to the increase in crashes when Routh’s vehicle was struck by 
Bernard’s[.]” Appellees’ Br. p. 17. Applying our reasoning from Lee, we reach 
the same conclusion, i.e., that the decision to replace the stop sign with a 
roundabout was the type of discretionary decision intended to be shielded from 
liability. See id.; see also Jurich, 126 N.E.3d at 858–59 (concluding that INDOT 
had engaged in a discretionary function when it decided, after completing a 
study of traffic conditions and volume, not to install a temporary traffic signal 
and was therefore immune from liability under the ITCA); Joseph v. LaPorte 
Cnty., 651 N.E.2d 1180, 1184–85 (Ind. Ct. App. 1995) (providing that the 
County had acted in its discretion in determining the speed limit on the road in 
question and that the designation of the speed limit was a discretionary policy 
decision as a matter of law), trans. denied. 
[18] The judgment of the trial court is affirmed. 
Pyle, J., and Kenworthy, J., concur. 
ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLANT 
Austin P. Sparks 
Jason R. Delk 
Delk McNally LLP 
Muncie, Indiana 
Court of Appeals of Indiana | Opinion 25A-PL-2593 | May 7, 2026 Page 13 of 13 
 
 
ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLEES 
STATE OF INDIANA AND INDIANA 
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION 
Theodore E. Rokita 
Indiana Attorney General 
 
Samuel J. Dayton 
Supervising Deputy Attorney General 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
 
