1 of 22 
Inquiries concerning the subject of this Notice should be directed to the Office of the Deputy Commissioner, Republic of 
Liberia, the Liberian International Ship & Corporate Registry, 22980 Indian Creek Dr., Suite 200, Dulles, VA 20166, 
USA 
 
 
TO:  ALL SHIPOWNERS, OPERATORS, MASTERS AND OFFICERS OF 
MERCHANT SHIPS AND AUTHORIZED CLASSIFICATION SOCIETIES 
SUBJECT:   Implementation, Inspections and Certification under  the Maritime L abour 
Convention (MLC), 2006 
Reference: (a) Maritime Labour Convention (MLC), 2006
(b) Liberian Maritime Law ( RLM-107) Articles: 292, 293, 320, 321, 322,323,
324, 325, 326, 327, 328, 330, 331, 333, 336, 336A, 338, 340, 341, 342, 343,
352, 354, 355, 356
(c) Liberian Maritime Regulations ( RLM-108) Regulations: 9.256, 9.257,
9.258, 10.291, 10.292, 10.296 (2d, 3, and 9), 10.315, 10.318, 10.320, 10.325,
10.336, 10.341, 10.342
(d) Requirements For Merchant Marine Personnel (RLM-118)
(e) Requirements For Marine Investigations And Hearings (RLM-260)
(f) Liberian Marine Notices: INS-001, INT-001, ISM-001, MAN-001, SEA-
001, SEA-002, SEA-004, SEA-003, SEA-005
(g) Liberian Guidelines for Maritime Labour Inspections - MLC-002, MLC-
003, MLC-004, MLC-005, MLC-006
(h) ILC.110/Amendments of 2022 to MLC, 2006
Supersedes: Marine Notice MLC-001, dated 07/20 
The following changes have been included: 
a. Added 2022 amendements to the Code of MLC, 2006 and transitional measures for
compliance under section 2.0
b. Added informing seafarers about their rights under the seafarers’ recruitment and
placement services’ system of protection in Annex I (DMLC Part I), section 5
c. Added provision of social connectivity in DMLC Part I section 9
d. Added supply of balanced food in DMLC Part I (section 10)
e. Added provision of the necessary appropriately-sized personal protective equipment
in DMLC Part I (section 11)
f. Added cases where seafarers are considered in need of immediate medical care,
repatriation of the body and ashes of a deceased seafarer and replaced Marine
Operations Note 08/2009 with Quantification Addendum in DMLC Part I (section
12)
Office of 
Deputy Commissioner  
of Maritime Affairs
THE REPUBLIC OF LIBERIA
  LIBERIA MARITIME AUTHORITY 
Marine Notice 
MLC-001 
Rev. 08/24 
MLC-001     2 of 22      8/24 
The Republic of Liberia 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
The purpose of this Marine Notice is to provid e guidance on implementing the requirements  of 
the Maritime Labour Convention (MLC) , 2006, including the inspection and certification of 
ships. This is the first in a series of Marine Notices that provides guidance on implementation of 
the MLC, 2006.  The related Marine Notices are:  
 
 MLC-002 – Minimum requirements for seafarers to work on a ship 
 MLC-003 – Terms and Conditions for employment of seafarers 
MLC-004 – Standards of accommodation, recreational facilities, food, water and catering 
MLC-005 – Health and safety protection, accident prevention, medical care, welfare and  
        social security protection of seafarer’s 
 MLC-006 – On-board complaint handling procedures 
 
BACKGROUND: 
 
In February 2006, the  94th (Maritime) Session of the International Labour Conference (ILC) of 
the ILO adopted the MLC, 2006.  When adopting the MLC, 2006 , the Conference also adopted 
17 resolutions, many of which relate to complementary and follow -up activities to assist in 
ensuring rapid and widespread ratification combined with effective implementation at the 
country level.  
 
The MLC, 2006, essentially  consolidated and updated 68 existing ILO M aritime Conventions 
and Recommendations adopted since 1920 , into a  single comprehensive international  legal 
instrument.  The MLC, 2006 contains new subjects, particularly in the area of occupational 
safety and health to meet current health concerns, such as fatigue, the effects of noise and 
vibration on workers and other workplace risks. It is the “fourth pillar” of the international 
regulatory regime for quality shipping, complementing the key Conventions of the International 
Maritime Organization (IMO) – SOLAS (1974) as amended, STCW (1978) as amended, and 
MARPOL (73/78), as amended. 
 
MLC, 2006 sets out seafarers’ rights to minimum decent conditions of work and living and helps 
to create conditions of fair competition for shipowners. It will be universally applicable and 
uniformly enforced.   Article V, paragraph 7, requires each Member to implement its 
responsibilities under this Convention in such a way as to ensure that the ships that fly the flag of 
any State that has not ratified this Convention do not receive more favorable treatment than the 
ships that fly the flag of any State that has ratified it. 
MLC, 2006 is comprised of three different but related parts: the Articles, the Regulations and the 
Code. The Articles and Regulations set out the core rights and principles and the basic 
obligations of Members ratifying the Convention. The Code contains the details for the 
implementation of the Regulations and is comprised of  Part A (mandatory Standards) and Part B 
(non-mandatory Guidelines). Although the provisions of Part B are non -mandatory, Members 
that have ratified MLC, 2006, are required under paragraph 2 of Article VI to give due 
consideration to implementing their responsibilities under Part A of the Code in the manner 
provided for in Part B.  Part B provides guidance that is helpful in ascertaining the kind of action 
that might be expected of Members under the corresponding general obligation in Part A, as well 
as action that would not necessarily be required. MLC, 2006 further notes that by following the 
guidance provided in Part B, a Member, as well as the ILO bodies responsible for reviewing 
MLC-001     3 of 22      8/24 
The Republic of Liberia 
implementation of international labour Conventions, can be sure without further consideration 
that the arrangements the Member has provided for are adequate to implement the 
responsibilities under Part A to which the Guideline relates. 
The Regulations and the Code are organized into general areas under five Titles:  
Title 1: Minimum requirements for seafarers to work on a ship  
Title 2: Conditions of employment  
Title 3: Accommodation, recreational facilities, food and catering  
Title 4: Health protection, medical care, welfare and social security protection  
Title 5: Compliance and enforcement  
 
Where Liberian Law and Regulation is not as specific as the requirements found in the MLC, 
2006, Liberian Marine Notices will provide guidance on compliance.  
 
At its  103rd Session in June 2014 , t he ILO approved amendments to the Code of MLC, 2006 
implementing Regulation 2.5 – Repatriation and Regulation 4.2 – Shipowners’ liability, 
establishing mandatory requirements that require shipowners to have financial security to cover 
abandonment of seafarers, as well as death and long -term disability of seafarers due to 
occupational injury and hazard. 
 
At its 105 th session in June 2016 , the IL O approved amendments to the Code of MLC, 2006 
addressing shipboard harassment and bullying and providing for the Maritime Labour Certificate 
to be extended for a period not exceeding five months following a renewal inspection, where the 
new certificate cannot be immediately issued and made available on board. 
 
At its 107 th session in June 2018 , the IL O approved amendments to the Code of MLC, 2006 
providing additional protection to seafarers in the event they are held captive on or off the ship as 
a result of piracy or armed robbery. 
 
At its 110 th session in June 2022, the IL O approved amendments to the Code of MLC, 2006 
which included modifications to recruitment, repatriation, recreational facilities, food and 
catering, medical care, and accident prevention. The amendments enter into force on 23 
December 2024. 
 
APPLICABILITY:  
 
SHIPS 
 
Except as expressly provided otherwise, the MLC, 2006 applies to all ships, whether publicly or 
privately owned, ordinarily engaged in commercial activities, other than ships engaged in fishing 
or in similar pursuits and ships of traditional build such as dhows and junks.  The MLC, 2006 
does not apply to warships or naval auxiliaries.  
 
The following ships shall be inspected and certified to be in compliance with the requirements of 
the convention and carry and maintain a Maritime Labour Certificate (ML Certificate) and the 
Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance (DMLC) Parts I and II issued in English: 
 
i. Ships of 500 gross tonnage or over, engaged in international voyages;  
MLC-001     4 of 22      8/24 
The Republic of Liberia 
ii. Ships of 500 gross tonnage or over, operating from a port, or between ports, in 
another country; and 
iii. Other ships, as may be voluntarily requested by a shipowner. 
 
Inspection and certification procedures for these ships are provided in section 2.   
 
Ships of less than 500 gross tonnage to which MLC, 2006 applies are subject to two inspections 
in a five-year period at intervals not exceeding three (3 ) years against the same requirements for 
certified ships. A Maritime Labour Certificate and a DMLC Part I & II are not issued , but an 
inspection report is issued to these ships. 
 
The Liberian Administration has decided not to apply the provisions of MLC, 2006 to Mobile 
Offshore Drilling Units (MODU), whose primary service is drilling operations for the 
exploration, exploitation, production of resources beneath the sea -bed and are not normally 
engaged in navigation or international voyages.   However, if MODU owners/operators wish to 
apply MLC on a voluntary basis, they should contact the Administration.   
 
The Liberian Administration has also decided not to apply the provisions of MLC to Floating 
Production, Storage and Offloading facilities (FPSOs), Floating Storage Units (FSUs), and Self -
Elevating Liftboats, whose primary service is neither underway nor engaged in an international 
voyage.  However, if FPSO, FSU or Self -Elevating Liftboat owners/operators wish to apply 
MLC on a voluntary basis, they should contact  the Administration .  Application of MLC to 
Mobile Offshore Accommodation Units and other similar mobile offshore units, such as non -
self-propelled barges, will be considered on a case by case basis. 
 
The Convention allows for flexibility in implementation by providing for national 
determinations, substantial equivalencies, and exemptions and variations under certain 
provisions. 
 
The requirements in the Code implementing  Regulation 3.1, Accommodation and recreational 
facilities, apply only to ships constructed on or after the date when th e Convention enters into 
force. A ship shall be deemed to have been constructed on the date when its keel is laid or when 
it is at a similar stage of construction.  For ships constructed before that date, the requirements 
relating to ship construction and equipment that are set out in the Accommodation of Crews 
Convention (Revised), 1949 (No. 92), and the Accommodation of Crews (Supplementary 
Provisions) Convention, 1970 (No. 133), shall continue to apply to the extent that they were 
applicable, prior to that date.  
 
SEAFARERS 
 
Except as expressly provided otherwise, MLC, 2006 applies to all seafarers on board the ships to 
which the Convention applies. 
 
The MLC, 2006 recognizes in Article II, paragraph 3, that there may be doubts whether a 
particular category or categories of persons who may perform work on board a ship covered by 
the Convention s hould be regarded as seafarers . Recognizing that there is need for clarification 
on this subject to help to provide uniformity in the application in the rights and obligations 
provided by the Convention, the 94th (Maritime) Session of the International Labour Conference 
adopted Resolution VII, to assist Administrations in resolving any difficulties that may arise.   
 
MLC-001     5 of 22      8/24 
The Republic of Liberia 
The Liberian Administration will consider the following issues, as provided  for in Resolution 
VII, in determining whether certain persons or category of persons are considered seafarers: 
 
i. the duration of the stay on board of the persons concerned;  
ii. the frequency of periods of work spent on board;  
iii. the location of the person’s principal place of work;  
iv. the purpose of the person’s work on board; and 
v. the protection that would normally be available to the persons concerned with 
regard to their labour and social conditions to  ensure they are comparable to that 
provided for under the Convention. 
 
The Administration, taking into account the criteria provided in  Resolution VII, considers that 
the following persons will not generally be considered as seafarers for the purpose of the MLC, 
2006: 
 
i. Professional Pilots; 
ii. Port Workers including stevedores; 
iii. Guest entertainers; 
iv. Ship Inspectors/Auditors/Surveyors; 
v. Ship Superintendents; 
vi. Repair and maintenance technicians;  
vii. Temporary riding crew such as Suez Canal crew; 
viii.  Specialist offshore technicians; 
ix. Privately contracted security personnel; and 
x. Owner/Client Representatives 
 
Cadets and Trainees enrolled in a maritime university and sent on board to complete the sea time 
required for graduation, may upon application  and satisfactory review of the ir contractual or 
similar arrangements , be  exempted from Regulations 1.4 (Recruitment and placement); 2.1 
(Seafarers’ employment agreements); 2.2 (Wages); 4.2 (Shipowners’ liability); 4.5 (Social 
Security); and Standards A 2.4 (Entitlement to leave); and A 2.5.2(b) of the Convention. 
 
1.0 DEFINITIONS: 
  
Definitions have been taken from the MLC, 2006 , SOLAS 74’ as amended  and where 
necessary, Liberian National interpretations.  
 
1.1 Administration:  The Office of Deputy Commissioner , Liberia Maritime 
Authority, the Republic of Liberia.  
 
 1.2 Competent authority:  The minister, government department or other authority 
having power to issue and enforce regulations, orders or other instructions having 
the force of law in respect of the subject matter of the provision concerned.  The 
Liberian Administration is the competent authority with respect to Liberia flagged 
vessels.  
 
1.3 Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance (DMLC): Document which 
states the national laws, regulations and marine notices implementing the 
requirements of this Convention for the working and living conditions for 
MLC-001     6 of 22      8/24 
The Republic of Liberia 
seafarers (Part I) and the measures put in place by the ship owner to ensure 
ongoing compliance with the requirements  and the measures proposed to ensure 
that there is continuous improvement , on the ship concerned  (Part II) . Part I is 
drawn up by the Administration and Part II is drawn up by the shipowner. 
 
1.4 International Voyage: A voyage from a country to a port outside such a country. 
 
1.5    Liberian Maritime Labour Inspector (LMLI):  A n auditor who has been 
trained and appointed by the Administration to conduct maritime labour 
inspections and verifications onboard Liberian F lag ships. The LMLI holds an 
identification card stating the inspector is qualified to perform maritime labour 
inspections and issue Maritime Labour Certificates on behalf of the 
Administration. A list of LML I’s can be found on Liberian Registry website 
www.liscr.com under the “Maritime” tab then click on MLC, 2006 and “Maritime 
Labour Inspector’s”. 
 
1.6 Maritime Labour Certificate:  The certificate referred to in Regulation 5.1.3 of 
the Maritime Labour Convention, 2006. 
 
1.7 Recognized Organization (RO) :  A n organization that meets MLC, 2006, 
Standard A5.1.2 and has been  authorized by the Administration to carry out 
maritime labour inspections or to issue ML Certificates or to do both on Liberian 
Flag ships. A list of RO’s is provided  on Liberian Registry  website 
www.liscr.com under the “Maritime” tab “MLC, 2006” and “List of RO’s”.  
  
1.8    Seafarer: any person who is employed or engaged or works in any capacity on  
board a ship to which this convention applies.  
 
1.9 Seafarers Employment Agreement; Includes both a contract of employment and 
the articles of agreement. 
 
1.10 Seafarer Recruitment and Placement Service  (SRPS):  Any person, company, 
institution, agency or other organization, in the public or private sector, which is 
engaged in recruiting seafarers on behalf of shipowners or placing seafarers with 
shipowners.  
 
1.11 Ship: a ship other than one which navigates exclusively in inland waters or waters 
within, or closely adjacent to sheltered waters or areas where port regulations 
apply. 
 
1.12 Shipowner: The owner of the ship or another organization or person, such as the 
manager, agent or bareboat charterer, who has assumed the responsibility for the 
operation of the ship from the owner and who, on assuming such responsibility, 
has agreed to take over the duties and responsibilities imposed on shipowners in 
accordance with MLC, 2006, regardless of whether any other organization or 
persons fulfill certain of the duties or responsibilities on behalf of the shipowner. 
 
1.13 New Ship: A ship constructed on or after the date that MLC, 2006 enters into  
  force. A ship shall be deemed to have been constructed on the date when its keel  
  is laid or when it is at a similar stage of construction. 
MLC-001     7 of 22      8/24 
The Republic of Liberia 
 
1.14 Existing Ship: A ship constructed before the date that MLC, 2006 enters into 
force. 
 
1.15 Deficiency: An observed situation or defect where objective evidence indicates a  
non-fulfillment of a specified requirement of MLC, 2006. 
 
1.16  Serious Deficiency: An identifiable deficiency that represents a significant danger 
to seafarers’ safety, health or security or constitutes a serious breach of the 
requirements of the MLC, 2006 (including seafarers’  rights), that requires 
immediate corrective action. 
 
1.17 Objective evidence : Quantitative or qualitative information, r ecords or  
statements of fact pertaining to seafarer safety or health or to the e xistence and 
implementation of MLC 2006 requirements, which is based on observation. 
 
2.0  COMPLIANCE GUIDANCE 
 
 2.1 Certification requirements  
Ships required to be inspected and certified for compliance with the requirements 
of the MLC, 2006 shall  carry and maintain a Maritime Labour Certificate and a 
Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance (DMLC) Parts I and II issued in  
English. 
 
The DMLC forms part of the  Maritime Labour Certificate and is specific to each 
ship.  Part I of the DMLC is drawn up by the Administration and identifies the list 
of matters to be inspected, the relevant national requirements, ship -type specific 
requirements under national legislation, any substantially equivalent provisions, 
and any exemption granted by the Administration. Part II is drawn up by the 
shipowner and identifies the measures that have been adopted to provide for 
initial and ongoing compliance with the national requirements and the  measures 
proposed to encourage continuous improvement. 
 
Part I and II contain a list of 16 areas related to the working and living conditions 
of seafarers that the Administration and the shipowner must address within the 
DMLC. The DMLC Part II must be reviewed and accepted by the Administration 
before a Maritime Labour Certificate may be issued. 
 
The 16 areas and corresponding regulations that must be addressed in the DMLC  
are: 
 
1. Minimum age (Regulation 1.1) 
2. Medical certification (Regulation 1.2) 
3. Qualifications of seafarers (Regulation 1.3) 
4. Use of any licensed or certified or regulated private recruitment and 
placement service (Regulation 1.4) 
5. Seafarers’ employment agreements (Regulation 2.1) 
6. Payment of wages (Regulation 2.2) 
7. Hours of work or rest (Regulation 2.3) 
8. Manning levels for the ship (Regulation 2.7) 
9. Accommodation (Regulation 3.1) 
MLC-001 8 of 22      8/24 
The Republic of Liberia 
10. On-board recreational facilities (Regulation 3.1)
11. Food and catering (Regulation 3.2)
12. On-board medical care (Regulation 4.1)
13. Health and safety and accident prevention (Regulation 4.3)
14. On-board complaint procedures (Regulation 5.1.5)
15. Financial security for repatriation (Regulation 2.5)
16. Financial security relating to shipowners’ liability (Regulation 4.2)
The 2022 amendments to MLC, 2006 amend the following areas of the DMLC: 
4. Use of any licensed or certified or regu1ated private recruitment and placement
service (Regulation 1.4)
10. On-board recreational facilities (Regulation 3.1)
11. Food and catering (Regulation 3.2)
12. On-board medical care (Regulation 4.1)
13. Health and safety and accident prevention (Regulation 4.3)
The Declaration of M aritime Labour Compliance (DMLC ) Part I ha s been amended to 
include the new amendments  and shipowners are required to also amend the DMLC Part 
II. 
2.2 Transitional measures 
While the amendments to the Code of MLC, 2006 shall be implemented no later 
than 23 December 2024, a s a transitional measure , maritime labour certificates 
and the declarations of maritime labour compliance are required to comply with 
the requirements of the Convention as amended, no later than the date of the first 
renewal inspection following entry into force of the 2022 amendments on 23 
December 2024. 
An amended DMLC Part I will be available to: 
• all ships registering with Liberia on or after 15 August 2024;
• ships registered in Liberia, prior to the first renewal inspection on or
after 23 December 2024; and
• any ship upon request
2.3 Verification Inspections and Certification 
The Administration is taking an active role in ensuring compliance with the 
working and living conditions and the rights of seafarers serving on board 
Liberian Flag ships.  This role includes the review and acceptance of the DMLC 
Part II prepared by all shipowners . Review and acceptance of DMLC Part II will 
not be delegated to RO’s/Classification Societies recognized by the 
Administration. The Administration’s review will ensure consistency and 
efficiency in confirming  compliance with requirements set out in DMLC Part I, 
certification of the DMLC Part II and inspections on the ship.   
The Administration has trained a cadre of Liberian auditors to serve as Liberian 
Maritime Labour Inspectors in order to provide effective and efficient inspection 
MLC-001     9 of 22      8/24 
The Republic of Liberia 
and verification of the working and living conditions on board Liberian flag ships. 
These inspectors are also trained to conduct safety inspections and verification 
audits under the ISM and ISPS Codes . The Administration has commenced 
“harmonizing” these inspections and audits with maritime labour inspections (See 
Marine Notice ISM-001 and ISP-001 for further details).  The Administration has 
also authorized RO’s to conduct maritime labour verification inspections  and 
certification of Liberian F lag ships. A shipowner can choose whether to have the 
on board verification inspections and certification conducted by the 
Administration or an authorized RO. The list of authorized RO’s can be found on 
LISCR website, www.liscr.com under the “Maritime” tab then click on 
“Regulations and Standards” and “Recognized Organizations”. 
  
Shipowners choosing or interested in using a L MLI should contact the 
Administration at audit@liscr.com for coordination.  
 
Specific information of the inspection, verification, and certification can be found 
in Section 4 of this Notice. 
 
2.4 Preparing the DMLC Part II 
 
The shipowner shall request from the Administration at mlc@liscr.com, a ship 
specific DMLC Part I  prior to developing and submitting a  DMLC Part II  for 
issuance of a Maritime Labour Certificate or a draft DMLC Part II for issuance of 
an interim Maritime Labour Certificate. 
 
The revised standard DMLC Part I  prepared by the Administration is provided in 
Annex I to this Marine Notice. 
 
The shipowner should include or make reference in the DMLC Part II, the 
occasions on which ongoing compliance with the Administrations particular 
requirements will be verified, the records to be taken and maintained, and the 
procedures to be followed where non -compliance is noted . References may be 
made to other more comprehensive documentation covering policies and 
procedures, such as, the documents required by the ISM Code.  If the DMLC Part 
II contains references to other documents , like the shipboard occupational health 
and safety programmes in the Company’s Safety Management System ( SMS), 
copies of the applicable  sections of those documents  shall be  included when 
submitting the DMLC Part II for review.  
 
To facilitate the DMLC Part II review and acceptance process, it is recommended 
to complete the checklist used by the Administration for the DMLC Part II review 
and acceptance and attach it to the submitted DMLC Part II. The checklist 
identifies the applicable sections of MLC, 2006 and the corresponding 
Administration's requirements for the DMLC Part II in order to be accepted by the 
Administration. 
 
A copy of the checklist can be downloaded from the LISCR website: 
www.liscr.com under the "Maritime" tab, then click on ‘Maritime Labor’  and 
"DMLC Part II Questionnaire”. 
 
MLC-001     10 of 22      8/24 
The Republic of Liberia 
The DMLC part II shall be drawn up in the format available in Annex II to this 
Marine Notice. 
 
2.5 Submitting the DMLC Part II 
 
Shipowners shall submit a single hard or soft copy of each DMLC Part II  to the 
Administration, in English, for review and acceptance prior to the inspection for a 
Maritime Labour Certificate . Where the DMLC Part II  is not in English, it must  
be accompanied by an English -language translation. Following the  
Administration’s review and acceptance of the measures in the DMLC Part II,  
either the LMLI or an authorized RO Inspector shall conduct an inspection of the 
ship to verify  implementation of the measures drawn up by the shipowne r. 
Following the successful on-board inspection and verification of compliance with 
requirements set out in DMLC Part I, the Part II will be certified and endorsed 
and the Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance issued with the Maritime 
Labour Certificate. 
 
To complete the review of each DMLC Part I I, the shipowner must also submit  
the following documents to the Administration, in English: 
 
a) Copy of the SRPS (s) (refer 1.10) license or certificate to operate, if available 
(refer to MLC-002, section 1.4.2 ); where the SRPS(s) is loc ated in a country 
that is not a party to MLC, 2006 , a certificate or letter issued by the 
Administration accepting the SRPS to recruit seafarers on Liberian  registered 
ships (refer to MLC-002, section 1.4.1); 
b) Copy of the Collective Bargaining Agreement (s) (CBA) applicable to 
seafarers serving on the ship operated by that shipowner  (refer MLC-003, 
section 3.1); 
c) Copy of the Seafarers Employment Agreement (s) applicable to seafarers 
serving on the ship operated by that shipowner  (refer to section 1.9 and MLC-
003, section 3.1); 
d) Where the seafarer’s employment agreement is signed by a representative of 
the shipowner,  a copy of the manning agreement or similar arrangement 
between the shipowner and the representative of the shipowner  (refer MLC-
003, section 3.1); 
e) Evidence of shipowners’ financial security for repatriation of seafarers  (refer 
to MLC-003, section 3.6.5); 
f) Evidence of shipowners’ financial security to assure compensation (as set out 
in Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.336(1); the seafarers' employment 
agreement; or a collective agreement , whichever is greater ) in case of 
seafarer's death or long-term disability due to an occupational injury, illness or 
hazard (refer to MLC-005, section 3.2.2); 
g) Copy of the  standardized format of the table of ship -board working 
arrangements (refer to MLC-003, section 3.3.6); 
h) Copy of the standardized format of the record of daily hours of rest or hours 
of work (refer to MLC-003, section 3.3.7); 
MLC-001     11 of 22      8/24 
The Republic of Liberia 
i) Copy of the  standard medical report form used by the master and relevant 
medical personnel (on board and ashore) to help facilitate treatment of 
seafarers (refer to MLC-005, section 3.1.5); and 
j) Copy of ship-owners on-board complaint procedures (refer MLC-006).   
 
A letter indicating successful review of the measures in the DMLC -II and the 
supporting documents will be issued to each ship , which must be placed on board 
along with the DMLC Part II.  Following successful inspection and issuance of a 
Maritime Labour Certificate, this letter is no longer required and may be removed. 
 
A copy of the DMLC -II and the letter  will be retained by the Administration for 
control purposes. 
 
3.0 AUTHORITY, CONDUCT, OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF 
INSPECTORS (LMLI’S AND AUTHORIZED RO INSPECTORS)  
  
3.1 Authority of Inspectors  
  
Inspectors have the authority: 
 
a) To board a Liberian registered ship; 
b) To carry out any examination, test or inquiry  in order to satisfy themselves 
that the requirements of the Convention are being strictly observed; 
c) To question the master, seafarer or any other person, including the shipowner 
or the shipowners’ representative, on any matter concerning the application of 
the requirements under Liberian laws and regulations, in the presence of any 
witness that the persons may have requested; 
d) To require the production of any books, log books, registers, records, 
certificates or other documents or information directly related to matters 
subject to inspection, in order to verify compliance with Liberian laws and 
regulations implementing this Convention; 
e) To enforce the posting of notices that may be required under Liberian laws 
and regulations implementing this Convention; 
f) To require that the master make arrangements t o take or remove, for the 
purpose of analysis, samples of products, cargo, drinking water, provisions, 
materials and substances used or handled; 
g) Following an inspection, to bring immediately to the attention of the 
shipowner, the operator of the ship or the master, any deficiencies  which may 
affect the health and safety of those on board ship; 
h) To require deficiencies to be remedied; 
i) On authorization from the Administration  to prohibit a ship from departing 
port until any deficiencies which represent a significant danger  to the safety, 
health or security of seafarers; or  which constitute a serious breach of the 
requirements (including seafarers rights)  of this convention is rectified or an 
action plan to rectify the deficiencies has been accepted by the Administration 
or authorized RO;  
MLC-001     12 of 22      8/24 
The Republic of Liberia 
j) To bring to the attention of the Administration and, if applicable to the RO 
any deficiency or abuse not specifically covered by existing Liberian laws and 
regulations and submit proposals for the improvement of the laws and 
regulations; 
k) To notify the Administration of any occupational injuries or diseases affecting 
seafarers in such cases and in such manner as required by Liberian law and 
regulations. 
 
3.2 Conduct of Inspectors 
 
a) Inspectors shall treat as confidential the source of any grievance or  complaint 
alleging a danger or deficiency in relation to seafarers’ working and living 
conditions or a violation of laws and regulations and shall not reveal to the 
shipowner, the shipowner s representative or the operator of the ship tha t an 
inspection was made as a consequence of such a grievance or complaint. 
b) Inspectors that have any direct or indirect interest with the shipowner, 
seafarers or other interested parties shall not be called upon to carry out the 
maritime labour inspection. 
c) Inspectors shall not reveal, even after leaving service, any commercial secrets 
or confidential working processes or information of a personal nature which 
may come to their knowledge in the course of their duties and may be subject 
to appropriate sanctions or disciplinary measures. 
 
3.3 Obligation of Inspectors 
 
LMLI’s and authorized RO’s, shall, submit a report of e ach inspection to the 
Administration (refer 4.1 below).  
 
In case of an investigation following a major incident, the report shall be 
submitted to the Administration as soon as practicable, but not later than one 
month following the conclusion of the investigation.  
 
3.4 Responsibility of Inspectors 
 
When an inspection is conducted or when measures are taken to remedy or rectify 
a deficiency or provide an acceptable corrective action plan, all reasonable efforts 
shall be made to avoid a ship being unreasonably detained or delayed.  
 
4.0      REQUIREMENTS  
 
 These requirements are supplemental to DMLC Part I , the Maritime Law (RLM -107), 
Maritime Regulations (RLM -108) and Marine Notices contained in the Combined 
Publication Folder (RLM-300).  
 
 4.1   Report of Maritime L abour Inspection, Maritime Labour Certificate  and 
DMLC 
 
Regardless of whether the  ship is certified under the MLC, 2006, or not, after 
MLC-001     13 of 22      8/24 
The Republic of Liberia 
conducting a n MLC, 2006, inspection, LMLI’s and authorized RO inspectors 
shall prepare a report of each inspection and provide three copies in English. The 
original of the report shall be given to the master , a copy shall be posted on the 
ships notice board for th e information of the seafarers and a copy  sent to the 
Administration. 
  
Upon request, on behalf of the seafarers, a copy of the report shall be sent to  the 
seafarers' representative. 
The report should stipulate that any deficiencies found during the inspection are to 
be rectified in accordance with the Administrations and/or authorized RO’s 
inspection reporting procedures.  
 
The current valid Maritime Labour Certificate  and DMLC (parts I and II) issued 
by the Maritime Labour Inspector in English, shall be carried on the s hip, and a 
copy shall be posted in a  conspicuous place on board where it is available to 
seafarers. A copy shall be made  available, upon request  to seafarers, LMLI’s, 
authorized RO inspectors, authorized officers in port states,  and shipowners’ and 
seafarers’ representatives. 
 
4.2    Record keeping of inspections 
 
For ships carrying a Maritime Labour Certificate, t he inspection reports  of all 
subsequent inspections or other verific ations carried out , together with the date 
when the defici encies were found to be remedied  shall be maintained together 
with the DMLC , and be made available , when requested , to seafarers, LMLI’s, 
authorized RO inspectors, authorized officers in port states and shipowners’ and 
seafarers’ representatives. 
 
 4.3   Change of Flag  
 
Shipowners of a  Liberian flagged ship should notify the Administration, if the 
ship changes flag to another Administration.  If that Administration is  a flag State 
that is a Party to the MLC, 2006, the Liberian Administration or the authorized 
RO, where the authorized RO has issued the Maritime Labour Certificate on 
behalf of the Administration, will transmit to the gaining flag Administration  
copies of the M aritime Labour  Certificate issued to  the ship and, if applicable, 
copies of the relevant inspection reports , if the competent authority so requests 
within three (3) months after the change of flag has taken place. 
 
 4.4   Changes to the Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance, ML Certificate 
and Shipowner 
 
4.4.1 Changes to measures in DMLC Part I 
 
The Administration will advise shipowners of changes to the DMLC Part I 
 
In case of substantial changes to the DMLC Part I, requiring updating and 
certifying of the DMLC Part II, a new DMLC Part I will be issued to each 
ship and a new DMLC Part II must be submitted to the Administration for 
review and acceptance.  
MLC-001 14 of 22 8/24 
The Republic of Liberia 
An additional Maritime Labour inspection may be required to verify the 
new measures, certify the new DMLC Part II and issue the declaration of 
maritime labour compliance. If an additional inspection is conducted, a 
new ML certificate will be issued with the same validity date as the 
existing ML certificate.  
After an inspection conducted at the next renewal of the ML certificate 
following entry into force of the 2022 amendments to MLC, 2006, a new 
ML certificate will be issued for a period which shall not exceed five 
years.  
4.4.2 Changes to measures in DMLC Part II 
The shipowner shall advise the Administration of changes to the DMLC 
Part II.  
a) In case of minor editorial changes to the DMLC Part II not leading to
updating of other parts of the DMLC Part II, only the amended pages
of the DMLC Part II shall be submitted to the Administration for
review. The issue date of the DMLC shall not be changed.  A new ML
Certificate need not be re-issued.
b) In case of any change to the measures in DMLC Part II, a new DMLC
Part II must be submitted to the Administration for revie w and
acceptance. An additiona l Maritime Labour inspection may be
required to verify the new measures , certify the new DMLC P art II
and issue the declaration of maritime labour compliance.  If an
inspection is conducted, a new ML certificate will be issued with the
same validity date as the original ML certificate.
c) The DMLC Part II  need not be submitted if there are changes made
only to the doc uments referenced in the DMLC Part II and  does not
affect the implementation of the measures in the DMLC Part II.
4.4.3 Changes to Certificate data 
a) In case of c hange in shipowners name and/or contact information,
only the affected pages in the DMLC Part II must be submitted to the
Administration and the last page in the DMLC  Part II  must be
submitted to the Administration  or the authorized RO which certified
the DMLC Part II and issued the ML Certificate. An amended DMLC
Part II will be issued with the new shipowners’  name and/or contact
information. The issue date of the DMLC shall not be changed. An
amended ML Certi ficate with the new issue d date and the same
validity dates as the original ML Certificate shall be issued by the
Administration or authorized RO.
The endorsement for the intermediate inspection, if any, shall be
transferred to the  new certificate, with date and location. It shall be
MLC-001     15 of 22      8/24 
The Republic of Liberia 
stamped or marked with text “Confirmed carried out”. The 
endorsement shall be stamped, dated and signed. 
b) In case of c hange in ships n ame, only affected pages  in the DMLC 
Part II , if any,  must be submitted to the Administration  and/or 
authorized RO which certified the DMLC Part II and issued the ML 
Certificate. An amended  DMLC Part I  will be issued with the new 
ship’s name. The issue date of the DMLC shall not be changed . An 
amended ML Certificate with the new issue date and the same 
validity dates as the original ML Certificate will be issued by the 
Administration or the authorized RO. 
 
The endorsement for the intermediate inspection, if any, shall be 
transferred to the  new certificate, with date and location. It shall be 
stamped or marked with the text  “Confirmed carried out”. The 
endorsement shall be stamped, dated and signed. 
 
 4.4.4 Changes to Shipowner 
 
In case of change of Shipowner (manager or operator), a new DMLC Part 
II and relevant documents from 2.4 a) to j) above must be submitted to the 
Administration for review. A Maritime Labour inspection will be required. 
 
  4.5 Inspection for issuance of a Mariti me Labour Certificate or Interim 
Maritime Labour Certificate:  
 
 4.5.1   Maritime Labour Certificate  
 
  Only the LMLI or an  authorized RO inspector is authorized to conduct 
maritime labour inspections and verifications  on behalf of the 
Administration.   
 
a) The shipowner must contact the Administration or authorized RO to 
arrange for the inspection and verification  for a Maritime Labour 
Certificate. Failure to have a valid Maritime Labour Certificate will be 
considered a violation of the MLC, 2006 Convention and the ship may 
be prevented from trading. 
b) The DMLC Part I and a DMLC Part II reviewed and accepted by the 
Administration must be available on board ship  before any inspection 
and verification is conducted. 
c) The Shipowners ’ measures drawn up in the DMLC  Part II  must be 
implemented on board before the inspection and verification for 
issuance of a Maritime Labour Certificate . The Administration does 
not specify minimum implementat ion period; however, the shipowner 
shall ensure that the measures included in the DMLC Part II have been 
in place on the ship for a period of time for the Master to develop 
sufficient evidence documenting implementation before the inspection 
and verification is carried out. 
MLC-001     16 of 22      8/24 
The Republic of Liberia 
d) Inspections other than Interim inspections will only be performed 
under normal operating conditions, for example: when the ship is not 
in dry-dock or lay-up. 
 
 4.5.2    Interim Maritime Labour Certificate 
   
  The Administration is aware of the short period  allowed for 
implementation of the requirements of the Convention on  board newly 
operated vessels; therefore, the following minimum requirements will be 
verified during the verification for an Interim Maritime Labour Certificate: 
 
a) The ship has been inspected , as far as reasonable and practicable, for 
the 16  matters listed i n 2.1 above , taking into account b), c) and d) 
below; 
b) The S hipowner has demonstra ted to the Administration that the ship 
has adequate procedures adopted in the draft of the DMLC Part II  to 
comply with the requirements of the Convention;  
c) The Master is familiar with the requirements of th e Convention and 
the responsibilities for implementation; and  
d) The Shipowner has submitted an application for a DMLC Part I and a  
draft of the DMLC  Part II  to the Administration which outlines the 
measures that the shipowner proposes to implement on board the ship. 
 
Where the information in b) and d) above has been submitted to the 
Administration, an email confirming receipt shall be sent to the 
Shipowner, as evidence of submission.  
 
 4.5.3 Preparing for the Inspection and Verification 
 
  When scheduling a  maritime labour inspection and verification using the 
services of a LMLI, the shipowner should complete Form 201 “Audit an d 
Inspection Application Form”, (available on LISCR website 
www.liscr.com under the Marine  Documents/Marine Safety Program/ 
Audit request form tabs) and submit it to the Audit Department at Liberian 
International Ship and Corporate Registry in Vienna, Virginia, USA.   
 
The LMLI will prepare for the inspection and coordinate the visit on board 
with the local agent and the shipowners’ representative with MLC 
responsibilities. 
The preparation for the inspection and verification by the LMLI shall 
include the following elements: 
 
a) Date and place where the inspection and verification will be 
conducted; 
b) Objectives and scope; 
c) The expected time and duration for each activity (refer 4.5.4) 
MLC-001     17 of 22      8/24 
The Republic of Liberia 
d) Review of ship’s history from previous flag state and port state 
inspection reports and ILO records if available; 
e) For certified and uncertified ships, before the inspection is carried out, 
whether there are any outstanding deficiencies from any previous 
inspection or other  verification which have not been addressed by the 
shipowner. The Administration will take action regarding rectification 
of the deficiencies before the inspection. 
 
 4.5.4 Inspection and verification 
 
  The inspection and verification  will be conducted as described below and 
should be sufficiently flexible to permit changes based on information 
gathered during the inspection. 
 
a) Conduct an opening meeting with at least the Master and the  
person/persons designated for  assisting seafarers in following the on-
board complaint procedures, using the following agenda: 
  
i. Confirm the working language. 
ii. Introduction of the members of the inspection team. 
iii. Explanation of the scope and requirement of the inspection. 
iv. Outline the inspection  program and ensure there is suffic ient time 
to complete the inspection. 
v. Set communication guidelines for inspectors and seafarers. 
vi. Agree which seafarers will accompany the inspector(s) as they 
verify the measures on board the vessel. 
vii. Verify vessel’s crew list. 
viii. Confirmation that the inspector will ensure the confidentiality of 
the information obtained during the inspection. 
ix. Verification of the implementation of any corrective actions from 
the previous inspection , close, sign and stamp the inspection 
report. 
x. Schedule the closing meeting. 
 
b) Conduct an inspection team briefing with all parties who participate in 
the inspection and familiarization with the measures drawn up in the 
DMLC, Parts I & II .  If a DMLC  Part I and a DMLC  Part II that has 
been reviewed and accepted by the Administration is not available  on 
board ship, the inspector(s) will not continue with the inspection.  
c) Conduct the inspection with the inspection team including: 
i. Inspection of records of the elements of decent work, human and 
operational issues such as payment of wages, qualifications, 
manning levels, seafarers’ employment agreements, minimum age, 
medical certification and hours of rest. 
MLC-001     18 of 22      8/24 
The Republic of Liberia 
ii. Inspection of records of occupational health,  safety and accident 
prevention programmes, including operational practices, hazard 
identification and risk evaluation, p ermit to work systems, 
accident/incident and near -miss reports, sa fety committee meeting 
reports; 
iii. Inspection of accommodation, recreational facilities, galley, food 
and catering, including the records of inspections; 
iv. Inspection of medical chest, medical logs, hospital;  
v. Inspection of deck areas, machinery spaces and personal protective 
equipment; 
vi. Inspection of on-board complaint handling procedures; and 
vii. Interview several seafarers in private. 
d) Conduct an inspection  team debriefing to gather conclusions and 
recommendations. 
e) Conduct a closing meetin g with at least the Master and the  person or 
persons designated to assist seafarers with the on -board complaint 
procedures.  
f) Complete and issue the inspection report in accordance with section 
4.1. 
 
 4.6   Rectification of Deficiencies  
   
a) Any deficiencies identified during the inspection shall be recorded in the 
inspection report. All deficiencies identified are required to be rectified in 
accordance with the Administrations and/or authorized RO’s inspection 
reporting procedures. 
b)  A Maritime Labour Certificate will not be issued  until deficiencies related to 
approved measures in the declaration of maritime labour compliance  are 
rectified or a corrective action plan has been provided by the shipowner and/or 
master and accepted by the Inspector to rectify the deficiencies within a  
specified time-frame, not exceeding three (3) months to implement the 
necessary corrective actions.  
c) The Inspector shall report any serious deficiencies which affect the safety of 
the ship, or represent a significant danger to the safety, health or security of 
seafarers, or constitute a serious breach of the requirements of this Convention 
(including seafarers’ rights) to the shipowner, the Master of the vessel 
involved and to the Administration or authorized RO . The inspector will  
confirm that the shipowner and/or Master has determined and initiated 
appropriate corrective action to correct the deficiencies or to correct the 
causes of the deficiencies before the ship departs port.  
d) In the case of any serious deficiencies which represent a significant danger or 
constitute a serious breach of the requirements of this Convention (inc luding 
seafarers’ rights), the Inspector shall, if authorized by the flag Administration, 
prohibit the ship from departing the port, unless the deficiencies are rectified 
or a corrective action plan to rectify the deficiencies has been accepted by the 
MLC-001     19 of 22      8/24 
The Republic of Liberia 
Administration or authorized RO. 
e) For inspections carried out by the LMLI, t he shipowner and/or Master should 
use the ‘Corrective Action Plan’ form provid ed in Annex V  or a ny other 
format, provided the necessary information is included. 
f) The Administration or authorized RO  may accept a  corrective action plan to 
correct the serious deficiencies, if satisfied that the plan will be implemented 
in an expeditious manner within a specified time-frame not exceeding three 
(3) months to implement the necessary corrective actions.  
 
g) When a corrective action plan to rectify the deficiencies or serious 
deficiencies has been accepted by the Inspector, Administration or authorized 
RO, an additional Maritime Labour inspection may be required to verify the  
implementation of the corrective action plan. 
h) Where an additional Maritime L abour inspection is not required, evidence of 
implementation of the corrective action shall be submitted within the agreed 
time-frame and verification of the implementation of the corrective actions 
will be carried out at the next scheduled inspection  by the attending inspector, 
who will close and sign the inspection report. 
 
 4.7 Additional Inspections and Verifications  
 
An additional maritime labour inspection may be carried out by the 
Administration or the authorized RO: 
 
a) if t he Administration receives a complaint which it does not consider 
manifestly unfounded or obtains evidence that a ship does not conform to the 
requirements of this Convention or that there are serious deficiencies in the 
implementation of the measures set out in the declaration of maritime labour 
compliance; 
b) if after a more detailed inspection by an authorized officer of a port state, the 
ship is prohibited from proceeding to sea until any conditions on board that 
are clearly hazardous to the safety, health or security of seafarers; or the non-
conformity that constitutes a serious or repeated breach of the requirements of 
this Convention have been rectified , or a plan of action to rectify such non-
conformities has been accepted by the authorized officer, and is satisfied that 
the plan will be implemented in an expeditious manner; 
c) when changes have been made to the measures in DMLC Part II; 
d) when substantial alteration has been made to the seafarer accommodation; or  
e) other occasions as may be deemed appropriate by the Administration.  
 
 4.8    Internal Maritime Labour Inspections 
 
An internal maritime labour inspection should be conducted by the shipowners at 
intervals not exceeding 12 months to ensure ongoing compliance and continuous 
improvement. This may be done in concert with the Company’s internal ISM 
audit.  
 
MLC-001     20 of 22      8/24 
The Republic of Liberia 
 Personnel carrying out the inspections should be independent of the areas being 
inspected unless this is impracticable due to the size and the nature of the 
shipowner. 
 
4.9 Designation of the Shipowners’ representative with MLC responsibilities 
 
The shipowner (manager or operator) must provide the Administration with the 
name, address, fax, email, telex numbers and emergency contact information of 
the person(s) with MLC responsibilities, including seafarer complaint resolution.  
This information may be included with the documentation submit ted by the 
shipowner for DMLC Part II. Changes should be sent by email or fax or mail. 
 
The form for the declaration of person(s) with MLC responsibilities (RL -5005) is 
provided in Annex VI. 
 
 4.10    Validity of Certificates 
 
A Maritime Labour Certificate shall be issued to each ship following a successful 
inspection and verification either by the LMLI or authorized RO inspector on 
behalf of the Administration.   
 
a) The Maritime Labour Certificate  shall be issued to a ship  by the 
Administration or by the  duly authorized RO for a period which shall not 
exceed five years , upon successful inspection and verification of  the 
Administrations requirements implementing the provisions of the Convention 
regarding the working and living conditions of seafarers on the ship, including 
measures for ongoing compliance which are included in the declaration of 
maritime labour compliance. 
b) The validity of the Maritime Labour Certificate  shall be subject to an  
intermediate inspection by the Administration  or authorized RO to ensure 
continuing compliance with the Administrations requirements implementing 
the provisions of the Convention , and it shall take place between the second 
and third anniversary dates of the certificate. Anniversary date means the day 
and month of the year which will correspond to the date of expiry of the 
Maritime Labour Certificate. The scope of the intermediate inspection shall be 
equal to an inspection for renewal of the certificate. The certificate shall be 
endorsed following satisfactory intermediate inspection. 
c) Notwithstanding section 4.10.1 above, when the renewal inspection has been 
completed within three (3) months before the expiry of the existing Maritime 
Labour Certificate, the new Maritime Labour Certificate  shall be valid from 
the date of completion of the renewal inspection for a period not exceeding 
five (5) years from the date of expiry of the exis ting certificate. In such a case 
the period of validity may exceed five (5) years. 
d) When the renewal inspection is completed more than three (3) months before  
the expiry date of the existing Maritime Labour Certificate, the new Maritime 
Labour Certificate  shall be  valid for a period not exceeding five (5) years 
starting from the date of completion of the renewal inspection. 
e) The date and place of issue stated on the Maritime Labour Certificate is where  
MLC-001     21 of 22      8/24 
The Republic of Liberia 
the certificate was printed regardless of the date and place of the inspection 
and verification. As example,  the inspection took place on 25 June 2 010 in 
Singapore and the certificate was issued in LISCR head office Vienna, 
Virginia on 25 July 2010 then the date and place of issue will be 25 July 2010 
at Vienna, Virginia. The Maritime Labour Certificate  will be valid until 24 
June 2015. 
f) A Maritime Labour Certificate  issued by the Liberian Administration canno t 
be endorsed by  an authorized  RO, without the authorization of the 
Administration. 
 
 4.11    Interim Certification 
 
a) Interim Maritime Labour Certificates may only be issued if the Administration 
or authorized RO acting on behalf of the Administration verified  compliance 
with provisions of section 4.5.2 above and for: 
 
i) New ships on delivery;  
ii) Transfer from another Flag; or  
iii) A shipowner takes on responsibility for the operation of a ship 
which is new to that shipowner. 
b) A declaration of maritime labour compliance need not be issued for the period 
of validity of the interim certificate. 
c) An interim Maritime Labour Certificate  may be issued for a period not 
exceeding six (6) months and cannot be extended.  
d) For a vessels first inspection under MLC, 2006,  it is recommended that 
shipowners consider requesting an interim Maritime Labour Certificate valid 
for a period not exceeding five (5) months. This will allow the Administration 
to extend the interim Maritime Labour Certificate  for a period not exceeding 
one (1) month , if needed to complete implementation of the requirements of 
the Convention and avoid undue delays.  
e) Prior to the expiration of the interim Maritime Labour Certificate , the 
Administration or the authorized RO should issue a Maritime Labour 
Certificate upon successful inspection for all the requirements of the 
Convention and verification of the working and living conditions of seafarers 
on the ship, including measures for ongoing compliance which are included in 
the declaration of maritime labour compliance. 
  
5.0      NONCOMPLIANCE WITH THE MLC, 2006 
 
 5.1      ‘Cease to be valid’ Maritime Labour Certificate 
 
A certificate issued under sections 4.10.1 or 4.11 above shall cease to be valid in 
any of the following cases: 
 
a) if the intermediate inspection is not completed within the second and third 
anniversary dates of the Maritime Labour Certificate; 
b) if the intermediate inspection is not satisfactorily completed and the ML  
MLC-001     22 of 22      8/24 
The Republic of Liberia 
Certificate is not endorsed; 
c) when a ship changes flag; 
d) when a shipowner ceases to assume the responsibility for the operation of a 
ship; and 
e) when substantial changes have been made to the structure or equipment 
covered in Title 3. 
 
In the case of a) and b) above, the existing M aritime Labour Certificate may be 
reinstated following an inspection and verification to the extent and scope of an 
inspection for a M aritime Labour Certificate. A new Maritime Labour Certificate 
will be issued with the same validity date as the original M aritime Labour 
Certificate. 
 
In the case referred to in c), d) and e) above, a new Maritime Labour Certificate  
shall only be issued when the Administration or the authorized RO issuing the 
new certificate is fully satisfied that the ship is in compliance with the  
Administrations laws and regulations and other  requirements implementing the 
provisions of this Convention regarding working and living conditions of 
seafarers on ships. 
 
 5.2      Withdrawal of the Maritime Labour Certificate  
 
A Maritime Labour Certificate  may be withdrawn at the determination of the 
Administration. Cause for certificate withdrawal may include, but is not limited 
to:  
 
a) On recommendation of the Liberian Maritime Labour Inspector or the  
authorized RO, that the ship concerned does not comply with the 
Administrations requirements implementing the provisions of this 
Convention; 
b) Any accepted corrective action plan  to rectify serious deficiencies  has not 
been implemented; and 
c) The measures in the declaration of maritime labour compliance Part II are not 
implemented on board. 
When considering whether a Maritime Labour Certificate  should be withdrawn, 
the Administration shall take into account the seriousness or the frequency of the 
deficiencies. 
 
5.3     Right to Appeal 
 
In the event a shipowner disagrees with a determination made by the L MLI or the 
authorized RO inspector, the shipowner may make a direct appeal to the 
Administration. The final determination will be based upon both the substance of 
the appeal and the recommendations of the L MLI or the authorized RO. Appeals 
shall be in writing and may be sent by email to MLC@liscr.com or faxed to the 
attention of MLC group at +1-703-790-5655.  
 
 
FR MLC-011-01 TID: Rev2-08/15/2024 
 
THE REPUBLIC OF LIBERIA 
LIBERIA MARITIME AUTHORITY 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX I 
 
Maritime Labour Convention, 2006 
 
Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance — Part I 
(Note: This Declaration must be attached 
to the ship’s Maritime Labour Certificate) 
 
 Issued under the authority of the Liberia Maritime Authority, Republic of Liberia  
 
With respect to the provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention, 2006, the following referenced ship:  
 
Name of Ship IMO number Gross tonnage 
   
 
 
is maintained in accordance with Standard A5.1.3 of the Convention. 
 
The undersigned declares, on behalf of the abovementioned competent authority, that:  
 
(a) the provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention are fully embodied in the national requirements referred 
to below; 
(b) these national requirements are contained in the national provisions referenced below; explanations 
concerning the content of those provisions are provided where necessary; 
(c) the details of any substantial equivalencies under Article VI, paragraphs 3 and 4, are provided in the section 
for this purpose below; 
(d) any exemptions granted by the competent authority in accordance with Title 3 are clearly indicated in the 
section provided for this purpose below; and 
(e) any ship -type specific requirements under national legislation are also referenced under the requirements 
concerned. 
 
1. Minimum age (Regulation 1.1) 
  
Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.326; Liberian Maritime Law Sections 326  and 326(2); and M. Notice 
RLM-118 (the Requirements for Liberian Merchant Marine Personnel Certification) Regulations 5.2.2.6; 
5.2.3; 5.4.2.7 as amended: Other than a ship’s cook who shall be at least 18 years old, the m inimum age 
allowed is 16-years for employment as seafarer.  Night work is prohibited for seafarers under the age of 18.  
See Marine Notice MLC -002 (paragraph 1.1)  which provides for exception to night work for seafarers 
under age 18.  Night is defined as a period of at least nine (9) consecutive hours starting at 2100 (9:00 p.m.) 
and ending no earlier than 0 600 ( 6:00 a.m .), which period shall be specified in the DMLC Part II. The 
employment, engagement or work of seafarers under age 18 is prohibited where the work is likely to 
jeopardize their health or safety.  See also MLC-005 (paragraph 3.3) which provides the detail of such work 
that is likely to jeopardize their health or safety. 
 
2. Medical certification (Regulation 1.2)   
 
Liberian Maritime Regulatio n 10.325(3) and M. Notice RLM -118 Reg. 5.2.6 and Reg. 5.3.3 require all 
seafarers to always possess a "Fit for Duty" Physical Examination Form completed by a (duly qualified) 
physician/ medical practitioner licensed/certificated at the place of examination, and/or who is recognized 
by the Competent Authority at the place of examination for the issuance of seafarer’s  medical certification, 
and such standard medical form found in Annex 2 of M. Notice RLM -118 (or similar form with required 
information indicated in Marine Notice MLC -002, Paragraph 1.2 ) should be issued within the past two 
years of signing the shipping articles.  However, for seafarers under the age of 18, the maximum period of 
validity of the certificate shall be one (1) year.  In urgent cases a seafarer may be permitted to work without 
a valid medical certificate in accordan ce with  Marine Notice MLC -002(Paragraph 1.2), for a period of not 
 
FR MLC-011-01  TID: Rev2—08/15/2024 
more than three (3) months (in accordance with Standard A1.2.8(b)), until the next port of call where the 
seafarer can obtain a medical certificate, provided that the seafarer concerned is in possession of an expired 
medical certificate of recent date but not to exceed ninety (90) days from the date of expiry of the said 
medical certificate that is in the seafarer’s possession. The m edical certifi cate must be provided in the 
English Language in addition to any other language. 
In accordance with treaty obligation, the Liberian Maritime Administration also accepts medical certificates 
issued in accordance with the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and 
Watchkeeping for Seafarers (STCW), as amended.         
             
3. Qualifications of seafarers (Regulation 1.3)      
 
Liberian Maritime Law Section 325 and Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.325 including M. Notice RLM -
118 provide standards  for training and certification requirement for seafarers employed on board Liberian 
registered ships. 
                     
4. Seafarers’ employment agreements (Regulation 2.1) 
 
a) Liberian Maritime Law Section 320 and Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.320 provide for execution of 
a Shipping Article/Articles of Agreement (Seafarers Employment Agreement  (SEA)) – “Before the 
Master of any Liberian vessel of 200 GRT  or more shall sail from any port, there shall be in force 
Shipping Articles (sometimes referred to as Articles) with every sea farer on board the vessel,  except 
with persons who are apprenticed to, or servants of, himself or the vessel's owner, who are not deemed 
to be seafarers.  The Shipping Articles shall be written or printed and shall be subscribed by every 
seafarer shipping on the vessel and shall state the period of engagement or voyage or voyages and the 
term or terms for which each sea farer shall be shipped, and the rate of pay for each, and such other 
items as may be required by Regulation ”. The Master is also required to sign the Articles of 
Agreement. 
 
b) Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.320(2) sub -paragraphs (a) and (b)  state: the seafarer s shall be given 
an opportunity to review and seek advice on the agreement, including any collective bargaining 
agreement (CBA) that forms part of the employment agreement, before signing, to ensure that they 
have freely entered into  the agreement with a sufficient understanding of their rights and 
responsibilities. The ship owner and the seafarer shall each  have a signed original of the employment 
agreement.   
 
c) Liberian Maritime Law Section 324 provides for wages due to early termination; Liberian Maritime  
Regulation 10.324 requires prior notification (of at least 7 days) for early termination of the seafarer's 
employment.  Marine Notice MLC -003 (paragraph 3.1) provides for termination of the SEA at a 
shorter notice or without notice in accordance with Standard A2.1.6. Marine Notice MLC -003 
(paragraph 3.1) also provides the minimum particulars to be included in the SEA.  
 
d) Liberian Maritime Law Section 325 and  Liberia n Maritime Regulation 10.325(2)(a) requires each 
person employed on board a Liberian vessel, other than those persons such as certain hotel staff 
personnel on passenger vessels who are not assigned or required to perform ship safety or pollution 
related shipboard duties, shall have in his or her possession an official Liberian Seafarer’s 
Identification and Record Book, issued by the Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner in accordance 
with the International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention N o 108 and Standard A2.1.1e, 
containing any certificates of special qualification issued to the holder by the Commissioner or a 
Deputy Commissioner, and in which all services at sea shall be entered and certified by the Master.  
 
5.     Use of any licensed or certified or regu1ated private recruitment and placement service (Regulation 1.4)    
                                        
Liberian Maritime Regulation  10.327A provides for recruitment and placement.  It provides for seafarer's 
access to an efficient , adequate and accountable system for finding employment on board ship without 
charge to the seafarer .  It also provide s that ship owners who use seafarer's recruitment and placement 
services that are based in countries or territories in which MLC -2006 does not apply are required to ensure 
that those services conform to the standards set out in A1.4.  Seafarers, prior to or in the process of 
engagement, shall be informed about their rights under the seafarers’ recruitment and placement services’ 
system of protection, to compensate seafarers for monetary loss that they may incur as a result of the failure 
of the recruitment and placement service or the relevant shipowner under the seafarers’ employment  
 
FR MLC-011-01  TID: Rev2—08/15/2024 
agreement to meet its obligations to them . See also Marine Notice MLC -002 (paragraph 1.4) which 
provides guidelines for auditing of those seafarers’ recruitment and placement services. 
 
6. Hours of work or rest (Regulation 2.3)  
 
a) Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.320 (4 ) ( 10) along with Marine Notices MAN -001 and MLC -003 
(paragraphs 3.3 and 3.4) provide for minimum rest period; Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.341( 1) 
incorporates the provision reflecting the minimum seventy-seven (77) hours in any seven day period 
including the conditions in Standard A2.3.10 and Standard A2. 3.11; Interval  between consecutive 
hours of rest cannot be more than fourteen ( 14) hours. Marine Notice MLC -003 includes Annexes 
reflecting the Liberian standardize d format (or use IMO/ILO form) for the table of shipboard working 
arrangement for posting and the record of work hours/rest periods, a copy of which is required to be 
signed/endorsed by the Master/ship owners’ representative or a person authorized by the Master, and 
by the seafarer.  A copy must be provided to the seafarer.  Other forms of record keeping may be 
accepted provided the required information is included. By the foregoing, the Administration has 
adopted the minimum hours of rest standard.   
 
b) Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.341 (2) and Maritime Law Sections 354, 355 and 356 and Marine 
Notice MLC-003 (paragraph 3.3) together make provision for the Collective Agreement exception to 
hours of rest in Standard A2.3.13 and for Emergency in Standard A2.3.14 which is specifically 
clarified by the amendment to Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.341.   MLC-003, paragraph 3.4 also 
provides guidelines for hours of work and rest for young seafarers under the age of 18 years.  
 
c) Liberian Maritime Law Section 333(3) provides for seafarer vacation allowance/paid holiday per year, 
and annual leave with pay calculated on the basis of a minimum of 2.5  calendar days per month 
employment as required by Standard A2.4.2. 
 
7. Manning levels for the ship (Regulation 2.7)  
 
a) Liberian Maritime Law Section 292 requires that Liberian vessel shall not be navigated unless it has in 
its service and on board such complement of officers and crew as is necessary for safe navigation, and 
with due regards to security.  
 
b) Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.292 and Marine Notice MAN -001 provide the specific detail 
manning requirements including minimum number of deck officers, minimum number of engineers, 
minimum number of ratings of crew and certificated persons proficient in survival craft.  A Minimum 
Safe Manning Certificate (MSMC) is issued by the Office of the Deputy Commissioner to each 
Liberian flag vessel in accordance with the Liberian Flag State requirements.  Reg. 10.292( 3) reflects 
minimization of excessive hours of work to ensure sufficient rest and limit fatigue of seafarers 
consistent with relevant IMO guidance. 
 
8. Accommodation (Regulation 3.1) 
 
Liberian Maritime Regulation.10.318 provides for the condition of employment.   Consistent with ILO 
Convention 92 and Convention 133, Liberian Maritime  Regulation 10.318(2) and sub -paragraph (3) and 
Marine Notice MLC -004 (paragraphs 3 and 4) provide for specific deta iled requirements for ships 
constructed on/or after MLC 2006 enters into force and consistent with the requirements of Standard 
A3.1and GuidelineB3.1 covering the size of rooms and other accommodation spaces; heating and 
ventilation; noise and vibration and other ambient factors; sanitary facilities; lighting and hospital 
accommodation; laundry facilities and mess rooms.  In accordance with Mari ne Notice MLC -004 
(paragraph 3), certain exemptions may be provided to certain ships. MLC -004 (paragraph 4) also includes 
frequency of documented inspections of accommodation and records to be maintained.  
 
9. On-board recreational facilities (Regulation 3.1) 
  
Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.318 and specifically, Reg. 10.318(2) and sub -paragraph (3) and Marine 
Notice MLC-004, paragraphs 3.14, 4.10 and 4.11 provide for specific detailed requirements for appropriate 
recreational facilities, including social connectivity.   
 
10. Food and catering (Regulation 3.2)  
 
 
FR MLC-011-01  TID: Rev2—08/15/2024 
a) Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.315 and Marine Notice MLC -004 (paragraph 5.1)  require to be 
maintained on board Liberian flag ships a sufficient supply of drinking water, and of food of suitably 
nutritive quality, balance  and variety taking due regard of the number of seafarers on board, their 
religious requirements, custom and habit (cultural practices), and which shall be properly and 
hygienically prepared, dispensed and served at no cost to the seafarers.  The Commissioner may, as 
and if necessary, prescribe scales of provisions appropriate to the customs and habits of the crew.  
 
b) Seafarers employed as cooks on board Liberia registered ships are required to have completed a 
training course or program (as indicated Marine Notice MLC -004, paragraph 5. 2) approved or 
recognized by the Administration as outlined in Standard A3.2.4 and as provided in the Requirements 
for Merchant Maritime Personnel Certification (RLM -118) Regulations 6.19 and as provided in MLC-
004, paragraph 5.2.  In accordance with Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.315(2), catering staff shall be 
properly trained or instructed for their position.  Ship owners shall ensure that seafarers, who are 
engaged as ships' cooks are trained, qualified and found competent for the position in accordance with 
requirements set out in the Liberian Maritime Regulations. 
 
c) On board inspection of food quality and drinking water supply and related accessories in accordance 
with Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.315(3) and Marine Notice MLC-004, paragraph 5.6. 
 
11. Health and safety and accident prevention (Regulation 4.3)  
 
a) In respect to accident prevention for the management of occupational safety and health on board, 
Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.296 (9) and MLC -005, paragraph 3.3 require s shipowners to take 
reasonable precautions to prevent occupational accidents, injuries and diseases on board ship,  
including provision of all necessary appropriately -sized personal protective equipment and  the Master 
of each vessel to appoint from amongst the crew a suitable person and a committee responsible for 
accident prevention, and such person or committee shall in addition to any other duties assigned by the 
Master ensure that any conditions aboard the vessel not in substantial compliance with the applicable 
provisions of the accident prevention code including the ILO code of practice entitled Accident 
prevention on board ship at sea and in port  or codes currently approved by the Office of the Deputy 
Commissioner are brought to the prompt attention of the Master. 
 
b) Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.296(9) and MLC -005, paragraph 3.3 require elements set forth in 
Standard A4.3 and identifies hazardous work for young seafarers under 18 years of age.  
 
c) Liberian Maritime Regulation 9.257(1) (f) requires inspection, reporting and correction of unsafe 
conditions of occupational accidents on board which shall be investigated.  See also Marine Notice 
MLC-005 (paragraph 3.3). 
 
12. On-board medical care (Regulation 4.1)     
 
a) In accordance with Standard A4.1.2, the Administration has adopted a standard medical report for ms 
for use by the Ships’ Masters and relevant onshore and onboard medical personnel . A copy of the 
forms which can be found in the Annex to the current WHO International Medical Guide for Ships. 
The form, when completed  and its contents shall be kept confidential and shall only be used to 
facilitate the treatment of seafarers and shall be submitted to the Administration as part of the report 
required by Liberian Maritime Regulation 9.257.  A medical log record shall be maintained as 
required by Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.296(2) (d). 
 
b) Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.296(3) require that Seafarers on Liberian flag ships shall have 
access to prompt and adequate medical care whilst working on board, and such medical  care to be 
provided by the ship owner at no cost to the seafarers.  Marine Notice MLC -005, paragraph 3.1 
provides cases where seafarers should be considered in need of immediate medical care  and for 
repatriation of the body and ashes of a deceased seafarer, in accordance with the wishes of the 
seafarer or their next of kin, as appropriate, and as soon as practicable. 
 
c)  Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.296(3) and Marine Notice MLC -005, paragraph  3.1 require that 
every Liberian vessel shall carry and maintain an adequate medicine chest bearing in mind the 
number of persons aboard and the nature and duration of the voyage. In the determination of the 
 
FR MLC-011-01  TID: Rev2—08/15/2024 
contents of the chest consideration shall be given to the recommendations of the International Labour 
Organization/WHO International Medical Guide for Ships and Quantification Addendum. 
 
d)  Seafarers designated to provide medical first aid or designated to take charge of medical care shall 
meet the standard of competence respectively specified in the applicable sections of the International 
Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watch  keeping, 1978, as amended, and as 
established by the Office of the Deputy Commissioner.  Marine Notice MLC -005, paragraph 3.1 also 
requires certain publications to be carried on board to assist  in providing medical care and obtaining 
medical advice. 
 
e) Liberian Maritime Law Section 336 and Marine Notice MLC -005, paragraph 3.1 and paragraph 3.2 
ensures that ship owners are liable to bear the costs for seafarers working on their ships in respect of 
health, medical protection, medical care , sickness and injury of the seafarers occurring between the 
date of commencing duty and the date upon which they are deemed duly repatriated, or arising from 
their employment between those dates. 
                           
13. On-board complaint procedures (Regulation 5.1.5)      
 
Liberian Maritime Law Section 359 a nd Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.359 provide for Conciliation, 
Mediation and Arbitration of labor dispute s, differences or grievances. On board complaint procedures is 
also contained in the publication on Familiarizati on, RLM-105A and Marine Notice MLC -006 (paragraph 
2.1) including the implementation of Guideline B5.1.5. 2(e) requiring that all complaints and the decisions 
on them shall be recorded and a copy provided to the seafarer concerned.   
   
14. Payment of wages (Regulation 2.2)                                   
 
a) Liberian Maritime Law Section 327 provides for Payment of Wages, as follows : “Commencement and 
Termination. - Wages shall commence on the day specified and agreed to in the Shipping Articles or at 
the time of presence on board the vessel for the purpose of commencing work, whichever first occurs, 
and shall terminate on the day of discharge or termination of the Articles ”.  Normal working hours’ 
standard for seafarers shall be based on an eight  (8) hour day with one day of rest per week and rest on 
public holidays.  Any applicable CBA may determine seafarers’ normal working hours on a basis no 
less favorable than this.  Hours worked in excess of the normal working hours shall be considered 
overtime.  The rate of compensation for ove rtime should not be less  than one-and one-quarter (1-1/4) 
times the basic wage per hour. 
 
b) Time of Payment. - In the absence of any agreement to the contrary the ship owner or the Master of the 
vessel shall pay to every sea farer his wages within two days after the termination of the Articles, or at 
the time when the sea farer is discharged, whichever is first. See also Marine Notice SEA -004 which, 
consistent with Marine Notice MLC -003, paragraph 3.2, provides for electronic transfer of wages and 
for proper accounting statement for the seafarer. 
 
c) Entitlement. - A se afarer is entitled to receive in local currency  or currency agreed to in the 
Employment Agreement, on demand, from the Master his wages actually earned less any valid 
deduction and payable at every intermediate port where the vessel shall load or deliver cargo before the 
voyage is ended, but not more than once in any fifteen -day period.  Seafarers shall be paid in full at no 
greater than monthly intervals in accordance with their employment agreements.  Seafarers shall be 
given a monthly account of the payment due and the amounts paid, including wages, any additional 
payments and the rate of exchange used, if applicable.  
   
d) Account. - Every Master shall deliver to the sea farer, before paying off, a full and true account of his 
wages and all deductions to be made there  from on any account whatsoever, and in default shall, for 
each offense, be liable to a penalty of not more than US$500. 
 
e) Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.320 (4)(2) provides that wages shall commence no later than on the 
day specified and agreed to in the Articles or at a time of presence on board for the purpose of 
commencing work, whichever first occurs, and shall terminate on the day of discharge.  
 
f) Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.327 incorporates Standard A2.2 (2) requiring monthly accounting of 
payments and calculation of overtime wages consistent with Guideline B2.2.2 .1(c) amplified by 
Marine Notice SEA-004. 
 
FR MLC-011-01  TID: Rev2—08/15/2024 
 
g) Liberian Maritime Law Section 331(2) provides that it shall be lawful for the Master and any sea farer 
to agree that an allotment of all or portion of the sea farer's earnings, at  regular intervals, may be 
payable to a spouse, children, grandchildren, parents, grandparents, brothers or sisters or person(s) 
nominated by the seafarer, or to a bank account in the name of the seafarer. 
 
15. Financial security for repatriation (Regulation 2.5) 
 
  a)  Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.342 requires each owner of a Liberian registered vessel to maintain at 
all times satisfactory third party liability insurance as described in Liberian Maritime Regulation 
2.66(2) and covering, inter alia, any default in meeting the owner’s repatriation obligations under 
Section 342 of the Liberian Maritime Law. Proof of valid insurance shall be provided annually to the 
Office of the Deputy Commissioner. 
   
b) Marine Notice MLC-003, paragraph 3.6.5 requires shipowners to maintain financial security to ensure 
that seafarers are duly repatriated in the event of their abandonment. The financial security shall 
provide direct access, sufficient coverage and expedited financial assistance to any abandoned seafarer.  
 
c) Ships shall carry on board a certificate or other documentary evidence of financial security issued by a 
financial security provider acceptable to the Administration. A copy shall be posted in a conspicuous 
place on board where it is available to seafarers. When more than one financial security provider 
provides cover, the document provided by each provider shall be carried on board.  
 
d) The certificate or other documentary evidence of financial security shall contain the information 
required in Appendix A2 -I of MLC, 2006 and the annex to Marine Notice MLC -003. It shall be in 
English or accompanied by an English translation. 
 
e) Marine Notice MLC -003, paragraph 3.6.5.5 requires that assistance provided by the financial security 
provider shall be granted promptly upon request made by the seafarer or the seafarers’ nominated 
representative and supported by the necessary justification of entitlement in accordance with paragraph 
3.6.5.1 of Marine Notice MLC -003. If time is needed to check the validity of certain aspects of the 
request of the seafarer or the seafarer’s nominated representative, this should not prevent the seafarer 
from immediately receiving such part of the assistance requested as is recognized as justified.  
 
f) Marine Notice MLC-003, paragraphs 3.6.5.6 and 3.6.5.7provide details on the assistance required to be 
covered and provided to a seafarer by the financial security provider. 
 
g) The financial security shall not cease before the end of the period of validity of the financial security 
unless the financial security provider has given prior notification of at least 30 days to the 
Administration. 
 
16.  Financial security relating to shipowners’ liability (Regulation 4.2)  
 
a) Liberian Maritime Law Section 336 provides for compensation  to seafarers and requires the 
shipowner or his representative to provide evidence of financial security to assure compensation to 
seafarers for long -term disability due to an occupational injury, illness or hazard in accordance with 
Liberian Regulations and Rules or pursuant to the provisions of a Collective Bargaining Agreement 
applicable to the seafarer.  
 
b) Liberian Maritime Law Section 336(A) provides for direct compensation to seafarers by the shipowner 
for loss of life pursuant to an actual mission assigned to the seafarer by, or by the authority of the 
Master. Additionally, and consistent with Regulation 4.2, paragraph 2 of MLC, 2006, Liberian 
Maritime Law Section 337 also provides for the seafarers’ personal representative to maintain a suit 
for damages, for the exclusive benefit of the deceased seafarers’ wife, husband, parent, child or 
dependent relative, against the vessel, person or corporation, which would have been liable if death had 
not ensued. 
 
c) Liberian Maritime Regulation 10.336(1) sets out the minimum amount of direct compensation for loss 
of life for each seafarer, regardless of the seafarers’ nationality, seniority or other circumstances. 
Marine Notice MLC -005, subparagraph 3.2.2. 1 requires that the contractual compensation, where set 
 
FR MLC-011-01  TID: Rev2—08/15/2024 
out in the seafarers’ employment agreement and without prejudice to subparagraph 3.2.2.4, shall be 
paid in full and without delay. 
 
d) Liberian Maritime Regulations 10.336(11) and 10.336(12) set out the shipowners’ obligation and 
describe the means by which a shipowner shall provide seafarers a benefit of direct compensation for 
loss of life and long-term disability due to occupational injury or illness or hazard. 
 
 
e) Marine Notice MLC -005, paragraph 3.2.2 requires the shipowner to provide the Office of the Deputy 
Commissioner with evidence of financial security to assure compensation in the event of the death or 
long-term disability of seafarers due to an occupational injury, illness or hazard. 
 
f) In accordance with Regulation 4.2, paragraph 2 of MLC, 2006, the seafarer shall receive payment 
without prejudice to other legal rights, but such payment may be offset by the shipowner against any 
damages resulting from any other claim made by the seafarer against the shipowner and arising from 
the same incident.  
 
g) Marine Notice MLC -005, subparagraph 3.2.2  requires that the seafarer shall not be pressurized into 
accepting a payment less than the contractual amount, subparagraph 3.2.2. 3 allows for an interim 
payment, where the nature of the long -term disability of the seafarer makes it difficult to assess the full 
compensation to which the seafarer may be entitled and subparagraph 3.2.2. 5 provides for the claim for 
contractual compensation to be brought directly by the seafarer concerned, of their next of kin, or a 
representative of the seafarer or designated beneficiary. 
 
h) Each ship shall carry on board a certificate or other documentary evidence of financial security issued 
by the financial security provider acceptable to the Administration. A copy shall be posted in a 
conspicuous place on board where it is available to the seafarers. Where more than one financial 
security provider provides cover, the document provided by each provider shall be carried on board.  
 
i) The certificate or other documentary evidence of financial security shall contain the information 
required in Appendix A4 -I of MLC,  2006 and the annex to Marine Notice MLC -005. It shall be in 
English or accompanied by an English translation. 
 
j) The financial security shall provide for the payment of all contractual claims covered by it which arise 
during the period for which the document is valid and it shall not cease before the end of the period of 
validity of the financial security, unless the financial security provider has given prior notification of at 
least 30 days to the Administration. 
 
k) Seafarers shall receive prior notification and the Office of the Deputy Commissioner shall be notified 
by the provider of the financial security, if a shipowner’s financial security is cancelled or terminated.  
 
l) Parties to the payment of a contractual claim may use the Model Receipt and Release Form set out in 
Appendix B4-I of MLC, 2006 and the annex to Marine Notice MLC-005. 
 
 
 
Name:  Margaret C. Ansumana                      
 
Title: Deputy Commissioner                          
 
 
Signature: ………………………………… 
 
Place: ........................................................ 
  
Date: …………………………………….          
              
                        (Seal or stamp of the authority,  
     as appropriate) 
 
 
FR MLC-011-01  TID: Rev2—08/15/2024 
 
Substantial equivalencies 
 
                  (Note: Strike out the statement which is not applicable) 
 
The following substantial equivalencies, as provided under Article VI, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Convention, 
except where stated above, are noted (insert description if applicable): 
 
___________________________________________________________________________________________  
 
___________________________________________________________________________________________  
 
 
 
 
No Equivalency has been granted. 
 
Name:  Margaret C. Ansumana    
  
Title:  Deputy Commissioner   
 
Signature: ………………………………….                          
 
Place: ………………………………………                    
 
Date: ……………………………………… 
                    
(Seal or stamp of the authority,  
as appropriate) 
 
 
     Exemptions 
 
         (Note: Strike out the statement which is not applicable) 
 
The following exemptions granted by the competent authority as provided in Title 3 of the Convention are noted:  
 
__________________________________________________________________________.  
 
__________________________________________________________________________.  
 
 
No Exemption has been granted. 
  
Name:  Margaret C. Ansumana    
 
Title:  Deputy Commissioner   
 
Signature: ………………………………                         
   
Place: …………………………………..                        
 
Date: ……………………………………    
                    
(Seal or stamp of the authority,  
as appropriate) 
 
 
 
 
THE REPUBLIC OF LIBERIA 
LIBERIA MARITIME AUTHORITY 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX II 
 
Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance – Part II 
 
Measures adopted to ensure ongoing compliance between inspections 
The following measures have been drawn up by the shipowner, named in the 
Maritime Labour Certificate to which this Declaration is attached, to ensure ongoing 
compliance between inspections: 
(State below the measures drawn up to ensure compliance with each of the items in Part I) 
1.  Minimum age (Regulation 1.1)        ❑ 
............................................................................................................................. .............................. 
 
 
2.  Medical certification (Regulation 1.2)       ❑ 
........................................................................................................................................................... 
 
 
3.  Qualifications of seafarers (Regulation 1.3)       ❑ 
........................................................................................................................................................... 
 
 
4.  Seafarers’ employment agreements (Regulation 2.1)     ❑ 
............................................................................................................................ .............................. 
 
 
5.  Use of any licensed or certified or regulated private recruitment 
and placement service (Regulation 1.4)       ❑ 
.......................................................................................................... ............................................... 
 
6.  Hours of work or rest (Regulation 2.3)       ❑ 
............................................................................................................................. ............................. 
 
 
7.  Manning levels for the ship (Regulation 2.7)      ❑ 
............................................................................................................................. ............................. 
 
 
8.  Accommodation (Regulation 3.1)        ❑ 
............................................................................................................................. ............................. 
 
9.  On-board recreational facilities (Regulation 3.1)      ❑ 
.......................................................................................................................................................... 
 
 
 
 
 
10.  Food and catering (Regulation 3.2)        ❑ 
.......................................................................................................................................................... 
 
11.  Health and safety and accident prevention (Regulation 4.3)     ❑ 
.................................................................................................................... ...................................... 
 
12.  On-board medical care (Regulation 4.1)      ❑ 
............................................................................................................................. ............................. 
 
13.  On-board complaint procedures (Regulation 5.1.5)      ❑ 
............................................................................................................................. ............................. 
14.  Payment of wages (Regulation 2.2)        ❑ 
.............................................................................................................................. ............................ 
 
15. Financial security for repatriation (Regulation 2.5)     ❑ 
.......................................................................................................................................................... 
 
16. Financial security relating to shipowners’ liability (Regulation 4.2)   ❑ 
.......................................................................................................................................................... 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I hereby certify that the above measures have been drawn up to ensure ongoing compliance, 
between inspections, with the requirements listed in Part I. 
 
Name of shipowner:1 ........................................ 
........................................................................... 
Company address: ............................................. 
........................................................................... 
Name of the authorized signatory: ................. 
........................................................................... 
Title: .................................................................. 
Signature of the authorized signatory: 
........................................................................... 
Date: .................................................................. 
(Stamp or seal of the shipowner1) 
The above measures have been reviewed by the Office of the Deputy Commissioner,  Liberia 
Maritime Authority , Republic of Liberia and, following inspection of the ship, have been 
determined as meeting the purposes set out under Standard A5.1.3, paragraph 10(b), regarding  
measures to ensure initial and ongoing compliance with the requirements set  out in Part I of this 
Declaration. 
Name: ................................................................. 
Title: ................................................................... 
Address: ............................................................. 
............................................................................. 
............................................................................. 
Signature: ........................................................... 
Place: .................................................................. 
Date: ................................................................... 
(Seal or stamp of the authority, as appropriate) 
_____________ 
1 Shipowner means the owner of the ship or another organization or person, such as the manager, agent or bareboat 
charterer, who has assumed the responsibility for the operation of the ship from the owner and who, on assuming such 
responsibility, has agreed to take over the duties and responsibilities imposed on shipowners in accordance with this Convention, 
regardless of whether any other organizations or persons fulfil certain of the duties or responsibilities on behalf of the shipowner. 
See Article II(1)(j) of the Convention. 
 or responsibilities on behalf of the shipowner. See Article II(1)(j) of the Convention. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
     
322-V1.  06/12 TID: 
 
THE REPUBLIC OF LIBERIA 
LIBERIA MARITIME AUTHORITY 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
     
 
           
 
 
ANNEX III 
 
Maritime Labour Certificate 
 
 (Note: This Certificate shall have a Declaration 
of Maritime Labour Compliance attached) 
 
Issued under the provisions of Article V and Title 5 of the 
Maritime Labour Convention, 2006 
(referred to below as “the Convention”) 
under the authority of the Government of 
 
The Republic of Liberia 
 
by the Office of the Deputy Commissioner, Liberia Maritime Authority 
 
 
Particulars of the ship 
 
Name of ship ........................................................................................................................... 
Distinctive number or letters ................................................................................................... 
Port of registry ......................................................................................................................... 
Date of registry ........................................................................................................................ 
Gross tonnage 1 ........................................................................................................................ 
IMO number ............................................................................................................................ 
Type of ship ............................................................................................................................. 
Name and address of the shipowner 2  ..................................................................................... 
.................................................................................................................................................. 
 
 
1 For ships covered by the tonnage measurement interim scheme adopted by the IMO, the gross ton-                        
nage is that which is included in the REMARKS column of the International Tonnage Certificate (1969). 
See Article II(1)(c) of the Convention. 
2 Shipowner means the owner of the ship or another organization or person, such as the manager, agent 
or bareboat charterer, who has assumed the responsibility for the operation of the ship from the owner and 
who, on assuming such responsibility, has agreed to take over the duties and responsibilities imposed on ship-                                               
owners in accordance with this Convention, regardless of whether any other organizations or persons fulfil certain 
of the duties or responsibilities on behalf of the shipowner. See Article II(1)(j) of the Convention. 
 
  
 
 
 
322-V1.  06/20  TID: 
 
This is to certify: 
1. That this ship has been inspected and verified to be in compliance with the 
requirements of the Convention, and the provisions of the attached Declaration of 
Maritime Labour Compliance. 
2. That the seafarers’ working and living conditions specified in Appendix A5-I 
of the Convention were found to correspond to the abovementioned country’s national 
requirements implementing the Convention. These national requirements are summariz-                          
ed in the Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance, Part I. 
This Certificate is valid until .................................... subject to inspections in acc-               
ordance with Standards A5.1.3 and A5.1.4 of the Convention. 
This Certificate is valid only when the Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance 
issued 
at ................................................................. on ................................................... is attached. 
Completion date of the inspection on which this Certificate is based was ............................. 
Issued at .................................................... on ........................................................................ 
Signature of the duly authorized official issuing the Certificate 
(Seal or stamp of issuing authority, as appropriate) 
 
 
 
 
Endorsements for mandatory intermediate inspection and, if required, 
any additional inspection 
This is to certify that the ship was inspected in accordance with Standards A5.1.3 
and A5.1.4 of the Convention and that the seafarers’ working and living conditions 
specified in Appendix A5-I of the Convention were found to correspond to the above-                
mentioned country’s national requirements implementing the Convention. 
 
Intermediate inspection:    Signed ........................................................ 
(to be completed between the second   (Signature of authorized official) 
and third anniversary dates) 
Place ........................................................... 
 
Date ............................................................ 
(Seal or stamp of the authority, 
as appropriate) 
 
Additional endorsements (if required) 
This is to certify that the ship was the subject of an additional inspection for the 
purpose of verifying that the ship continued to be in compliance with the national require-                 
ments implementing the Convention, as required by Standard A3.1, paragraph 3, 
of the Convention (re-registration or substantial alteration of accommodation) or for 
other reasons. 
 
      
 
322-V1.  06/20  TID: 
         
Additional inspection:     Signed .......................................................... 
(if required)      (Signature of authorized official) 
Place ............................................................. 
Date .............................................................. 
(Seal or stamp of the authority, 
as appropriate) 
 
 
Additional inspection:     Signed ........................................................... 
(if required)      (Signature of authorized official) 
Place ............................................................. 
Date ............................................................... 
(Seal or stamp of the authority, 
as appropriate) 
 
 
Additional inspection:     Signed ........................................................... 
(if required)      (Signature of authorized official) 
Place .............................................................. 
Date ............................................................... 
(Seal or stamp of the authority, 
as appropriate) 
 
Extension after renewal inspection (if required)  
This is to certify that, following a renewal inspection, the ship was found to continue to be in 
compliance with national laws and regulations or other measures implementing the requirements of the 
Convention, and that the present certificate is hereby extended, in accordance with paragraph 4 of 
Standard A5.1.3, until …………………………………… (not more than five months after the expiry date 
of the existing certificate) to allow for the new certificate to be issued to and made available on board the 
ship.  
Completion date of the renewal inspection on which this extension is based was: 
..............................................................................................................................................  
 
Signed: .................................................................. 
(Signature of authorized official) 
...............................................................................  
Place: ..................................................................... 
 Date: ...................................................................... 
 (Seal or stamp of the authority, as appropriate) 
 
 
 
    
     
322-V1.  06/12 TID: 
 
321-V1.  06/12    TID:  
 
 
THE REPUBLIC OF LIBERIA 
LIBERIA MARITIME AUTHORITY 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
ANNEX IV 
 
Interim Maritime Labour Certificate 
 
Issued under the provisions of Article V and Title 5 of the 
Maritime Labour Convention, 2006 
(referred to below as “the Convention”) 
under the authority of the Government of 
 
The Republic of Liberia 
 
by the Office of the Deputy Commissioner, Liberia Maritime Authority 
Particulars of the ship 
 
Name of ship ..................................................................................................................... 
Distinctive number or letters ............................................................................................ 
Port of registry .................................................................................................................. 
Date of registry ................................................................................................................. 
Gross tonnage 1 ................................................................................................................. 
IMO number ..................................................................................................................... 
Type of ship ...................................................................................................................... 
Name and address of the shipowner 2  .............................................................................. 
........................................................................................................................................... 
This is to certify, for the purposes of Standard A5.1.3, paragraph 7, of the Convention, 
that: 
(a)  this ship has been inspected, as far as reasonable and practicable, for the matters 
listed in Appendix A5-I to the Convention, taking into account verification of 
items under (b), (c) and (d) below; 
(b)  the shipowner has demonstrated to the competent authority or recognized organ-                   
ization that the ship has adequate procedures to comply with the Convention; 
(c)  the master is familiar with the requirements of the Convention and the responsi- 
bilities for implementation; and 
(d)  relevant information has been submitted to the competent authority or recog-                          
nized organization to produce a Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance. 
 
1 For ships covered by the tonnage measurement interim scheme adopted by the IMO, the gross ton-                        
nage is that which is included in the REMARKS column of the International Tonnage Certificate (1969). 
See Article II(1)(c) of the Convention. 
2 Shipowner means the owner of the ship or another organization or person, such as the manager, agent 
or bareboat charterer, who has assumed the responsibility for the operation of the ship from the owner and 
who, on assuming such responsibility, has agreed to take over the duties and responsibilities imposed on ship-                                               
owners in accordance with this Convention, regardless of whether any other organizations or persons fulfil certain 
of the duties or responsibilities on behalf of the shipowner. See Article II(1)(j) of the Convention. 
 
 
 
321-V1.  06/12    TID:  
 
 
This Certificate is valid until .................................... subject to inspections in accordance 
with Standards A5.1.3 and A5.1.4. 
 
Completion date of the inspection referred to under (a) above was ................................... 
 
Issued at ..................................................... on ................................................................... 
Signature of the duly authorized official 
Issuing the interim certificate ……………………………………………………………. 
(Seal or stamp of issuing authority, as appropriate) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
330-V2. 06/12 
 
THE REPUBLIC OF LIBERIA 
LIBERIA MARITIME AUTHORITY 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
ANNEX V 
 
Corrective Action Plan 
for Maritime Labour Inspection Deficiencies 
(To be used in the case of any serious deficiencies which represent a significant danger to the 
safety, health or security of seafarers or constitute a serious breach of the requirements of the 
Convention, including seafarers’ rights) 
 
 
Vessel Name: ___________________________  IMO #: _______________________ 
 
Inspection Date: ________________________ 
 
Please list the deficiency noted during the vessel’s Maritime Labour inspection and the 
corrective action planned. 
Submit the completed form to the Inspector and email a copy to MLC@liscr.com.  
 
                               
Deficiency Planned Corrective Action Date to be 
rectified 
Date  
rectified 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
330-V2. 06/12 
 
 
FR MLC-006-01 Rev2-02/2023  
 
THE REPUBLIC OF LIBERIA 
LIBERIA MARITIME AUTHORITY 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
ANNEX VI 
 
DECLARATION OF SHIPOWNERS’ REPRESENTATIVE WITH  
         MLC RESPONSIBILITIES 
         (including seafarer complaint resolution) 
  
 (To be filled out by the Shipowner 1) 
 
 Dates should be in the format dd/mm/yyyy 
Information 
1 Name of  Shipowner 1: Company IMO number: 
2 Name of MLC Representative: 
Address(es) of the MLC Representative: 
 
Phone: 
Fax: 
Mobil Phone: 
24 hour number: 
Email: 
 
The MLC Representative is responsible for all ships:  
YES / NO 
 If NO, the following ships: 
 3 Name of ship:  IMO Number:  
 Name of ship:  IMO Number:  
 Name of ship:  IMO Number:  
 Name of ship:  IMO Number:  
 Name of ship:  IMO Number:  
 Name of ship:  IMO Number:  
 Name of ship:  IMO Number:  
 Name of ship:  IMO Number:  
 
THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT this record is correct in all respects: 
 
Date of issue: ________________       Date of actual change: ________________________ 
 
 
1 Shipowner: The owner of the ship or another organization or person, such as the manager. Agent or bareboat charterer, who has 
assumed the responsibility for the operation of the ship from the owner and who, on assuming such responsibility, has agreed to 
take over the duties and responsibilities imposed on shipowners in accordance with MLC, 2006, regardless of whether any other 
organization or persons fulfill certain of the duties or responsibilities on behalf of the shipowner. 
    
Signature of authorized person: ________________________________________________________ 
Name of authorized person: ___________________________________________________________
_ 