  
 
  
 
 
  
  
ANNOUNCEMENTS  
 
 
  
HHS Releases New Voluntary Performance Goals to 
Enhance Cybersecurity Across the Health Sector 
and Gateway for Cybersecurity Resources  
  
  
 
 
  
  
TLP:WHITE  
 
  
Jan 30, 2024 
 
 
 
On January 24, 2024, the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services (HHS), through the Administration for Strategic 
Preparedness and Response (ASPR), released voluntary health care 
specific cybersecurity performance goals (CPGs) and a new  gateway 
website to help Health Care and Public Health (HPH) sector 
organizations implement these high-impact cybersecurity practices 
and ease access to the plethora of cybersecur ity resources HHS and 
other federal partners offer. 
 
As outlined in the recent HHS Health Care Sector Cybersecurity  
concept paper, HHS is publishing the CPGs to help healthcare 
organizations, and healthcare delivery organization s in particular, 
prioritize the implementation of high-impact cybersecurity practices. 
The HPH CPGs are designed to protect the healthcare sector from 
cyberattacks better, improve response when events occur, and 
minimize residual risk. HPH CPGs include both essential goals to 
outline minimum foundational practices for cybersecurity performance 
and enhanced goals to encourage the adoption of more advanced 
practices. 
 
The HPH CPGs provide layered protection at different points of 
weakness in an organization’s technology environment, which is 
crucial to increase cyber resilience and ultimately prote ct patient 
 

safety. Layered defense provides redundancy so if one line of 
defense is compromised, additional layers exist as a backup to 
ensure that threats are stopped along the way.   
 
Both the essential and enhanced goals were informed by common 
industry cybersecurity frameworks, best practices, and strategies 
(e.g., Health Industry Cybersecurity Practices, NIST Cybersecurity 
Framework, and the National Cybersecurity Strategy and 
Implementation Plan), and are designed to directly address common 
attack vectors against U.S. domestic hospitals as identified in the 
2023 Hospital Cyber Resiliency Landscape Analysis . As an example, 
according to the Landscape Analysis, 80% of cyber -attacks are 
identity-based (e.g., social engineering), compromising legitimate 
credentials to move laterally within organizations. Several essential 
CPGs, including implementing basic cybersecurity training, 
implementing email security measures, and revoking credentials for 
departing workforce members, are relatively lower -cost, high-yield 
actions to protect organizations from identity -based attacks. The 
more intensive enhanced goals like network segmentation prevent 
threat actors from moving laterally within organizations when they are 
compromised. 
 
More information on these CPGs and HHS’ cybersecurity work can 
be found here. 
 
  
 
  
Reference(s)  
 
HHS, HHS  
 
  
 
  
 
  
Release Date  
Jan 24, 2024 (UTC) 
 
Incident Date  
Jan 31, 2024 (UTC) 
 
  
Alert ID e8891935  
 
 
 
    
 
 
  
  
  
This Alert has 1 attachment(s). To view or download the attachment(s), click 
"View Alert" to login to the web portal. 
View Alert 
 
  
Tags ASPR, HHS 
 
 
TLP:WHITE Subject to standard copyright rules, TLP:WHITE 
information may be distributed without restriction.  
 
 
HHS 405(d)  
The 405(d) Program aims to develop consensus -based best 
practices and methodologies to strengthen the healthcare & public 
health (HPH) sector's cybersecurity posture against cyber threats. 
After significant analysis of the current cybersecurity issues facing t he 
healthcare industry, the 405(d) Task Group developed Health 
Industry Cybersecurity Practice: Managing Threat and Protecting 
Patients, its first official Task Group product. The 405(d) Program and 
Task Group actively continues to develop new products to help 
further strengthen our sector.  
 
 
For Questions and/or Comments   
Please email us at contact@h-isac.org 
 
 
Share Threat Intel  
For guidance on sharing indicators with Health-ISAC via CSAP, please visit the Knowledge 
Base article CSAP “Share Threat Intel” Documentation at the link address provided here: 
https://health-isac.cyware.com/webapp/user/knowledge-base Additionally, this collaborative 
medium provides opportunities for attributed or anonymous sharing across ISACs and other 
cybersecurity-related entities. 
 
 
Knowledge Base  
Check out our Knowledge Base for HITS integration documentation. https://health-
isac.cyware.com/webapp/user/knowledge-base/f4b0c136/ 
   
 
Download Health-ISAC’s Information Sharing App.  
 
    
    
 
 
  
For more updates and alerts, visit: https://health-isac.cyware.com/webapp/  
 
 
  
  
  
If you are not supposed to receive this email,  
please contact us at toc@h-isac.org.  
 
 
 
  
Powered by Cyware   
 
  
 
 
