The Cyberattack on Change Healthcare: Lessons for Financial Stability | Office of Financial Research Skip to main content FinancialResearch.gov Enter Search Term(s): Submit Toggle navigation Monitoring Tools Monitoring Tools Overview Bank Systemic Risk Monitor Financial Stress Index Hedge Fund Monitor Short-term Funding Monitor U.S. Money Market Fund Monitor Discontinued Discontinued Monitors Financial System Vulnerabilities Monitor Financial Markets Monitor G-SIB Scores Interactive Chart Data & Standards Data & Standards Overview Financial Instrument Reference Database (FIRD) Data Collections Legal Entity Identifier (LEI) Interagency Data Inventory LIBOR Alternatives News & Events News & Events Overview From the Director The OFR Blog Press Releases Congressional Testimony Public Appearances Conferences Inside the OFR About Us OFR Leadership Careers Financial Research Advisory Committee Policies Budget Strategy Grants Meet the Research Staff Partnerships Publications Publications Overview Briefs Reports Staff Discussion Papers Viewpoint Papers Working Papers Feedback Subscribe Get updates from the OFR: Sign up OFR Resources Legal Entity Identifier Tracker total LEIs issued View LEI Tracker OFR Developers' API OFR data are available for use in your own application Short Term Funding API Hedge Fund API Briefs The Cyberattack on Change Healthcare: Lessons for Financial Stability By Arthur Fliegelman and Daniel Stemp Published: November 13, 2024 Share on Facebook Share on Linked In View paper Cyberattacks are a growing threat to businesses that rely heavily on technology for their operations, like those in the U.S. financial system. Just a brief outage of key services could have wide-ranging effects. While the financial system’s cyber defenses have been strong to date, lessons learned from recent attacks in other sectors can inform improvements. This brief examines the cyberattack on Change Healthcare, a critical healthcare service provider, and draws lessons for how the U.S. financial system can better prepare for and reduce the risk of a similar attack (Brief no. 24-05). Back to Briefs × You are now leaving the OFR’s website. You will be redirected to: You are now leaving the OFR Website. The website associated with the link you have selected is located on another server and is not subject to Federal information quality, privacy, security, and related guidelines. To remain on the OFR Website, click 'Cancel'. To continue to the other website you selected, click 'Proceed'. The OFR does not endorse this other website, its sponsor, or any of the views, activities, products, or services offered on the website or by any advertiser on the website. Thank you for visiting www.financialresearch.gov. Cancel Proceed Was this page helpful? How can we make this page better? Thank you for your feedback! OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH U.S. Department of the Treasury 717 14th Street, NW Washington, DC 20220 Contact us Accessibility Careers FOIA Legal Notices No FEAR Act Privacy Plain Writing Office of Inspector General Report Fraud Waste and Abuse U.S. Department of the Treasury USA.gov Office of Financial Research