1 
 
         DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES            Office of the Secretary 
       
Director  
Office for Civil Rights 
Washington, D.C. 20201 
 
March 13, 2024 
Re: Cyberattack on Change Healthcare   
Dear Colleagues: 
The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) is aware that Change Healthcare, a unit of UnitedHealth Group 
(UHG), was impacted by a cybersecurity incident in late February that is disrupting health care 
and billing information systems nationwide. The incident poses a direct threat to critically needed 
patient care and essential operations of the health care industry.  
OCR administers and enforces the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 
(HIPAA) Privacy, Security, and Breach Notification Rules, which establish the minimum privacy 
and security requirements for  protected health information  and breach notification requirements 
that covered entities (health care providers, health plans, and clearinghouses) and their business 
associates must follow. We are committed to ensuring access to care while enforcing laws that 
bolster patient privacy and security. 
Given the unprecedented magnitude of this cyberattack, and in the best interest of patients and 
health care providers, OCR is initiating an investigation into this incident. OCR’s investigation of 
Change Healthcare and UHG will focus on whether a breach of protected health information 
occurred and Change Healthcare’s and UHG’s compliance with the HIPAA Rules.  
OCR’s interest in other entities that have partnered with Change Healthcare and UHG is secondary. 
While OCR is not prioritizing investigation s of health care providers, health plans , and business 
associates that were tied to or impacted by this attack, we are reminding entities that have partnered 
with Change Healthcare and UHG of their regulatory obligations and responsibilities , including 
ensuring that business associate agreements are in place and that timely breach notification to HHS 
and affected individuals occurs as required by the HIPAA Rules. 
Safeguarding protected health information is a top priority. OCR would also like to share the 
following resources to assist you in protecting your records systems and patients from 
cyberattacks: 
• OCR HIPAA Security Rule Guidance Material  – This webpage provides educational 
materials to learn more about the HIPAA Security Rule and other sources of standards for 
safeguarding electronic protected health information. Mate rials include a Recognized 
Security Practices Video, Security Rule Education Paper Series, HIPAA Security Rule 
Guidance, OCR Cybersecurity Newsletters, and more. 
2 
 
• OCR Video on How the HIPAA Secu rity Rule Protects Against Cyberattacks – This 
video discusses how the HIPAA Security Rule can help covered entities and business 
associates defend against cyberattacks. Topics include breach trends, common attack 
vectors, and findings from OCR investigations. 
• OCR Webinar on HIPAA Security Rule Risk Analysis Requirement  – This webinar 
discusses the HIPAA Security Rule requirements for conducting an accurate and thorough 
assessment of potential risks and vulnerabilities to electronic protect health information 
and reviews common risk analysis deficiencies OCR has identified in its investigations. 
• HHS Security Risk Assessment Tool – This tool is designed to assist small- to medium-
sized entities in conducting an internal security risk assessment to aid in meeting the 
security risk analysis requirements of the HIPAA Security Rule. 
• Factsheet: Ransomware and HIPAA  – This resource provides information on what is 
ransomware, what covered entities and business associates should do if their information 
systems are infected, and HIPAA breach reporting requirements. 
• Healthcare and Public Health (HPH) Cybersecurity Performance Goals – These 
voluntary, health care specific cybersecurity performance goals can help health care 
organizations strengthen cyber preparedness, improve cyber resiliency, and protect 
patient health information and safety. 
  
OCR is committed to helping health care entities understand health information regulations and to 
collaboratively working with entities to navigate the serious challenges we face together. OCR 
encourages all entities to review the cybersecurity measures they have in place with urgency to 
ensure that critically needed patient care can continue to be provided and that health information 
is protected.  
Sincerely, 
/s/ 
Melanie Fontes Rainer 
Director, Office for Civil Rights 
 
 