HHS Cyber Gateway | Home An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( 🔒 ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. About Us | Search | Contact Us menu Home HPH CPGs Knowledge on Demand Resource Library Recoursos de español Cyber Safety is Patient Safety HHS Cyber Gateway Home HPH CPGs Knowledge on Demand Five Threats Quick Shots Resource Library Toolkits Posters Publications Webinars SBARs Archive Recoursos de español About Us Search Contact Us Disclaimer Who We Are The increasing sophistication of cyber threats demands a united front from the HPH sector. As the Sector Risk Management Agency, we have launched The HHS Cyber Gateway in direct response to this imperative, providing a curated selection of resources tailored to meet the unique cybersecurity needs of healthcare organizations. By leveraging the collective expertise of federal agencies and collaborating with industry stakeholders, we believe this website will help empower HPH Sector members navigate the evolving threat landscape effectively. What We Do Through the HHS Cyber Gateway, you will have access to the latest information, dedicated HPH cybersecurity resources and tools to bolster your organization's cybersecurity defenses. Whether you are a small clinic or a large healthcare system, we are committed to supporting you in your efforts to safeguard patient data and ensure the integrity and availability of critical healthcare services How Can We Help You The HHS Cyber Gateway cornerstone publications provide your organizations with proven best practices to implement and use to mitigate the most prevalent and emerging cyber threats of today. We provide FREE cyber hygiene resources to educate small to large organizations on how to stay cyber aware and increase their cyber preparedness. Our vetted publications and supporting resources have one goal in mind, to keep patient safety a top priority - remember: “Cyber Safety is Patient Safety”! HPH CPGs Voluntary Healthcare and Public Health (HPH) Cybersecurity Performance Goals (CPGs) aligned with HICP and CISA to prioritize high-impact practices and protect patient safety. Publications Vetted cybersecurity best practices publications created by industry and government partnerships to strengthen the sector. Education Cyber hygiene learning for every level of your organization with multiple delivery methods. Healthcare Practitioner Cyber hygiene resources for the Healthcare Practitioner role to use or disseminate among staff. Cyber Posters Cyber hygiene posters and reminders for staff to help keep patients cyber safe. IT Professional Cyber resources tailored for IT Professionals to keep patients cyber safe. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) helps the Healthcare and Public Health (HPH) critical infrastructure sector prepare for and respond to cyber threats, adapt to the evolving threat landscape, and build a more resilient sector. As outlined in the HHS Healthcare Sector Cybersecurity concept paper, HHS is publishing these voluntary healthcare specific Cybersecurity Performance Goals (CPGs) to help healthcare organizations prioritize implementation of high-impact cybersecurity practices. Learn more about HPH CPGs HICP Main Document Whats New In HICP 2023 Hospital Resiliency Landscape Analysis HICP Technical Vol. 1 OCCI Checklist HHS Post (April 2024) HHS Post XXV (July 2024) HICP Technical Vol. 2 Knowledge on Demand KOD Overview Quick Shots: VPN Quick Shots: Botnet Quick Shots: Access Management Quick Shots: Encryption Quick Shots: Malware Five Threats Social Engineering Threat Training Ransomware Threat Training Loss or Theft of Equipment or Data Threat Training Insider, Accidental or Malicious Data Loss Threat Training Attacks Against Network Connected Medical Devices Threat Training Have You Heard - EHR Check your Cyber Pulse Have You Heard - Medical Devices Medical Practitioners Cyber Hygiene Poster Secure Your Inbox, Protect Your Patients Security Operation Center and Incident Response Identity and Access Management Protect Your Endpoints Cyber Hygiene Poster Ransomware Infection Poster How to Implement Data Classification Healthcare Threat Identification Poster! 2023 Cybersecurity Awareness Month Key Behaviors Healthy Cyber Habits Staying Cyber Safe Cyber Safety Zone Cybersecurity Checkup Teleworking Tips Cyber Hygiene Poster Check your Cyber Pulse How to Implement Data Security (Small Organizations) How to Implement Data Security (Medium Organizations) How to Implement Data Security (Large Organizations) How to Implement Patching (Small Organizations) How to: Cyber Workforce Development (for Small Organizations) How to Implement Cyber Insurance (for Medium-Large Healthcare Organizations) How to Implement Cyber Insurance (for Small Healthcare Organizations) Join Our Distro Want to stay up to date on the latest HPH cybersecurity resources, updates, and threat mitigation tactics? Join our mailing list for our Advisory Bulletins and weekly Healthcare and Public Health Sector Cybersecurity Newsletter. Join Our Mailing List send Follow us Home HPH CPGs Knowledge on Demand Five Threats Quick Shots Resources Toolkits Poster Publications Webinars SBARs Archive Recoursos de español Resumen de guías de recursos Carteles Recursos sobre amenazas cibernéticas About Us Contact Us Disclaimer Ver: 3.3.0