CISA, FBI, and HHS Release an Update to #StopRansomware Advisory on ALPHV Blackcat | CISA Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Staying Secure at Events no-cost Cyber Services Secure by design Secure Your Business Report A Cyber Issue Search Menu Close Topics Topics Cybersecurity Best Practices Cyber Threats and Response Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience Election Security Emergency Communications Industrial Control Systems Information and Communications Technology Supply Chain Security Partnerships and Collaboration Physical Security Risk Management How can we help? Government Educational Institutions Industry State, Local, Tribal, and Territorial Individuals and Families Small and Medium Businesses Find Help Locally Faith-Based Community Executives High-Risk Communities Spotlight Resources & Tools Resources & Tools All Resources & Tools Services Programs Resources Training Groups News & Events News & Events Directives News Events Cybersecurity Alerts & Advisories Request a CISA Speaker Congressional Testimony CISA Conferences CISA Live! Careers Careers Benefits & Perks Hiring and Recruitment New Employee Orientation & Onboarding Students & Recent Graduates Veteran and Military Spouses About About Divisions & Offices Regions Leadership Doing Business with CISA Site Links CISA GitHub CISA Central Contact Us Subscribe Transparency and Accountability Policies & Plans Staying Secure at Events no-cost Cyber Services Secure by design Secure Your Business Report A Cyber Issue Breadcrumb Home News & Events Cybersecurity Advisories Alert CISA, FBI, and HHS Release an Update to #StopRansomware Advisory on ALPHV Blackcat Share: Alert CISA, FBI, and HHS Release an Update to #StopRansomware Advisory on ALPHV Blackcat Release Date February 27, 2024 Today, CISA, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) released an update to the joint advisory #StopRansomware: ALPHV Blackcat to provide new indicators of compromise (IOCs) and tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs) associated with the ALPHV Blackcat ransomware as a service (RaaS). ALPHV Blackcat affiliates have been observed primarily targeting the healthcare sector. CISA, the FBI, and HHS urge network defenders to review the updated joint advisory to protect and detect against malicious activity. All organizations are encouraged to share information on incidents and anomalous activity to CISA’s 24/7 Operations Center at report@cisa.gov or via our Report page, and/or to the FBI via your local FBI field office or the FBI’s 24/7 CyWatch at (855) 292-3937 or CyWatch@fbi.gov . For more on ransomware, visit stopransomware.gov . This product is provided subject to this Notification and this Privacy & Use policy. Please share your thoughts We recently updated our anonymous product survey ; we welcome your feedback. Return to top Topics Spotlight Resources & Tools News & Events Careers About Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency Facebook X LinkedIn YouTube Instagram RSS CISA Central 1-844-Say-CISA contact@cisa.dhs.gov DHS Seal CISA.gov An official website of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security About CISA Budget and Performance DHS.gov FOIA Requests No FEAR Act Office of Inspector General Privacy Policy Subscribe The White House USA.gov Website Feedback