 
 
March 19, 2024 
 
The Honorable Jason Smith    The Honorable Richard Neal 
Chairman       Ranking Member 
Committee on Ways and Means    Committee on Ways and Means  
United States House of Representatives  United States House of Representatives 
Washington, DC 20515     Washington, DC 20515 
 
Dear Chairman Smith and Ranking Member Neal: 
 
On behalf of our nearly 5,000 member hospitals, health systems and other health care 
organizations, our clinician partners — including more than 270,000 affiliated 
physicians, 2 million nurses and other caregivers — and the 43,000 health care leaders 
who belong to our professional membership groups, the American Hospital Association 
(AHA) writes to you in advance of the March 20 hearing on the President’s Fiscal Year 
(FY) 2025 Health and Human Services (HHS) Budget to update you on the recent 
cyberattack on Change Healthcare and its impacts on hospitals, health systems and 
patients around the country, as well as to share concerns regarding the Administration’s 
proposal to penalize hospitals that don’t meet certain cybersecurity requirements.   
 
BACKGROUND ON THE CYBERATTACK 
 
On Feb. 21, Change Healthcare, a subsidiary of UnitedHealth Group, was the victim of 
the most significant and consequential cyberattack on the U.S. health care system in 
American history. Change Healthcare is the predominant source of more than 100 
critical functions that keep the health care system operating. Among them, Change 
Healthcare manages the clinical criteria used to authorize a substantial portion of 
patient care and coverage, processes billions of claims, supports clinical information 
exchange, and processes drug prescriptions. Significant portions of Change 
Healthcare’s functionality have been crippled. As a result, patients have struggled to get 
timely access to care and billions of dollars have stopped flowing to providers, thereby 
threatening the financial viability of hospitals, health systems, physician offices and 
other providers. 
 
IMPACT TO HOSPITALS, HEALTH SYSTEMS, COMMUNITIES AND PATIENTS 
 
According to Change Healthcare, the company processes 15 billion health care 
transactions annually and touches 1 in every 3 patient records. These transactions 
include a range of services that directly affect patient care, including eligibility 
The Honorable Jason Smith 
The Honorable Richard Neal 
March 19, 2024 
Page 2 of 6 
 
verifications and pharmacy operations, as well as claims transmittals and payment. This 
unprecedented attack against one of America’s largest health care companies has 
already imposed significant consequences on patients and the hospitals, health 
systems and other providers who care for them. In some communities, patients have 
struggled to obtain prescriptions or have faced delays in scheduling care or receiving 
and paying bills. In response to a recent AHA survey of hospitals with nearly 1,000 
responses, 74% reported direct patient care impact, including delays in authorizations 
for medically necessary care.1 In addition, hospitals, health systems and other providers 
are experiencing extraordinary reductions in cash flow, threatening their ability to make 
payroll and to acquire the medical supplies needed to provide care. In the same survey, 
94% of hospitals reported that the Change Healthcare cyberattack was impacting them 
financially, with more than half reporting the impact as “significant or serious.” Indeed, a 
third of the survey respondents indicated that the attack has disrupted more than half of 
their revenue. The urgency of this matter grows by the day. 
 
While the impact varies by hospital, Change Healthcare’s downed systems are 
hampering providers’ ability to verify patients’ health insurance coverage, process 
claims and receive payment from many payers, exchange clinical records with other 
providers, provide cost estimates and bill patients, and, in some instances, access the 
clinical guidelines used in clinical decision support tools and as part of the prior 
authorization process. The staggering loss of revenue means that some hospitals and 
health systems may be unable to pay salaries for clinicians and other members of the 
care team, acquire necessary medicines and supplies, and pay for mission critical 
contract work in areas such as physical security, dietary and environmental services. In 
addition, replacing previously electronic processes with manual processes has often 
proved ineffective and is adding considerable administrative costs on providers, as well 
as diverting team members from other tasks. Nearly all hospitals that responded to our 
survey have implemented one or more workarounds with varying degrees of success 
and at high cost. While 81% of survey respondents have found these workarounds to be 
“somewhat” effective, they are bearing considerable burden and cost to implement 
them. Two-thirds reported that switching clearinghouses was “difficult or very difficult,” 
and nearly half reported that the cost to their organization to implement workarounds 
was “significant or serious.” 
 
ACTION BY UNITEDHEALTH GROUP/OPTUM/CHANGE HEALTHCARE 
 
Since the AHA first learned of the attack, we have been in communication with 
UnitedHealth Group leadership to lend our support and share our members’ challenges 
because of the Change Healthcare outage.  
 
 
 
1 The AHA issued a survey to all U.S. hospitals on Friday, March 9, 2024. These results reflect responses 
representing 960 hospitals as of the morning of Tuesday, March 12, 2024.  
The Honorable Jason Smith 
The Honorable Richard Neal 
March 19, 2024 
Page 3 of 6 
 
We appreciate the information that UnitedHealth Group laid out early this month 
regarding an aspirational timeline of potential technical relief for this historic 
cyberattack on the U.S. health care system. However, nothing in the 
announcement materially changes the chronic cash flow implications and 
uncertainty that our nation’s hospitals and physicians are experiencing as a 
result. What’s more, even if UnitedHealth Group is able to restore Change Healthcare’s 
systems on its aspirational timeline, it has not indicated when third parties will be able to 
validate the security of those systems, making it difficult for certain providers to rely on 
those systems. Even after Change Healthcare’s technology is restored, it will be weeks 
— if not months — before hospitals and other health care providers will be made whole 
as the entire system — payers and providers — work through the backlog of previously 
unprocessed and rejected claims. 
 
All of this means that it will be a long time before hospitals and health systems can have 
the confidence that they will be paid for care they have already provided. Regrettably, 
UnitedHealth Group’s temporary loan programs are insufficient for meeting the needs of 
our members as they struggle to meet the financial demands of payroll, supplies and 
bond covenant requirements, among others. Our survey found that only 22% of 
respondents are participating in this program largely due to unexpectedly low amounts 
offered and one-sided terms. For example, 81% of respondents found that UnitedHealth 
Group’s loan program would have only offered them between 0%-10% of the revenue 
they are losing because of the Change Healthcare outage. It is therefore unsurprising 
that we have heard from hospitals that have taken out private loans to continue 
providing 24/7 care for their communities. 
 
While we will continue to work with UnitedHealth Group and other payers as this 
situation evolves to communicate the state of the field and ensure support for our 
members and the patients they serve, all options for assistance must be explored so 
that the health care field can continue to care for patients and communities. 
 
HOSPITALS NEED ASSISTANCE FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 
  
The Centers for Medicare & Medicare Services (CMS) March 9 issued a notice formally 
announcing terms for hospitals, physicians and other providers impacted by the Change 
Healthcare cyberattack to apply for accelerated and advance payments (AAPs). The 
agency stated that it would provide a maximum of a 30-day payment amount, with 
repayment in full required 90 days after the date that the AAP is issued. 
 
We appreciate that CMS and HHS continue to work with stakeholders to find solutions 
to the Change Healthcare disruption and ameliorate its impact on hospitals, health 
systems, physicians and other providers. However, we are concerned that this 
program is limited in its impact due to certain statutory constraints, including the 
repayment timeline and interest rate on AAPs. In addition, we still need to 
address what is likely to be a substantial problem on the backend: excessive 
The Honorable Jason Smith 
The Honorable Richard Neal 
March 19, 2024 
Page 4 of 6 
 
denials by payers of claims that either could not be filed timely or because the 
provider could not obtain the necessary authorization. In short, providers still 
need certainty that they will not face billions in denials for technical reasons 
beyond their control as a result of the Change Healthcare outage.  
 
The AHA welcomed the letter sent on March 10 to all providers from HHS and the 
Department of Labor recognizing the unprecedented nature of the Change Healthcare 
cyberattack and its far-reaching impacts on hospitals, physicians and the health care 
sector. We appreciated the letter asked for greater transparency from UnitedHealth 
Group and expedited payments to impacted providers so that they can continue timely 
care for patients. The departments also urged other commercial insurance companies 
and payers to make interim payments to providers, ease administrative burdens, and 
pause prior authorizations, requirements on timely billing and other utilization 
management requirements. It is critical that all payers help providers during this incident 
to ensure patient care is not compromised. 
 
The federal government does have statutory limitations to require private payers 
to take all the actions that may be needed, and Congress may need to take 
specific steps to ensure the health care system is not disrupted for patients. We 
will continue to work with Congress and policymakers as the impacts from the 
cyberattack persist. 
 
CYBERSECURITY IN THE PRESIDENT’S FY 2025 BUDGET 
 
The President’s budget proposes funding to assist hospitals in defending against 
cyberattacks. Funds would be provided first to approximately 2,000 hospitals 
determined to have the greatest need for assistance; in later years smaller amounts 
would benefit all hospitals to implement enhanced cybersecurity practices. However, the 
budget also recommends new penalties for not meeting what the Administration defines 
as essential cybersecurity practices. Beginning in FY 2029, the Administration proposes 
to enforce adoption of essential practices with hospitals failing to meet these standards 
facing penalties of up to 100% of the annual market basket increase and, beginning in 
FY 2031, potential additional penalties of up to 1% off the base payment. Critical access 
hospitals that fail to adopt the essential practices would incur a payment reduction of up 
to 1%, but their total penalty is capped.  
 
The primary source of cyber risk exposure facing the health care sector originates from 
vulnerabilities in third party technology and service providers, and not a hospital’s 
primary systems. A review of the top data breaches in 2023 shows that of over 95% of 
the most significant health sector data breaches, defined by those where over 1 million 
records were exposed, were related to “business associates” and other non-hospital 
health care entities, including CMS, which had a breach included in the top 20 largest 
data breaches last year.   
 
The Honorable Jason Smith 
The Honorable Richard Neal 
March 19, 2024 
Page 5 of 6 
 
Hospitals and health systems have invested billions of dollars and taken many steps to 
protect patients and defend their networks from cyberattacks that can disrupt patient 
care and erode privacy by the loss of personal health care data. The AHA has long 
been committed to helping hospitals and health systems with these efforts, working 
closely with our federal partners, including the FBI, HHS, Cybersecurity and 
Infrastructure Security Agency and many others to prevent and mitigate cyberattacks. 
The AHA supports voluntary consensus-based cybersecurity practices, such as those 
announced in January by HHS. These cybersecurity performance goals (CPGs) are 
targeted at defending against the most common tactics used by cyber adversaries to 
attack health care and related third parties, such as exploitation of known technical 
vulnerabilities, phishing emails and stolen credentials.  
 
As data theft and ransomware attacks targeting health care have increased dramatically 
over the past several years, the AHA has worked closely with federal agencies and the 
hospital field to build trusted relationships and channels for the mutual exchange of 
cyber threat information, risk mitigation practices and resources to implement these 
practices. 
 
The AHA was meaningfully involved in the development of the CPGs and will continue 
to work collaboratively with HHS and other federal partners to enhance cybersecurity 
efforts for the entire health care field, including hospitals and health systems, 
technology providers, and other vendors, to ensure we are protected against the 
primary source of cyber risk – criminal and nation state-supported cyber adversaries. 
 
The AHA cannot support proposals for mandatory cybersecurity requirements 
being levied on hospitals as if they were at fault for the success of hackers in 
perpetrating a crime. Many recent cyberattacks against hospitals and the health 
care system, including the current Change Healthcare cyberattack, have 
originated from third-party technology and other vendors. No organization, 
including federal agencies, is or can be immune from cyberattacks. Imposing 
fines or cutting Medicare payments would diminish hospital resources needed to 
combat cybercrime and would be counterproductive to our shared goal of 
preventing cyberattacks. The Administration’s budget proposal for hospitals is 
misguided, and it will not improve the overall cybersecurity posture of the health 
care sector.  
 
CONGRESSIONAL REQUEST 
 
The AHA continues to urge that Congress consider any statutory limitations that 
exist for an adequate response from CMS and HHS to help minimize further 
fallout from the Change Healthcare cyberattack. The Administration has limited 
tools available, particularly because, unlike with COVID-19, the government is not 
operating under a declared Public Health Emergency and National Emergency. 
While CMS has offered payments under the AAP, the agency only has authority to 
The Honorable Jason Smith 
The Honorable Richard Neal 
March 19, 2024 
Page 6 of 6 
 
do so for limited time periods and amounts and with very high interest rates after 
repayments are due.  
 
We also urge Congress to put forward policies that would alleviate administrative 
requirements imposed by payers, including Medicare Advantage and other 
commercial payers. Without relief from these payers in the form of waivers of 
prior authorization and timely filing requirements, not to mention additional 
advance payment, providers, including hospitals and health systems, will likely 
see significant denials of care as a result of the shutdown of Change Healthcare. 
 
We must resolve the crisis resulting from the cyberattack on Change Healthcare for the 
wellbeing of our patients and communities. We stand ready to work with you, Change 
Healthcare and its corporate ownership to minimize any further disruption to patient 
care as a result of this attack and to ensure hospitals and health systems have the 
resources they need to continue serving their patients and communities. Please contact 
me if you have questions, or feel free to have a member of your team contact AHA 
Executive Vice President Stacey Hughes at shughes@aha.org. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
/s/ 
 
Richard J. Pollack 
President and Chief Executive Officer  