 
 
1 
 
Testimony of Andrew Witty 
Chief Executive Officer, UnitedHealth Group 
Before the Senate Finance Committee 
“Hacking America’s Health Care: Assessing the Change Healthcare Cyber Attack and 
What’s Next” 
May 1, 2024 
 
 
Introduction  
Good morning, Chairman Wyden, Ranking Member Crapo and Members of the C ommittee. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify here today.  My name is Andrew Witty. I serve as chief 
executive officer of UnitedHealth Group, a health care and well-being company founded 50 years 
ago in Minnesota.  
 
Our mission is to help people live healthier lives and help make the health system work better for 
everyone. My colleagues include doctors, nurses, engineers, scientists – experts and caregivers 
in nearly every discipline of modern medicine.  
 
Together, we are working to help enable our  health system’s transition to value-based care and 
are empowering physicians and their care teams to deliver more personalized, high-quality care 
that delivers better outcomes at a lower cost.  
 
We pursue these objectives through our two distinct and complementary businesses , 
UnitedHealthcare and Optum.  
 
UnitedHealthcare provides a full range of health benefits , serving individuals, small businesses, 
large companies, labor unions, universities  and hospitals. More seniors cho ose our Medicare 
Advantage offerings, and more employers choose our benefits plans  than any other  company. 
And we partner with more than 30 states to serve individuals and families through Medicaid. 
 
Optum offers a full spectrum of  health services, bringing together clinical expertise, technology 
and data to advance integrated, patient-centered care; make clinical, administrative and financial 
processes simpler and more efficient; and connect patient care across the continuum, including 
pharmacy, medical and behavioral care.    
 
Change Healthcare is now part of Optum, and works across the health system to enabl e 
information, claims and payments  to flow quickly and  accurately between physicians, 
pharmacists, health plans and governments.   
 
Today’s Hearing 
I appreciate the Committee’s interest in the recent cyberattack on Change Healthcare. The 
cyberattack was unprecedented, as the criminals who perpetrated it caused incredible disruption 
across the health care system.  
 
From pharmacist s having to manually submit claims to the rural family medicine practice 
struggling to make payroll  – the impacts of an attack  by organized criminals, no matter how 
temporary, were real. 
 
 
 
2 
 
As a result of this malicious cyberattack, patients and providers have experienced disruptions and 
people are worried about their private health data. To all those impacted, let me be very clear: I 
am deeply sorry.   
 
From the moment I learned of the intrusion , I felt a profound sense of responsibility to do 
everything we could to preserve access to care and support our customers and clients . Our 
response and reaction to this attack has been grounded in three principles: to secure the systems; 
to ensure patient access to care and medication; and to assist providers with their financial needs.  
 
We have been working 24/7 from the day of the incident and have deployed the full resources of 
UnitedHealth Group on all aspects of our response and restoration efforts. I want this Committee 
and the American public to know that the people of UnitedHealth Group will not rest –  I will not 
rest – until we fix this.  
 
We know there is more to be done, and we appreciate the ongoing efforts of our customers, 
employees and government  partners – especially CMS and HHS –  who have offered great 
support as we continue these efforts together.   
 
Cyberattacks continue to increase in frequency and significance, with one analysis calculating 
that in 2023, cybercriminals collected an all-time high of over $1 billion in ransom.
1 Our company 
alone repels an attempted intrusion every 70 seconds – thwarting more than 450,000 intrusions 
per year.  These criminals continue to adapt and develop more sophisticated and malicious 
methodologies, and they have increasingly targeted critical infrastructure, including schools, 
government agencies and the health care sector. These adversaries are willing to attack 
everything from community hospitals to pharmacies to networks like ours t hat enable the 
information exchange necessary to provide care.  
 
I would not wish a cyberattack on any one. That is one reason why, as chief executive officer of 
UnitedHealth Group, I have strongly committed our organization to work with law enforcement, 
policy makers and industry participants to help prepare for and recover from the impact of  the 
hundreds of other attacks that continue to be perpetrated across so many facets of America’s 
critical infrastructure each year, and to collectively strengthen our cybersecurity resiliency to these 
evolving threats.   
 
The Ransomware Attack 
On the morning of February 21, a cybercriminal calling themselves ALPHV or BlackCat deployed 
a ransomware attack inside Change Healthcare’s information technology environments , 
encrypting Change’s systems so we could not access them. 
 
Our response was sw ift and forceful. Not knowing the entry point of the attack  at the time , we 
immediately severed connectivity with Change’s data centers to eliminate the potential for further 
infection. While shutting down many Change environments was extremely disruptive, it was the 
right thing to do. 
 
We secured the perimeter of the attack and prevented malware from spreading beyond Change 
to the broader health system.  
 
 
1 Chainalysis, The 2024 Crypto Crime Report, at 11 (Feb. 2024), https://bit.ly/49TCvQ5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
It worked. There has never been any evidence of spread beyond Change – not to any external 
environment and not to Optum, UnitedHealthcare or UnitedHealth Group. 
 
Within hours of  the ransomware launch, we contacted the FBI  and remain in  regular 
communication. We shared critical information, including details about the intrusion, the method 
of attack, Indicators of Compromise (IOC) and other information that would as sist in their 
investigation. We are grateful for the FBI’s work on this matter and the support they have provided, 
and we will continue to share information that will enable law enforcement to pursue, capture and 
bring these criminals to justice. 
 
We are working tirelessly to uncover and understand every detail we can , which we will use to 
make our cyber defenses stronger than ever. We are committed to sharing accurate answers 
safely, appropriately and responsibly.  
Cyber experts continue to investigate the incident. While we will learn more and our understanding 
may change, here’s what I can share today. On February 12 , criminals used compromised 
credentials to remotely access a Change Healthcare Citrix portal, an application used to enable 
remote access to desktops. The portal did not have multi -factor authentication. Once the threat 
actor gained access, they moved laterally within the systems i n more sophisticated ways  and 
exfiltrated data. Ransomware was deployed nine days later. 
As we have addressed the many challenges in responding to this attack , including dealing with 
the demand for ransom, I have been guided by the overriding priority to do everything possible to 
protect peoples’ personal health information.  
 
As chief executive officer, the decision to pay a ransom was mine. This was one of the hardest 
decisions I’ve ever had to make. And I wouldn’t wish it on anyone.  
 
Protecting Patient Data 
As we continue  our investigative efforts, we are also working to understand the full scope of 
impacted patient, provider and payer information. As we have previously confirmed,  based on 
initial targeted data sampling to date, we found files containing protected health information (PHI) 
and personally identifiable information (PII), which could cover a substantial proportion of people 
in America. So far, we have not seen evidence of exfiltration of materials such as doctors’ charts 
or full medical histories among the data. 
  
Given the ongoing nature and complexity of the data review, it is likely to take several months of 
continued analysis before enough information will be available to identify and notify impacted 
customers and individuals, partly because the files containing that data were compromised in the 
cyberattack. Our teams, along with leading external industry experts, continue to monitor the 
internet and dark web to determine if data has been published. 
 
We will, of course, comply with legal requirements and provide notice to affected individuals, and 
have offered to our customers and clients to provide notice on their behalf where it is  permitted. 
We are working closely with HHS’s Office of Civil Rights to make sure our notice is effective, 
useful and complies with the law.  
 
 
 
4 
 
Rather than waiting to complete this  review, we are providing free credit monitoring and identity 
theft protections for two years, along with a dedicated call center staffed by clinicians to provide 
support services.  Anyone concerned their data may have been impacted should visit 
changecybersupport.com for more information.  
 
Our Response and Restoration Progress 
We continue to make s ubstantial progress in restoring Change Healthcare’s impacted services, 
guided first and foremost by our commitment to protect personal information and the three 
principles I spoke  of earlier: to secure the systems; to ensure patient access to care  and 
medication; and to assist providers with their financial needs.  
 
1. Securing the Systems and Restoring them Safely 
 
As I noted, we promptly severed connectivity to the Change environments and established a 
perimeter, thereby quarantining the threat and preventing further damage. 
 
By the afternoon of February 21, experts from Google, Microsoft, Cisco, Amazon and others were 
enroute to Change’s Nashville Central Command Operations Center, where they joined security 
teams from Mandiant and Palo Alto Networks. We are exceedingly grateful for their support.  
 
Together with our Change Healthcare colleagues, they immediately began the around-the-clock 
and enormously complex task of safely and securely rebuilding Change Healthcare’s technology 
infrastructure from the ground up. The team replaced thousands of laptops, rotated credentials, 
rebuilt Change Healthcare’s data center network and core services, and added new server 
capacity. The team delivered a new technology environment in just weeks – an undertaking that 
would have taken many months under normal circumstances.   
 
2. Ensuring Patients’ Access to Needed Care 
 
We have prioritized our restoration efforts on systems and networks that are most critical to 
access to care: pharmacy, provider payments and claims.  
 
Pharmacy Services : So that we could ensure , as much as possible,  continued access to 
medication, we immediately prioritized restoring our pharmacy networks to be certain that patients 
could get the prescriptions they needed. By March 7, 99% of pre-incident pharmacies were able 
to process claims, and today, it is just a fraction of a percent below normal service levels. 
 
Medical Claims: Medical claims across the health system are now flowing at near normal levels 
as systems come back online or providers switch to other methods of submission. We realize 
there are a small number of providers who continue to be adversel y impacted. We are working 
with them to find alternative submission solutions and will continue to provide them with financial 
support as needed. 
 
Payments: Payment processing by Change Healthcare, which represents about 6% of all 
payments, is at approximately 86% of pre -incident levels and is  increasing as additional 
functionality is restored. 
 
 
 
5 
 
3. Payer and Provider Support 
 
In the days after the ransomware attack, we worked quickly to find alternative channels or 
workarounds for payers and providers within the networks facilitating the near -instant 
transmission of information across the health system so that transactions could flow. This involved 
pushing volume to Change Healthcare’s competitors to allow the system to regain functionality as 
quickly as possible, and we are grateful for their assistance.  
 
We also immediately recognized that many providers would be affected by the disruption in claims 
and payments flows, so we worked quickly to get funds into the hands of providers who need it. 
  
To this end, UnitedHealthcare accelerated more than a billion dollars in claims payments to 
immediately infuse providers with liquidity. 
 
For claims not covered by UnitedHealthcare, we set up a Temporary Funding Assistance Program 
offering no-cost, no-interest loans to any provider who needed it. We  harnessed the strength of 
our nationwide payments network – the same network we used in 2020, during the pandemic –  
to disburse billions of dollars in a matter of days  of federal CARES Act funding to providers on 
behalf of HHS.  
 
As of last Friday, April 26, UnitedHealth Group has advanced more than $6.5 billion in accelerated 
payments and no-interest, no-fee loans to thousands of providers. About 34% of these loans have 
gone to safety net hospitals and federally qualified health centers that serve many of the patients 
and communities at the highest risk.  While some of our early estimates of providers’ potential 
gaps did not address their full need given our lack of visibi lity into their claims flow, we quickly 
adjusted. 
 
We are committed to providing this financial assistance for providers for as long as it takes to get 
their claims and payments flowing at pre-incident levels. If there are providers or payers in your 
states who need help, please put us in touch with them. We pledge to do everything in our power 
to fix their system or underwrite their cashflow, simple as that. 
 
Policy Solutions 
The Change Healthcare attack demonstrates the growing need to fortify cybers ecurity in health 
care. I look forward to working with policymakers and other stakeholders to bring our experience 
to bear in helping develop strong, practical solutions.   
 
We support mandatory minimum security standards – developed collaboratively by the 
government and private sector  – for the health care industry . Importantly, these efforts must 
include funding and training for institutions that need help in making that transition, such as 
hospitals in rural communities.   
 
We also support efforts to strengthen our national cybersecurit y infrastructure, including greater 
notification to law enforcement and standardized and nationalized cybersecurity event reporting.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Conclusion  
In closing, I want to say again to all those impacted, I am deeply sorry. 
 
I also want to express my sincerest thanks to  our customers, who along with  so many of our  
colleagues stepped up to help our health system continue to serve all who depend on it  during 
this difficult time. And I would like to extend my appreciation to our partners in government and in 
the private sector for the tremendous assistance they have provided throughout.  
 
Fighting cybercrime is an enormous task and one that requires us all – industry, law enforcement 
and policymakers – to come together. 
 
I look forward to answering your questions today  and to sharing our learnings so that everyone 
can better protect themselves from future attacks. 
 
 
 
### 