S T A T U T O R Y  I N S T R U M E N T S  
2014 No. 1613 
MERCHANT SHIPPING 
The Merchant Shipping (Maritime Labour Convention) 
(Minimum Requirements for Seafarers etc.) Regulations 2014 
Made - - - - 9th July 2014 
Laid before Parliament 15th July 2014 
Coming into force - - 7th August 2014 
CONTENTS 
PART 1 
General matters 
 
1. Citation and commencement 
2. Interpretation 
3. Application 
 
PART 2 
Minimum age 
 
4. Seafarer to be of minimum age 
5. Young persons on night duty 
6. Part 2 requirements for non-United Kingdom ships  with MLC documentation 
7. Meaning of “employer” etc. 
 
PART 3 
Recruitment and placement 
 
8. Duty on shipowner in respect of recruitment and placement services 
 
PART 4 
Seafarers’ employment agreements 
 
9. Duty to enter into seafarer employment agreement  
10. Content of seafarer employment agreement 
11. Minimum notice period 
12. Documents 
13. Foreign language seafarer employment agreement 
14. Duty of master to produce seafarer employment a greement 
 2 
15. Part 4 requirements for non-United Kingdom ship s with MLC documentation 
 
PART 5 
Wages 
 
16. Late payment of wages etc. 
17. Account of seafarer’s wages etc. 
18. Part 5 requirements for non-United Kingdom ship s with MLC documentation 
 
PART 6 
Repatriation 
 
19. Duty to repatriate seafarers 
20. Place for return. 
21. Scope of duty to repatriate 
22. Duty pending repatriation 
23. Prohibition on recovering costs from seafarer 
24. Seafarer property 
25. Duty to carry documents 
26. Financial security requirement applicable to al l ships 
27. Secretary of State functions in the event of sh ipowner default 
28. Part 6 requirements for non-United Kingdom ship s with MLC documentation 
 
PART 7 
Crew accommodation 
 
29. Crew accommodation requirements 
30. Provision for certain older ships 
31. Exemptions 
32. Approvals to allow substantial equivalences 
33. Part 7 requirements for non-United Kingdom ship s with MLC documentation 
 
PART 8 
Food and catering 
 
34. Provision of food and drinking water 
35. Organisation and equipment of the catering depa rtment 
36. Inspection of food and catering facilities 
37. Requirement to carry a qualified ship’s cook 
38. Certificate of competency as a ship’s cook 
39. Recognition of existing certificates of compete ncy 
40. Training requirements for catering staff and ot her persons processing food in the 
galley 
41. Part 8 requirements for non-United Kingdom ship s with MLC documentation 
42. Interpretation of Part 8 
 
PART 9 
Medical care 
 
43. Shipowner duty to make provision for seafarer m edical and other expenses 
 3 
44. Duty to carry a medical practitioner on ship 
45. Right to medical attention 
46. Part 9 requirements for non-United Kingdom ship s with MLC documentation 
47. Interpretation of Part 9 
 
PART 10 
Shipowners’ liability 
 
48. Shipowners’ liability for seafarer unemployment  and losses following loss or 
foundering of ship 
49. Financial security requirement applicable to al l ships 
50. Shipowners’ liability for wages following sickn ess or injury sustained by seafarer 
51. Property left behind by sick or injured seafare r 
52. Shipowners’ liability in respect of burial or c remation of seafarer 
53. Interpretation of Part 10 
 
PART 11 
Inspection and detention of ships 
 
54. Inspection of United Kingdom ships and non-Unit ed Kingdom ships without MLC 
documentation 
55. Inspection of non-United Kingdom ships with MLC  documentation 
56. Detention of ships 
57. Failure to repatriate - detention of non-United  Kingdom ships with MLC 
documentation at request of foreign State 
58. Supplementary provisions as respects detention of ships 
 
PART 12 
Offences and penalties 
 
59. Penalties 
60. Defence 
 
PART 13 
Review 
 
61. Review 
 
 SCHEDULE 1 — Provision to be included in a Seafare r Employment Agreement 
 PART 1 — Provision to be included in all agreement s 
 PART 2 — Provision to be included where seafarer i s an employee 
 PART 3 — Provision to be included where seafarer i s not an employee 
 SCHEDULE 2 — Provision to be included in a written  record of work on a ship 
 4 
The Secretary of State is a Minister designated for  the purposes of section 2(2) of the European 
Communities Act 1972( a) in relation to measures relating to the safety of ships and the health and 
safety of persons on them( b) and in relation to measures relating to maritime transport( c). 
The Secretary of State makes the following Regulati ons in exercise of the powers conferred by 
section 85(1)(a) and (b), (3) and (5) to (7) and se ction 86(1) and (2) of the Merchant Shipping Act 
1995( d) and by section 2(2) of the European Communities Act 1972. 
In accordance with section 86(4) of the Merchant Sh ipping Act 1995 the Secretary of State has 
consulted the persons referred to in that section. 
PART 1 
General matters 
Citation and commencement 
1. —(1) These Regulations may be cited as the Merchant  Shipping (Maritime Labour 
Convention) (Minimum Requirements for Seafarers etc.) Regulations 2014. 
(2)  These Regulations come into force on 7th August 2014. 
Interpretation 
2. —(1) In these Regulations— 
“the Act” means the Merchant Shipping Act 1995( e); 
“Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance” means, in relation to a ship, the Part 1 and Part 
2 documents drawn up and issued in accordance with the MLC, in the forms corresponding to 
the relevant models given in Appendix A5-II of the MLC and having the contents, duration 
and validity specified in Regulation 5.1.3 and Standard A5.1.3 of the MLC; 
“employee” means an individual who is employed under a contract of employment; 
“fishing vessel” has the meaning given in section 313(1) of the Act; 
“Maritime Labour Certificate” and “interim Maritime Labour Certificate” mean, in relation to 
a ship, a certificate of that name issued in accord ance with the MLC, in a form corresponding 
to the relevant model given in Appendix A5-II of th e MLC and having the contents, duration 
and validity specified in Regulation 5.1.3 and Standard A5.1.3 of the MLC; 
“the MCA” means the Maritime and Coastguard Agency,  an executive agency of the 
Department for Transport; 
“the MLC” means the Maritime Labour Convention, whi ch was adopted on 23rd February 
2006 by the General Conference of the International Labour Organization(f); 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 1972 c.68. Section 2(2) was amended by section 27  of the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006 (c.51) and by 
section 3 of, and Part I of the Schedule to, the Eu ropean Union (Amendment) Act 2008 (c.7). The Mariti me Labour 
Convention is regarded as one of the EU treaties within the meaning of section 1(2) of the European Communities Act 1972 
by virtue of the European Communities (Definition of Treaties) (Maritime Labour Convention) Order 2009 (S.I. 2009/1757, 
as amended by S.I. 2011/1043).   
(b) S.I. 1993/595. 
(c) S.I. 1994/757. 
(d) 1995 c. 21. Sections 85 and 86 were amended by se ction 8 of  the Merchant Shipping and Maritime Secu rity Act 1997 
(c.28), and are applied to hovercraft by article 4 of the Hovercraft (Application of Enactments) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989/1350) 
(sections 85 and 86 re-enact sections 21 and 22 of the Merchant Shipping Act 1979 (c.39), to which tha t article refers). 
There are other amendments which are not relevant to these Regulations. 
(e) 1995 c.21. 
(f) Cm 7049. 
 5 
“Merchant Shipping Notice” means a notice described  as such and issued by the MCA, and 
any reference to a particular Merchant Shipping Not ice includes a reference to a Merchant 
Shipping Notice amending or replacing that Notice w hich is considered by the Secretary of 
State to be relevant from time to time; 
“pleasure vessel” means— 
(a)  any vessel which at the time it is being used is— 
 (i) (aa) in the case of a vessel wholly owned by a n individual or individuals, used 
only for the sport or pleasure of the owner or the immediate family or friends 
of the owner; or 
(bb)  in the case of a vessel owned by a body corporate, used only for sport or 
pleasure and on which the persons on board are empl oyees or officers of the 
body corporate, or their immediate family or friends; and 
(ii)  on a voyage or excursion which is one for which the  owner does not receive money 
for or in connection with operating the vessel or c arrying any person, other than as a 
contribution to the direct expenses of the operatio n of the vessel incurred during the 
voyage or excursion; or 
(b)  any vessel wholly owned by or on behalf of a member s’ club formed for the purpose of 
sport or pleasure which, at the time it is being us ed, is used only for the sport or pleasure 
of members of that club or their immediate family, and for the use of which any charges 
levied are paid into club funds and applied for the general use of the club, 
where, in the case of any vessel referred to in par agraphs (a) or (b), no other payments are 
made by or on behalf of users of the vessel, other than by the owner; and in this definition 
“immediate family” means, in relation to an individ ual, the spouse or civil partner of the 
individual, and a relative of the individual or the  individual’s spouse or civil partner; and 
“relative” means brother, sister, ancestor or lineal descendant; 
“proper officer” has the meaning given in section 313(1) of the Act; 
“relevant inspector” means any of the persons mentioned in section 258(1) of the Act; 
“seafarer” means any person, including the master o f a ship, who is employed or engaged or 
works in any capacity on board a ship and whose normal place of work is on board a ship; 
“seafarer employment agreement” means a written agr eement between a seafarer and another 
person in respect of the seafarer’s work on board a ship; 
“sea-going” in relation to a United Kingdom ship means— 
(a)  a ship which operates outside the waters specified as Category A, B, C and D waters in 
Merchant Shipping Notice 1837(M)( a); 
(b)  a ship to which the Merchant Shipping (Survey and C ertification) Regulations 1995( b) 
apply and in respect of which no exemption granted under regulation 2(2) of those 
Regulations applies; 
(c)  a ship to which regulation 4 of the Merchant Shippi ng (Vessels in Commercial Use for 
Sport or Pleasure) Regulations 1998( c) applies and which falls within the description 
given in paragraph (3) of that regulation; or 
(d)  a high speed craft in respect of which a permit to operate outside waters of Categories A, 
B, C or D has been issued in accordance with regula tion 8 of the Merchant Shipping 
(High Speed Craft) Regulations 2004( d); 
“ship” includes hovercraft; 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) Merchant Shipping Notice 1837(M) specifies which waters are Category A, B, C and D waters for the pu rposes of 
regulation 3(2)(a) of S.I. 1992/2356, as the notice which currently supersedes Merchant Shipping Notice M1504 pursuant to 
regulation 2 of those Regulations. 
(b) S.I. 1995/1210, amended by S.I. 2004/302, S.I. 20 05/2114 and S.I. 2010/1075; there are other amendin g instruments but 
none is relevant. 
(c) S.I. 1998/2771, amended by S.I. 2002/1473; there is another amending instrument which is not relevant.  
(d) S.I. 2004/302, amended by S.I. 2012/2636; there a re other amending instruments but none is relevant. 
 6 
“shipowner” means— 
(a)  in relation to a ship which has a valid Maritime La bour Certificate or interim Maritime 
Labour Certificate, the person identified as the shipowner on that Certificate; 
(b)  in relation to any other ship, the owner of the shi p or, if different, any other organisation 
or person such as the manager, or the bareboat char terer, that has assumed the 
responsibility for the operation of the ship from the owner; 
“United Kingdom ship” means a ship which is— 
(a)  a United Kingdom ship within the meaning of section 85(2) of the Act; 
(b)  a Government ship within the meaning of section 308 (4) of the Act which is ordinarily 
engaged in commercial maritime operations; or 
(c)  a hovercraft registered under the Hovercraft Act 1968( a); and 
“United Kingdom waters” has the meaning given in section 313(2) of the Act. 
(2)  In the application of these Regulations to a hoverc raft, a reference to the master of a ship 
includes a reference to the captain of that hovercraft. 
Application 
3. —(1) Subject to paragraph (5) and regulations 37(1)  and 44(2), the provisions specified in 
paragraph (2) apply to— 
(a)  a sea-going United Kingdom ship wherever it may be; and 
(b)  a sea-going ship which is not a United Kingdom ship , while that ship is in United 
Kingdom waters, if— 
(i)  the MLC has not come into force for the State whose  flag the ship is entitled to fly; 
or 
(ii)  the MLC has come into force for the State whose fla g the ship is entitled to fly, but 
the ship does not carry— 
(aa)  a Maritime Labour Certificate to which a Declaratio n of Maritime Labour 
Compliance is attached; or 
(bb)  an interim Maritime Labour Certificate. 
(2)  The provisions referred to in paragraph (1) are as follows— 
(a)  all of the provisions in Parts 2 to 10, other than those referred to in sub-paragraph (4)(b); 
and 
(b)  all of the provisions in Part 11, other than regulations 55 and 57. 
(3)  Subject to paragraph (5) and regulation 46(4), the provisions specified in paragraph (4) apply 
to a sea-going ship which is not a United Kingdom s hip, while that ship is in United Kingdom 
waters, if— 
(a)  the MLC has come into force for the State whose flag the ship is entitled to fly; and 
(b)  the ship carries— 
(i)  a Maritime Labour Certificate to which a Declaratio n of Maritime Labour 
Compliance is attached; or 
(ii)  an interim Maritime Labour Certificate. 
(4)  The provisions referred to in paragraph (3) are as follows— 
(a)  regulations 26 and 49 and all of the provisions in Parts 3 and 11 (other than regulation 
54); and 
(b)  the following provisions— 
(i)  regulation 6; 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 1968 c.59. 
 7 
(ii)  regulation 15; 
(iii)  regulation 18; 
(iv)  regulation 28; 
(v)  regulation 33; 
(vi)  regulation 41; and 
(vii)  regulation 46. 
(5)  These Regulations do not apply to— 
(a)  pleasure vessels; 
(b)  fishing vessels; 
(c)  ships of traditional build; 
(d)  warships or naval auxiliaries; or  
(e)  vessels which are not ordinarily engaged in commercial activities. 
PART 2 
Minimum age 
Seafarer to be of minimum age 
4. —(1) A person under 16 years of age must not be employed, engaged or work on board a ship. 
(2)  A breach of paragraph (1) is an offence by the ship owner, the master of the ship and the 
employer of the person under the age of 16. 
Young persons on night duty 
5. —(1) Subject to paragraph (2), a seafarer under 18 years of age must not be employed, 
engaged or work on board a ship at night. 
(2)  Paragraph (1) does not apply where— 
(a)  the effective training of the seafarer, in accordan ce with established programmes and 
schedules, would be impaired by its application; or 
(b)  the specific nature of the duty or of a recognised training programme requires that the 
seafarer performs duties at night and the work to b e carried out is specified in Merchant 
Shipping Notice 1838(M) as not being detrimental to  the health and well-being of 
seafarers under the age of 18. 
(3)  In this regulation, “night” means a period— 
(a)  the duration of which is not less than nine consecutive hours; and 
(b)  which starts no later than midnight and ends no earlier than 5 a.m. (local time). 
(4)  A breach of paragraph (1) is an offence by the ship owner, the master of the ship and the 
employer of the person under the age of 18. 
Part 2 requirements for non-United Kingdom ships with MLC documentation 
6. —(1) A ship must not be operated in breach of the p rohibitions in paragraphs 1 and 2 of 
Standard A1.1 (minimum age) of the MLC, subject to any exceptions made by the State whose 
flag the ship is entitled to fly in accordance with paragraph 3 of that Standard. 
(2)  A breach of paragraph (1) is an offence by the ship owner, the master of the ship and the 
employer of a seafarer under the age prescribed in Regulation 1.1 of the MLC or, in the case of 
night work, the age prescribed in paragraph 2 of Standard A1.1 of the MLC. 
 8 
Meaning of “employer” etc. 
7.  In this Part— 
“employer” means the person by whom a person under 16 years of age or, as the case may be, 
a seafarer under 18 years of age is employed or engaged in breach of regulation 4, 5 or 6; 
“employed” means employed under a contract of employment; and 
“engaged” means engaged under a contract, whether e xpress or implied and (if it is express) 
whether oral or in writing, whereby the person or s eafarer so engaged undertakes to do or 
perform personally any work or services for the emp loyer, or another party to the contract, 
whose status is not by virtue of the contract that of a client or customer of any profession or 
business undertaking carried out by the person or seafarer. 
PART 3 
Recruitment and placement 
Duty on shipowner in respect of recruitment and placement services 
8. —(1) A shipowner must not use a recruitment and pla cement service to recruit a person as a 
seafarer to work on board a ship unless it is a service falling within paragraph (2). 
(2)  A recruitment and placement service falls within this paragraph if it— 
(a)  is based— 
(i)  in the United Kingdom; 
(ii)  in a country which has ratified the MLC; or 
(iii)  in a country to which another country’s ratificatio n of the MLC has been extended; 
or 
(b)  is based in another country and conforms to the req uirements relating to recruitment and 
placement services referred to in paragraph 5 of St andard A1.4 of the MLC, whether or 
not those requirements are obligations under the law of the country in which it is based. 
(3)  A breach of paragraph (1) is an offence by the shipowner. 
(4)  In this regulation, “recruitment and placement serv ice” means any person or organisation 
which is engaged in recruiting seafarers on behalf of shipowners or placing seafarers with 
shipowners.   
PART 4 
Seafarers’ employment agreements 
Duty to enter into seafarer employment agreement 
9. —(1) A seafarer must have a seafarer employment agr eement which complies with this 
regulation. 
(2)  Subject to paragraph (4), if the seafarer is an emp loyee but is not an employee of the 
shipowner— 
(a)  the employer of the seafarer must be a party to the seafarer employment agreement; and 
(b)  the seafarer employment agreement must include prov ision under which the shipowner 
guarantees to the seafarer the performance of the e mployer’s obligations under the 
agreement insofar as they relate to the matters specified in– 
(i)  paragraphs 5 to 11 of Part 1 of Schedule 1; and  
(ii)  Part 2 of Schedule 1.  
 9 
(3)  Subject to paragraph (4), if the seafarer is not an  employee or if the seafarer is an employee 
of the shipowner, the shipowner must be a party to the seafarer employment agreement. 
(4)  Paragraphs (2)(b) and (3) do not apply if the parti es to a seafarer employment agreement 
are— 
(a)  a seafarer who is on board the ship for the principal purpose of receiving training; and  
(b)  an approved training provider. 
(5)  A breach of paragraphs (1) to (3) is an offence by the shipowner. 
(6)  In this Part— 
“approved training provider” means a person who provides or secures the provision of seafarer 
training pursuant to an agreement with the Secretary of State; and  
“employer” means a person by whom the seafarer is e mployed under a contract of 
employment. 
Content of seafarer employment agreement 
10. —(1) Subject to paragraph (2), a seafarer employmen t agreement must include provision 
about the following matters— 
(a)  if the seafarer is an employee of the shipowner or of any other person, the matters in Part 
1 and Part 2 of Schedule 1; 
(b)  if the seafarer is not an employee, the matters in Part 1 and Part 3 of Schedule 1, 
and where the seafarer employment agreement is one which falls within regulation 9(4), the name 
and address of the approved training provider must be set out in the agreement. 
(2)  Such provision may be achieved by way of reference to another document which includes 
provision about those matters. 
(3)  A breach of paragraph (1) is an offence by the shipowner. 
(4)  Prior to entering into a seafarer employment agreem ent, the shipowner or, in the case of an 
agreement falling within regulation 9(4), the appro ved training provider must take reasonable 
steps to satisfy itself with regard to the following requirements— 
(a)  the seafarer must have had a sufficient opportunity to review and take advice on the terms 
and conditions of the agreement; 
(b)  the seafarer must have received an explanation of t he rights and responsibilities of the 
seafarer under the agreement; and 
(c)  the seafarer must be entering into the agreement freely. 
(5)  Where a shipowner— 
(a)  fails to take such reasonable steps; or 
(b)  in relevant cases, fails to take reasonable steps t o ensure that the approved training 
provider has complied with paragraph (4), 
the shipowner commits an offence. 
(6)  A seafarer employment agreement must contain a decl aration by the shipowner and the 
seafarer or, in the case of an agreement falling wi thin regulation 9(4), by the approved training 
provider and the seafarer confirming that the requi rements in paragraph (4)(a) to (c) have been 
met. 
(7)  A breach of paragraph (6) is an offence by the shipowner. 
Minimum notice period 
11. —(1) Subject to paragraph (3), the minimum period o f notice which must be given before 
terminating a seafarer employment agreement is seve n days or such longer period as may be 
specified in the agreement. 
 10  
(2)  The minimum period of notice which must be given by  a seafarer before terminating a 
seafarer employment agreement must not be longer th an the minimum period of notice which 
must be given by the shipowner or, as the case may be, the approved training provider. 
(3)  Nothing in this regulation prevents the earlier ter mination of a seafarer employment 
agreement without penalty where this is requested b y the seafarer on compassionate grounds or 
where the seafarer is dismissed for reasons of gross misconduct. 
Documents 
12. —(1) As soon as is practicable after entering into a seafarer employment agreement, the 
shipowner must provide to the seafarer an original of the agreement signed by each party and a 
copy of any document referred to in that agreement. 
(2)  A breach of paragraph (1) is an offence by the shipowner. 
(3)  The shipowner must— 
(a)  ensure that a copy of the seafarer employment agree ment (and a copy of any document 
referred to in that agreement) for each seafarer on a ship is held on board; and 
(b)  allow each seafarer to see the copy of the seafarer  employment agreement to which the 
seafarer is a party (and a copy of any document referred to in that agreement) on request. 
(4)  A breach of paragraph (3) is an offence by the shipowner. 
(5)  Subject to paragraph (7), as soon as is practicable  after a seafarer’s work on board a ship 
comes to an end, the shipowner must provide to the seafarer a written record of the seafarer’s 
work on that ship. 
(6)  For the purposes of paragraph (5), the record— 
(a)  must contain provision about the matters set out in Schedule 2; 
(b)  must not contain provision about the quality of the seafarer’s work; and 
(c)  must not contain provision about the seafarer’s wages. 
(7)  Paragraph (5) does not apply if regulation 25 of th e Merchant Shipping (Crew Agreements, 
Lists of Crew and Discharge of Seamen) Regulations 1991( a) applies in respect of the seafarer. 
(8)  A breach of paragraph (5) or (6) is an offence by the shipowner. 
Foreign language seafarer employment agreement 
13. —(1) This regulation applies where a seafarer has a seafarer employment agreement which is 
not in the English language. 
(2)  The shipowner must ensure that an English translati on of the provisions of the seafarer 
employment agreement (including any provisions whic h are contained in another document 
referred to in the agreement) is held on board. 
(3)  A breach of paragraph (2) is an offence by the shipowner. 
Duty of master to produce seafarer employment agreement 
14. —(1) The master of a ship must produce to the Secre tary of State, the Registrar-General of 
Shipping and Seamen or the Commissioners for Her Ma jesty’s Revenue and Customs (or any 
person acting on their behalf) on demand copies of any documentation held on board pursuant to 
regulations 12(3)(a) and 13(2). 
(2)  A breach of paragraph (1) is an offence by the master of the ship. 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) S.I. 1991/2144. 
 11  
Part 4 requirements for non-United Kingdom ships with MLC documentation 
15. —(1) A ship must not be operated unless it complies with the requirements in— 
(a)  paragraph 1 of Standard A2.1 (seafarers’ employment agreements) of the MLC; and 
(b)  paragraph 4 of Standard A2.1 of the MLC regarding t he particulars to be contained in 
seafarers’ employment agreements, 
whether or not the State whose flag the ship is ent itled to fly has adopted any relevant laws or 
regulations. 
(2)  A breach of paragraph (1) (other than a breach of t he requirement referred to in paragraph 
(3)) is an offence by the shipowner. 
(3)  A breach of the requirement in sub-paragraph 1(d) o f Standard A2.1 of the MLC is an 
offence by the master of the ship. 
PART 5 
Wages 
Late payment of wages etc. 
16. —(1) Subject to paragraph (2), if any amount in res pect of wages or other remuneration 
payable to a seafarer under a seafarer employment a greement is not paid on the due date, interest 
must be paid on the unpaid amount at the rate of 20 per cent per annum from the date on which the 
amount was due until the date of payment.  
(2)  Paragraph (1) does not apply to the extent that the  failure to make such payment on the 
required date was due to— 
(a)  a mistake; 
(b)  a reasonable dispute as to liability; 
(c)  the act or default of the seafarer; or 
(d)  any other cause not being the wrongful act or defau lt of the persons liable to make the 
payment or of their servants or agents. 
Account of seafarer’s wages etc. 
17. —(1) The shipowner must ensure that an account of t he seafarer’s wages or other 
remuneration under a seafarer employment agreement is prepared and delivered to the seafarer— 
(a)  periodically during the term of the seafarer employ ment agreement, at intervals not 
exceeding one month; and 
(b)  within one month of the agreement terminating. 
(2)  Where the seafarer is an employee, such account must include the following information— 
(a)  the name of the seafarer; 
(b)  the date of birth of the seafarer (if known); 
(c)  the number of the seafarer’s current discharge book (if any); 
(d)  the capacity in which the seafarer worked on board the ship; 
(e)  the period covered by the account; 
(f)  the amounts payable for the period covered by the account; and  
(g)  the type and amount of any deductions made during the period covered by the account. 
(3)  Where, pursuant to paragraph (2), the account inclu des information of amounts which have 
been determined by reference to a currency exchange  rate, the account must include details of the 
relevant exchange rate and any commission paid. 
 12  
(4)  Where the seafarer is not an employee, such account  must include the following 
information— 
(a)  payments due; 
(b)  payments made (including any not falling within sub-paragraph (a)); and 
(c)  any rates of exchange and any commissions paid which are relevant to those payments. 
(5)  A breach of paragraphs (1) to (4) is an offence by the shipowner. 
Part 5 requirements for non-United Kingdom ships with MLC documentation 
18. —(1) A ship must not be operated unless the shipown er complies with the requirements in 
paragraph 2 of Standard A2.2 (wages). 
(2)  A breach of paragraph (1) is an offence by the shipowner. 
PART 6 
Repatriation 
Duty to repatriate seafarers 
19. —(1) Subject to regulation 21, a shipowner must mak e such provision as is necessary for 
repatriation of a seafarer as soon as is practicable in the following cases— 
(a)  where the seafarer employment agreement expires; 
(b)  where the seafarer employment agreement is terminated by the shipowner; 
(c)  where the seafarer employment agreement is terminat ed by the seafarer in accordance 
with the terms of the agreement; 
(d)  where the seafarer is no longer able to carry out t he seafarer’s duties under the seafarer’s 
employment agreement or cannot be expected to carry  them out in the specific 
circumstances, including in the following circumstances— 
(i)  the seafarer has an illness, injury or medical cond ition which requires their 
repatriation when found medically fit to travel; 
(ii)  shipwreck; 
(iii)  the shipowner is not able to fulfil its legal or co ntractual obligations to the seafarer 
following insolvency, the sale of the ship or a change in the ship’s registration; or 
(iv)  the ship is bound for a war zone to which the seafarer does not consent to go; 
(e)  where the seafarer has completed the maximum period  of service on board following 
which the seafarer is entitled to repatriation in a ccordance with the seafarer employment 
agreement; and 
(f)  where the seafarer employment agreement is terminated pursuant to an order of a court or 
tribunal. 
(2)  A breach of paragraph (1) is an offence by the shipowner. 
Place for return. 
20. —(1) Where there is a duty on a shipowner to provide for the repatriation of a seafarer under 
regulation 19, a seafarer is entitled to repatriati on to the destination provided for in the seafarer 
employment agreement, or such other place as may subsequently be agreed with the shipowner. 
(2)  If the seafarer employment agreement does not ident ify a destination, and there has been no 
agreement between the seafarer and the shipowner as  to the destination, the seafarer is entitled to 
repatriation to the seafarer’s choice of the following destinations— 
(a)  the place at which the seafarer entered into the seafarer’s employment agreement; or 
 13  
(b)  the seafarer’s country of residence. 
Scope of duty to repatriate 
21.  Where there is a duty on a shipowner to provide fo r the repatriation of a seafarer under 
regulation 19, that duty ends when— 
(a)  the seafarer is repatriated in accordance with regulation 20; 
(b)  the shipowner makes reasonable arrangements for rep atriation which are unsuccessful 
because of the seafarer’s unreasonable conduct; 
(c)  the shipowner has used reasonable endeavours to contact the seafarer for a period of three 
months or more, but has been unable to make such contact; 
(d)  the seafarer confirms in writing to the shipowner that repatriation is not required; or 
(e)  the seafarer is dead. 
Duty pending repatriation 
22. —(1) A shipowner to which a duty in regulation 19 a pplies must make such provision as is 
necessary for the seafarer’s relief and maintenance pending repatriation. 
(2)  The shipowner must have regard to the seafarer’s pe rsonal circumstances and requirements 
when determining what provision is required under paragraph (1). 
(3)  Without prejudice to the generality of paragraph (1) the provision for relief and maintenance 
must include— 
(a)  food; 
(b)  clothing; 
(c)  accommodation;  
(d)  toiletries and other personal necessaries; 
(e)  surgical, medical, dental or optical treatment (inc luding the repair or replacement of any 
appliance) for any condition requiring immediate care; and 
(f)  in cases where legal aid is unavailable or insuffic ient, reasonable costs for the defence of 
the seafarer in any criminal proceedings in respect of any act or omission within the scope 
of the seafarer’s employment, being proceedings whe re neither the shipowner nor an 
agent of the shipowner is the complainant. 
(4)  The duty in paragraph (1) ends when the duty in regulation 19 ends. 
(5)  A breach of paragraph (1) is an offence by the shipowner. 
Prohibition on recovering costs from seafarer 
23. —(1) Subject to paragraph (2), a shipowner must not  enter into an agreement with a seafarer 
under which the seafarer must make payment in respect of either— 
(a)  repatriation costs; or 
(b)  relief and maintenance costs. 
(2)  A seafarer employment agreement may provide that the seafarer must reimburse repatriation 
costs where the agreement is terminated because of the seafarer’s serious misconduct. 
(3)  If a seafarer employment agreement contains provisi on described in paragraph (2) and that 
obligation arises, a deduction equivalent to those costs may be made from the wages due to the 
seafarer under that agreement. 
(4)  If a seafarer employment agreement does not contain  provision such as that described in 
paragraph (2), the shipowner may only recover the costs described in paragraph (1) (or damages in 
respect of such costs) where the agreement is termi nated because of the seafarer’s serious 
misconduct. 
 14  
(5)  A breach of paragraph (1) is an offence by the shipowner. 
(6)  An agreement is void to the extent it provides that  a seafarer must make a payment to the 
shipowner in respect of either repatriation costs o r relief and maintenance costs in breach of 
paragraph (1). 
Seafarer property 
24. —(1) This regulation applies where— 
(a)  a shipowner is under a duty under regulation 19 in respect of a seafarer; and 
(b)  property belonging to that seafarer has been left behind on board a ship. 
(2)  The master of the ship must take charge of that pro perty and enter a description of each item 
in the official log book. 
(3)  A breach of paragraph (2) is an offence by the master of the ship. 
(4)  Subject to paragraph (6), the master of the ship an d the shipowner must ensure that 
reasonable care is taken of the property pending its delivery in accordance with paragraph (10). 
(5)  A breach of paragraph (4) is an offence by the master of the ship and the shipowner. 
(6)  The master of the ship may at any time— 
(a)  sell any part of the property which is of a perishable or deteriorating nature; and 
(b)  destroy or otherwise dispose of any part of the pro perty considered a potential risk to the 
health or safety of any person. 
(7)  The proceeds of any sale under paragraph (6)(a) are  the property of the seafarer and the 
master of the ship must ensure that details of the sale are entered in the official log book. 
(8)  The master of the ship must ensure that details of any destruction or disposal under 
paragraph (6)(b) are entered in the official log book. 
(9)  A breach of paragraphs (7) or (8) is an offence by the master of the ship. 
(10)  Subject to paragraph (11), the shipowner must cause  the property and a document 
containing the information entered in the log book pursuant to paragraphs (7) and (8) to be 
delivered to the seafarer or to the seafarer’s next of kin. 
(11)  The duty in paragraph (10) is discharged if the shipowner causes the delivery to be made to 
the last known address of the seafarer or the next of kin, as the case may be. 
(12)  A breach of paragraph (10) is an offence by the shipowner. 
(13)  The seafarer or the next of kin, as the case may be , must reimburse the shipowner for the 
reasonable delivery costs if demanded. 
Duty to carry documents 
25. —(1) A shipowner must ensure that a copy of Part 6 of these Regulations and Marine 
Guidance Note 479(M) are held on board the ship and are available to seafarers. 
(2)  Unless the shipowner reasonably considers that all of the seafarers on board the ship 
understand English sufficiently to understand the documents referred to in paragraph (1), the duty 
in paragraph (1) includes the duty to hold on board  the ship and make available to seafarers such 
translated versions of those documents as are sufficient to ensure that all of the seafarers on board 
the ship can understand at least one version. 
(3)  A breach of paragraphs (1) or (2) is an offence by the shipowner. 
(4)  In this regulation “Marine Guidance Note 479(M)” me ans the note described as such and 
issued by the MCA in July 2014. 
Financial security requirement applicable to all ships 
26. —(1) A ship must not be operated unless— 
 15  
(a)  in the case of a ship in a category described in regulation 3(1)(a) or (b), there is in force a 
contract of insurance or other financial security adequate to ensure that the shipowner will 
be able to meet any liabilities arising from the duties in regulations 19 and 22; or 
(b)  in the case of a ship in the category described in regulation 3(3), financial security is 
provided in accordance with paragraph 2 of Regulation 2.5 (repatriation) of the MLC.  
(2)  A breach of paragraph (1) is an offence by the shipowner. 
Secretary of State functions in the event of shipowner default 
27. —(1) If a shipowner of a United Kingdom ship fails to make provision required under 
regulation 19 or 22, the Secretary of State must ma ke the required provision (or secure that it is 
made) and may recover costs incurred from the shipowner as a civil debt. 
(2)  If a shipowner of a ship which is not a United Kingdom ship fails to make provision required 
under regulation 19 or 22, the Secretary of State may make the required provision (or secure that it 
is made) and may recover costs incurred from the shipowner as a civil debt. 
(3)  Subject to paragraph (5), the costs which the Secretary of State may recover under paragraph 
(1) and (2) include— 
(a)  costs incurred by the Secretary of State in making the required provision (or securing that 
it is made); and  
(b)  costs incurred by the Secretary of State in reimbur sing another person (including a State 
which has made provision pursuant to paragraph 5 of  Standard A2.5 (repatriation) of the 
MLC) for having made the required provision (or hav ing secured its provision), whether 
or not the Secretary of State has requested or required them to do so. 
(4)  Subject to paragraph (5), if a shipowner of a Unite d Kingdom ship fails to make provision 
required under regulation 19 or 22 and the seafarer  incurs costs in making the required provision 
or securing that it is made, the seafarer may recover such costs from the shipowner as a civil debt. 
(5)  The costs incurred by the seafarer which are referred to in paragraph (4)— 
(a)  may not be recovered by the seafarer under paragrap h (4) if they have been recovered by 
the Secretary of State under paragraph (1); and 
(b)  may not be recovered by the Secretary of State unde r paragraph (1) if they have been 
recovered by the seafarer under paragraph (4). 
Part 6 requirements for non-United Kingdom ships with MLC documentation 
28. —(1) A shipowner must make such provision as is necessary for the repatriation of a seafarer 
as soon as is practicable in the circumstances desc ribed in paragraph 1 of Standard A2.5 of the 
MLC, subject to any national provisions which have been adopted by the State whose flag the ship 
is entitled to fly pursuant to paragraph 2 of Standard A2.5. 
(2)  A breach of paragraph (1) is an offence by the shipowner. 
(3)  A shipowner must comply with – 
(a)  the prohibitions in paragraph 3 of Standard A2.5, w hether or not those prohibitions apply 
in the State whose flag the ship is entitled to fly; and  
(b)  the requirement in paragraph 9 of Standard A2.5, wh ether or not the State whose flag the 
ship is entitled to fly has imposed that requirement in its national laws or otherwise. 
(4)  A breach of paragraph (3) is an offence by the shipowner. 
 
 16  
PART 7 
Crew accommodation 
Crew accommodation requirements 
29. —(1) In this Part, “crew accommodation” means accommodation, including the construction, 
machinery, fittings and equipment of that accommodation, intended for or used by seafarers. 
(2)  Subject to regulations 30, 31 and 32, a ship must c omply with the requirements relating to 
crew accommodation set out in Merchant Shipping Notice 1844 (M). 
(3)  A breach of paragraph (2) is an offence by the shipowner. 
(4)  The master of the ship, or an officer appointed by the master for that purpose, must, at 
intervals not exceeding 7 days and accompanied by a t least one member of the crew, inspect the 
crew accommodation to ensure it is clean, decently habitable and maintained in a good state of 
repair. 
(5)  A breach of paragraph (4) is an offence by the master of the ship. 
(6)  The master of the ship, or an officer appointed by the master for that purpose, must record 
the findings of inspections undertaken pursuant to paragraph (4) in the official log book of the ship 
specifying— 
(a)  the time and date of the inspection; 
(b)  the name and rank of each person making the inspection; and 
(c)  particulars of any respect in which the crew accomm odation was found by any of the 
persons making the inspection not to comply with these Regulations. 
(7)  A breach of paragraph (6) is an offence by the master of the ship. 
Provision for certain older ships 
30. —(1) A ship the keel of which was laid or which was at a similar stage of construction before 
11th July 1997— 
(a)  as respects crew accommodation which has not been substantially reconstructed or altered 
on or after 11th July 1997, must comply with the re quirements set out in Schedule 6 to 
the Merchant Shipping (Crew Accommodation) Regulati ons 1978( a), as if they had not 
been revoked; 
(b)  as respects crew accommodation which has been substantially reconstructed or altered on 
or after 11th July 1997 but before the date on whic h these Regulations come into force, 
must comply with the requirements set out in the Me rchant Shipping (Crew 
Accommodation) Regulations 1997( b). 
(2)  A ship the keel of which was laid or which was at a  similar stage of construction on or after 
11th July 1997 but before the date on which these R egulations come into force must, as respects 
crew accommodation which has not been substantially reconstructed or altered on or after the date 
on which these Regulations come into force, comply with the requirements set out in the Merchant 
Shipping (Crew Accommodation) Regulations 1997. 
(3)  In this regulation “similar stage of construction” means the stage at which— 
(a)  construction identifiable with a specific ship begins; and 
(b)  assembly of that ship has commenced comprising at least 50 tonnes or one per cent of the 
estimated mass of all structural material, whichever is less. 
(4)  A breach of paragraphs (1) or (2) is an offence by the shipowner. 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) S.I. 1978/795, amended by S.I. 1979/491, S.I. 198 4/41 and S.I. 1989/184 and revoked on 11 July 1997 by S.I. 1997/1508.  
(b) S.I. 1997/1508. 
 17  
Exemptions 
31. —(1) The Secretary of State may exempt a ship from some or all of the requirements of 
regulation 29(2) where — 
(a)  the exemption is expressly permitted by Standard A3 .1 (accommodation and recreational 
facilities) of the MLC; and 
(b)  the Secretary of State has fulfilled any obligation  imposed on the competent authority by 
that Standard in respect of the exemption, 
and in sub-paragraph (a), the reference to an exemp tion which is expressly permitted includes 
anything permitted in accordance with paragraph 6(a ) or (d) of Standard A3.1 of the MLC or 
allowed in accordance with paragraph 9(g) of that Standard. 
(2)  An exemption under this regulation— 
(a)  must be given in writing; 
(b)  may be granted on such terms as the Secretary of State may specify; and 
(c)  may be altered or cancelled by the Secretary of Sta te giving written notice to the 
shipowner. 
(3)  A breach of the terms of an exemption granted under  paragraph (1) is an offence by the 
shipowner. 
Approvals to allow substantial equivalences 
32. —(1) In respect of a particular ship, or ships of a particular description, the Secretary of State 
may approve arrangements which, when taken together  with the conditions to which the approval 
is subject, the Secretary of State considers are su bstantially equivalent to the requirements which 
are set out in Merchant Shipping Notice 1844(M). 
(2)  An approval under this regulation— 
(a)  must be given in writing; and 
(b)  must specify the date on which it takes effect and the conditions (if any) on which it is 
given. 
(3)  Such an approval may be cancelled and the terms of an approval may be altered, in both 
cases by the Secretary of State giving written notice to the shipowner. 
(4)  A breach of a condition on which such an approval is given is an offence by the shipowner. 
Part 7 requirements for non-United Kingdom ships with MLC documentation 
33. —(1) Subject to paragraph (2), a ship must not be o perated unless it complies with the 
minimum standards for on-board accommodation and recreational facilities set out in paragraphs 6 
to 17 of Standard A3.1 (accommodation and recreational facilities) of the MLC. 
(2)  The requirement in paragraph (1) is subject to— 
(a)  the application provision in paragraph 2 of Regulation 3.1 of the MLC; and 
(b)  any permissions, exemptions or variations which hav e been granted or allowed by the 
State whose flag the ship is entitled to fly and which are permitted by the MLC provisions 
referred to in paragraph (1). 
(3)  A breach of paragraph (1) is an offence by the shipowner. 
(4)  The master of a ship must comply with the requirements in paragraph 18 of Standard A3.1 of 
the MLC with regard to— 
(a)  frequent inspections; and 
(b)  the recording of the results of such inspections an d making those results available for 
review, 
 18  
whether or not the State whose flag the ship is entitled to fly has imposed those requirements in its 
national laws or otherwise. 
(5)  A breach of paragraph (4) is an offence by the master of the ship. 
 
PART 8 
Food and catering 
Provision of food and drinking water 
34. —(1) The shipowner and the master of a ship must en sure that food and drinking water are 
provided on board the ship which— 
(a)  are suitable in respect of quantity, quality and, i n relation to food, nutritional value and 
variety, taking account of— 
(i)  the number of seafarers on board and the character,  nature and duration of the 
voyage; and 
(ii)  the different religious requirements and cultural p ractices in relation to food of the 
seafarers on board; 
(b)  do not contain anything which is likely to cause si ckness or injury to health or which 
renders any food or drinking water unpalatable; and 
(c)  are otherwise fit for consumption. 
(2)  The shipowner and master of a ship must ensure that  food and drinking water provided in 
accordance with paragraph (1) are provided free of charge to all seafarers while they are on board. 
(3)  A breach of paragraphs (1) or (2) is an offence by the shipowner and the master of the ship. 
Organisation and equipment of the catering department 
35. —(1) The shipowner and the master of a ship must ensure that— 
(a)  food and drinking water which are provided for seafarers are stored and handled; and 
(b)  the catering department is organised and equipped, 
in accordance with the requirements set out in Merchant Shipping Notice 1845(M). 
(2)  A breach of paragraph (1) is an offence by the shipowner and the master of the ship. 
Inspection of food and catering facilities 
36. —(1) The master of a ship must ensure that, not less than once a week— 
(a)  the supplies of food and drinking water on board ar e inspected to check compliance with 
regulation 34 and 35; and 
(b)  the catering department and its equipment are inspe cted to check compliance with 
regulation 35. 
(2)  An inspection under paragraph (1) must be carried out by— 
(a)  the master of the ship; or 
(b)  a person authorised by the master, 
together with a member of the catering staff. 
(3)  A breach of paragraphs (1) or (2) is an offence by the master of the ship. 
(4)  The master of the ship must ensure that the results  of any inspection under paragraph (1) are 
recorded in the official logbook of the ship. 
(5)  A breach of paragraph (4) is an offence by the master of the ship. 
 19  
Requirement to carry a qualified ship’s cook 
37. —(1) This regulation does not apply to— 
(a)  a ship which ordinarily operates with fewer than 10 seafarers on board; or 
(b)  a ship which operates only within 60 miles of a saf e haven and which does not operate to 
or from, or call at, a port in a country other than the United Kingdom, 
and in this paragraph “safe haven” means a harbour or shelter of any kind which affords entry and 
protection from the weather. 
(2)  Subject to paragraph (3), a ship must not be operat ed unless a qualified ship’s cook is on 
board. 
(3)  In circumstances of exceptional necessity the Secre tary of State may grant an exemption 
from the requirement in paragraph (2)— 
(a)  until the next port of call, or 
(b)  for a period not exceeding one month, 
but only if there is a person on board the ship who  is trained or instructed in areas including food 
and personal hygiene and safe handling and storage of food in accordance with the relevant 
requirements in  Merchant Shipping Notice 1846(M). 
(4)  An exemption under this regulation— 
(a)  must be given in writing; 
(b)  may be granted on such terms as the Secretary of State may specify; and 
(c)  may be altered or cancelled by the Secretary of Sta te giving written notice to the 
shipowner. 
(5)  The Secretary of State may approve as respects a pa rticular ship, or as respects ships of a 
particular description, arrangements which, when ta ken together with the conditions to which the 
approval is subject, the Secretary of State considers are substantially equivalent to the requirement 
in paragraph (2). 
(6)  An approval under this regulation— 
(a)  must be given in writing; and 
(b)  must specify the date on which it takes effect and the conditions (if any) on which it is 
given. 
(7)  Such an approval may be cancelled and the terms of an approval may be altered, in both 
cases by the Secretary of State giving written notice to the shipowner. 
(8)  A breach of— 
(a)  paragraph (2); 
(b)  the terms of an exemption granted under paragraph (3); or 
(c)  a condition on which an approval is given under paragraph (5), 
is an offence by the shipowner and the master of the ship. 
Certificate of competency as a ship’s cook 
38. —(1) On receipt of an application for a certificate  of competency as a ship’s cook and the 
appropriate fee (if any), the Secretary of State mu st, on being satisfied that the applicant is an 
eligible person, issue a certificate of competency to the applicant. 
(2)  Before the issue of any such certificate, the Secre tary of State may require the applicant to 
produce such certificates of discharge and such oth er documentary evidence as may be necessary 
to establish to the satisfaction of the Secretary of State that the applicant is an eligible person. 
(3)  The provisions of sections 62 to 69 of the Act (dis qualification of seamen and inquiries) 
apply in respect of a certificate of competency iss ued under paragraph (1) as if such a certificate 
were a certificate to which those sections apply. 
 20  
(4)  The provisions prescribed in the Merchant Shipping (Disqualification of Holder of Seaman’s 
Certificates) Regulations 1997( a) apply in respect of a certificate of competency i ssued under 
paragraph (1) as if regulation 2 of those Regulations included a reference to such a certificate.   
(5)  For the purposes of any inquiry under section 63 of  the Act and of any re-hearing of an 
inquiry under section 64 of the Act in relation to a certificate of competency issued under 
paragraph (1), the Merchant Shipping (Section 63 In quiries) Rules 1997( b) apply as if the 
definition of “certificate holder” in rule 2(1) inc luded a reference to the holder of a certificate of  
competency issued under paragraph (1). 
(6)  If an eligible person— 
(a)  satisfies the Secretary of State that a certificate already issued to that person has been lost, 
destroyed or stolen; and 
(b)  pays the appropriate fee (if any), 
the Secretary of State must issue a copy of the certificate to that person. 
(7)  Any such copy must, before it is so issued, be cert ified as such by the Registrar General of 
Shipping and Seamen or, as the case may be, by such  person as the Secretary of State may have 
directed to keep the record referred to in paragraph (8). 
(8)  A record of all certificates of competency issued under this regulation and of the suspension, 
cancellation or alteration of, and any other matter s affecting, any such certificate must be kept, in 
such manner as the Secretary of State may require, by the Registrar General of Shipping and 
Seamen or by such other person as the Secretary of State may direct. 
Recognition of existing certificates of competency 
39. —(1) A certificate of competency— 
(a)  issued under the Merchant Shipping (Certification of Ships’ Cooks) Regulations 1981( c); 
(b)  treated as equivalent under regulation 8 of those Regulations; or 
(c)  deemed under regulation 9 of those Regulations to be issued pursuant to section 43 of the 
Merchant Shipping Act 1970( d), 
which is in force and not suspended  on the date when these Regulations come into force,  has 
effect as if it were a certificate of competency as a ship’s cook issued under regulation 38 of these 
Regulations. 
(2)  A certificate to which paragraph (1) applies remain s valid for a period of 5 years beginning 
on the date on which these Regulations come into fo rce unless it is suspended or cancelled in 
accordance with section 62 of the Act. 
Training requirements for catering staff and other persons processing food in the galley 
40. —(1) The shipowner must ensure that— 
(a)  every member of catering staff is properly trained or instructed for their position in 
accordance with the relevant requirements set out in Merchant Shipping Notice 1846(M); 
and 
(b)  any person processing food in the galley is properl y trained or instructed in areas 
including food and personal hygiene and handling in  accordance with the relevant 
requirements set out in Merchant Shipping Notice 1846(M). 
(2)  A breach of paragraph (1) is an offence by the shipowner. 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) S.I. 1997/346, amended by S.I. 1997/2971. The Mar ine Safety Agency is now the Maritime and Coastguard Agency.  
(b) S.I. 1997/347. 
(c) S.I. 1981/1076.  
(d) 1970 c.36. Section 43 was repealed by the Merchan t Shipping Act 1995, section 314(1) and Schedule 12.  
 21  
Part 8 requirements for non-United Kingdom ships with MLC documentation 
41. —(1) A ship must not be operated unless it complies  with paragraphs 1 and 2 of Regulation 
3.2 (food and catering) of the MLC. 
(2)  A breach of paragraph (1) is an offence by the shipowner and the master of the ship. 
(3)  The master of a ship must comply with the requireme nts in paragraph 7 of Standard A3.2 of 
the MLC with regard to – 
(a)  frequent inspections; and 
(b)  the documenting of such inspections, 
whether or not the State whose flag the ship is entitled to fly has imposed those requirements in its 
national laws or otherwise. 
(4)  A breach of paragraph (3) is an offence by the master of the ship. 
(5)  A ship must not be operated unless it meets the minimum standards set out in— 
(a)  sub-paragraph 2(b) of Standard A3.2 of the MLC; and 
(b)  sub-paragraph 2(c) of that Standard. 
(6)  A breach of paragraph (5)(a) is an offence by the shipowner and the master of the ship. 
(7)  A breach of paragraph (5)(b) is an offence by the shipowner. 
(8)  Subject to any dispensation issued by the State who se flag the ship is entitled to fly in 
accordance with paragraph 6 of standard A3.2 of the  MLC, a shipowner must comply with the 
requirements in paragraphs 3 and 4 of Standard A3.2 of the MLC. 
(9)  A breach of paragraph (8) is an offence by the shipowner. 
Interpretation of Part 8 
42.  In this Part— 
“catering department” means the galley, mess rooms and any other areas on board intended or 
used for the storage or preparation of food for seafarers or the service of meals to seafarers; 
“catering staff” means seafarers whose normal dutie s include the preparation and storage of 
food, the service of meals to seafarers on board the ship or other work in the galley or in areas 
where food is stored or handled; 
“eligible person” means a seafarer who— 
(a)  is 18 years of age or over; 
(b)  has completed training in accordance with the requirements in Merchant Shipping Notice 
1846(M); and 
(c)  has served for not less than one month at sea; 
“qualified ship’s cook” means a person who has been  issued with a ship’s cook certificate 
which has not expired or been cancelled and which is not suspended; and 
“ship’s cook certificate” means— 
(a)  a certificate of competency as a ship’s cook which has been issued under regulation 38; 
(b)  a certificate which under regulation 39 has effect as if it were a certificate of competency 
as a ship’s cook issued under regulation 38; or 
(c)  a certificate which the Secretary of State has spec ified in Merchant Shipping Notice 
1846(M) is equivalent to a certificate of competenc y as a ship’s cook issued under 
regulation 38. 
 22  
PART 9 
Medical care 
Shipowner duty to make provision for seafarer medical and other expenses 
43. —(1) This regulation applies in relation to a seafa rer who suffers sickness or injury falling 
within paragraph (2). 
(2)  Sickness or injury falls within this paragraph if it— 
(a)  first occurs during a period— 
(i)  which starts on the date on which that seafarer’s s eafarer employment agreement 
commences and ends on the next date on which the sh ipowner’s duty to make 
provision for the repatriation of that seafarer und er regulation 19 ends under 
regulation 21; or 
(ii)  which starts after a period referred to in sub-para graph (i) but is caused by 
circumstances or events arising during that period; and 
(b)  does not first occur during a period of leave, other than shore leave. 
(3)  Subject to paragraphs (5) and (6), the shipowner must— 
(a)  ensure that the seafarer is provided with medical c are on board, so far as is practicable; 
and 
(b)  meet any expenses falling within paragraph (4) whic h are reasonably incurred in 
connection with the seafarer’s sickness or injury. 
(4)  Expenses falling within this paragraph are— 
(a)  expenses of surgical, medical, dental or optical tr eatment (including the supply, repair or 
replacement of any appliance); and 
(b)  expenses for board and lodging. 
(5)  The duty to meet expenses referred to in paragraph (3)(b)— 
(a)  does not apply to expenses which are met by a public authority; and 
(b)  does not affect any duty on the shipowner under reg ulation 22 and does not apply in 
respect of any expenses met by the shipowner in accordance with that duty. 
(6)  Subject to paragraph (7), the duty to meet expenses  referred to in paragraph (3)(b) is limited 
to expenses incurred during whichever of the following periods is the shorter— 
(a)  a period of 16 weeks beginning on the day on which the sickness or injury first occurs; or 
(b)  a period beginning on the day on which the sickness  or injury first occurs and ending on 
the day on which a person authorised to issue seafa rer medical certificates notifies the 
seafarer of a decision that— 
(i)  the seafarer is not fit to carry out the duties whi ch that seafarer is required to carry 
out under the terms of that seafarer’s seafarer employment agreement, and 
(ii)  the seafarer is unlikely to be fit to carry out duties of that nature in the future. 
(7)  If a person authorised to issue seafarer medical ce rtificates has notified a seafarer of a 
decision in the terms described in paragraph (6)(b)  and that or another such person subsequently 
notifies the seafarer that such a decision no longe r applies in both or either respects, the duty to 
meet expenses referred to in paragraph (3)(b) is li mited to expenses incurred during the period set 
out in paragraph (6)(a). 
(8)  The shipowner may recover from the seafarer as a ci vil debt any expenses it has met under 
the duty to meet expenses referred to in paragraph (3)(b) in connection with— 
(a)  injury suffered otherwise than in the service of the ship; 
(b)  injury or sickness arising from the wilful miscondu ct of the seafarer who is injured or 
sick; or 
 23  
(c)  injury or sickness intentionally concealed by the s eafarer prior to entering into the 
seafarer employment agreement. 
(9)  If any expenses are incurred by a seafarer to which  the duty in paragraph (3) applies, the 
seafarer may (other than in the circumstances refer red to in sub-paragraphs (a) to (c) of paragraph 
(8)) recover those expenses from the shipowner as a civil debt. 
(10)  A breach of paragraph (3) is an offence by the shipowner. 
Duty to carry a medical practitioner on ship 
44. —(1) Subject to paragraph (2), a ship must not be o perated unless a medical practitioner is 
carried on board the ship. 
(2)  This regulation does not apply to a ship unless— 
(a)  it has 100 or more persons on board; and 
(b)  it is engaged on an international voyage lasting more than 72 hours. 
(3)  A breach of paragraph (1) is an offence by the shipowner. 
Right to medical attention 
45. —(1) When a ship is in a port of call, the shipowne r must permit a seafarer to go ashore for 
medical attention of a kind which is not available on board the ship, where this is reasonably 
practicable. 
(2)  A breach of paragraph (1) is an offence by the shipowner. 
Part 9 requirements for non-United Kingdom ships with MLC documentation 
46. —(1) A seafarer must— 
(a)  be given access to prompt and adequate medical care  whilst working on board the ship at 
no cost to the seafarer; and 
(b)  be permitted to visit a qualified medical doctor or  dentist without delay in ports of call, 
where practicable. 
(2)  A breach of paragraph (1) is an offence by the shipowner. 
(3)  Subject to paragraph (4), a ship must not be operat ed unless it carries a qualified medical 
doctor who is responsible for providing medical care. 
(4)  Paragraph (3) does not apply to a ship unless— 
(a)  it has 100 or more persons on board; and 
(b)  it is engaged on an international voyage lasting more than 72 hours.  
(5)  A breach of paragraph (3) is an offence by the shipowner. 
(6)  In paragraph (3), “qualified medical doctor” means a person who is recognised as such by, 
and who (for the purposes of sub-paragraph 4(b) of Standard A4.1 (medical care on board ship and 
ashore) of the MLC) has the qualifications required  by, the State whose flag the ship is entitled to 
fly. 
Interpretation of Part 9 
47.  In this Part — 
“person authorised to issue seafarer medical certif icates” means a person who has been 
authorised by or on behalf of the Secretary of Stat e or another national maritime 
administration to issue medical certificates to sea farers for the purposes of Regulation 1.2 of 
the MLC (medical certificate) or Regulation I/9 of the STCW Convention; 
 24  
“fully registered person” and “licence to practise” have the meanings given in section 55(1) of 
the Medical Act 1983( a); 
“medical practitioner” means— 
(a)  in the case of a practitioner ordinarily resident i n the United Kingdom, a fully registered 
person who— 
(i)  holds a licence to practise; or 
(ii)  meets the criteria specified in Merchant Shipping N otice 1841(M), being criteria 
which the Secretary of State considers appropriate having regard to the evidence of 
continuing professional development which such a pr actitioner must demonstrate in 
order to obtain a licence to practise; or 
(b)  in the case of a practitioner not ordinarily reside nt in the United Kingdom, a person who 
meets the criteria specified in Merchant Shipping N otice 1841(M), being criteria which 
the Secretary of State considers appropriate having  regard to the qualifications and other 
credentials which must be demonstrated by a person falling within paragraph (a); and 
“the STCW Convention” means the International Conve ntion on Standards of Training, 
Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers, 1978(b), as amended in 1995 by resolution 1 of 
the STCW Convention( c), convened at the International Maritime Organization’s headquarters 
from 26th June to 7th July 1995. 
PART 10 
Shipowners’ liability 
Shipowners’ liability for seafarer unemployment and  losses following loss or foundering of 
ship 
48. —(1) This regulation applies in relation to a seafarer working on board a ship which founders 
or is lost. 
(2)  If the loss or foundering of the ship causes the se afarer to become unemployed, the 
shipowner must pay to the seafarer an amount equiva lent to the wages which would otherwise 
have been payable under the seafarer employment agr eement for every day on which the seafarer 
is unemployed in the two month period commencing on  the day following the day on which the 
loss or foundering occurred. 
(3)  If the loss or foundering of the ship causes the seafarer to suffer injury or loss (other than the 
loss of wages referred to in paragraph (2)), the shipowner must pay compensation to  the seafarer. 
(4)  In relation to loss other than personal injury or d eath, the duty in paragraph (3) is limited to 
the amount specified (if any) in the seafarer employment agreement. 
(5)  A seafarer may recover any sum due from the shipowner under paragraph (2) or (3) as a civil 
debt. 
Financial security requirement applicable to all ships 
49. —(1) A ship must not be operated unless the requirement in paragraph (2) is met. 
(2)  The requirement referred to in paragraph (1) is tha t there is in force in relation to the ship a 
contract of insurance (or other form of security) w hich provides financial assurance of an amount 
which the shipowner reasonably considers adequate t o ensure that the shipowner will be able to 
meet any liabilities the shipowner may have, includ ing liabilities under seafarer employment 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 1983 c.54. The definition of “fully registered pe rson” was amended by S.I. 2000/3041, S.I. 2006/1914 , S.I. 2007/3101 and 
S.I. 2008/1774. The definition of “licence to practise” was amended by S.I. 2002/3135. 
(b) Cmnd 9266. 
(c) Cmnd 3772. 
 25  
agreements, to provide compensation in the event of  death or long term disability to seafarers 
arising from occupational injury, illness or hazard. 
(3)  A breach of paragraph (1) is an offence by the shipowner. 
Shipowners’ liability for wages following sickness or injury sustained by seafarer 
50. —(1) Subject to paragraph (11), this regulation app lies in relation to a seafarer who suffers 
sickness or injury which— 
(a)  first occurs during a period— 
(i)  which starts on the date on which the seafarer’s se afarer employment agreement 
commences and ends on the next date on which the sh ipowner’s duty to make 
provision for the repatriation of that seafarer und er regulation 19 ends under 
regulation 21; or 
(ii)  which starts after a period referred to in sub-para graph (i) but is caused by 
circumstances or events arising during that period; 
(b)  does not first occur during a period of leave, other than shore leave; and 
(c)  results in the seafarer’s incapacity for work. 
(2)  If a seafarer falling within paragraph (1)(a)(i) do es not receive the wages payable under the 
seafarer employment agreement in respect of the per iod specified in paragraph (3), the shipowner 
must pay to the seafarer a sum equal to the difference between— 
(a)  any sums received by the seafarer in respect of wag es for that period under that 
agreement; and 
(b)  the wages which would have been payable to the seaf arer under that agreement if the 
seafarer had remained fit for work throughout that period, and (where the agreement 
would otherwise have terminated during that period)  if the agreement had continued on 
the same terms throughout that period. 
(3)  The period referred to in paragraph (2) is a period— 
(a)  starting on the date of the injury or the first day of the sickness; and 
(b)  ending on the date on which the duty to repatriate the seafarer under regulation 19 ends 
under regulation 21 (or, if such a duty does not ar ise, the date on which the seafarer 
leaves the ship). 
(4)  Subject to paragraphs (5) to (7), if a seafarer fal ling within paragraph (1) is incapable of 
work after the date on which the duty to repatriate  the seafarer under regulation 19 ends under 
regulation 21 (or if such a duty does not arise, th e date on which the seafarer leaves the ship), and 
the seafarer does not receive the basic wages payab le under the seafarer employment agreement 
for the period starting on that date and ending on the date on which the seafarer is again fit for 
work, the shipowner must pay to the seafarer a sum equal to the difference between— 
(a)  any sums received by the seafarer in respect of bas ic wages for that period under that 
agreement; and 
(b)  the basic wages which would have been payable to th e seafarer under that agreement if 
the seafarer had remained fit for work throughout t hat period, and (where the agreement 
would otherwise have terminated during that period)  if the agreement had continued on 
the same terms throughout that period. 
(5)  The duty in paragraph (4) ends on the expiry of the  period of 16 weeks commencing on the 
day following the date of the injury or the first day of the sickness referred to in paragraph (1). 
(6)  The duty in paragraph (4) is conditional upon the s eafarer applying for all relevant social 
security benefits payable in consequence of— 
(a)  the seafarer’s incapacity for work; and 
(b)  the sickness or injury which resulted in the incapacity for work, 
under the laws of the United Kingdom or the laws or  arrangements in the country to which the 
seafarer is repatriated. 
 26  
(7)  If the seafarer receives social security benefits o f the kind described in paragraph (6) in 
respect of the period referred to in paragraph (5) or any part of that period— 
(a)  the amount which the shipowner must pay to the seaf arer under paragraph (4) is to be 
reduced by that amount; and 
(b)  the shipowner may recover as a civil debt any payme nts already made to the seafarer to 
the extent that they exceed such reduced amounts. 
(8)  The seafarer must on request provide information to  the shipowner as to the amounts 
received by the seafarer in social security benefits during the period referred to in paragraph (5). 
(9)  The sums payable to the seafarer under paragraphs ( 2) and (4) must be paid in the same 
manner and at the same frequency as wages are (or, as the case may be, were) payable under the 
seafarer employment agreement. 
(10)  The seafarer may recover any sum due from the shipo wner under paragraph (2) or (4) as a 
civil debt. 
(11)  This regulation does not apply to a seafarer where— 
(a)  the injury referred to in paragraph (1) was sustained while the seafarer was not at work; 
(b)  the injury or sickness referred to in paragraph (1)  was sustained or arose due to the 
seafarer’s wilful misconduct; or 
(c)  the sickness or incapacity for work existed at the time when the seafarer entered the 
seafarer employment agreement, and the seafarer del iberately concealed the sickness or 
incapacity from the shipowner. 
Property left behind by sick or injured seafarer 
51.  To the extent it would not otherwise apply, regula tion 24(2), (4), (6) to (8), (10), (11) and 
(13) applies in respect of property left behind on board the ship by a seafarer falling within 
regulation 50(1). 
Shipowners’ liability in respect of burial or cremation of seafarer 
52. —(1) Subject to paragraph (2), if a seafarer dies while— 
(a)  on board a ship on which the seafarer works; or 
(b)  on shore leave in a country other than the seafarer’s country of residence, 
the shipowner must meet any expenses reasonably inc urred in connection with the seafarer’s 
burial or cremation. 
(2)  The duty in paragraph (1) does not apply to expenses which are met by a public authority. 
(3)  Where the seafarer’s personal representatives incur  costs in meeting expenses which should 
be met by the shipowner under paragraph (1), whethe r by incurring such costs directly or by 
reimbursing another person who has incurred those c osts, those representatives may recover those 
costs from the shipowner as a civil debt. 
Interpretation of Part 10 
53.  In this Part— 
“basic wages” means the pay, however composed, for the seafarer’s normal hours of work 
excluding overtime, bonuses, allowances, paid leave and other remuneration; and 
“wages” means the pay, however composed, for the seafarer’s normal hours of work including 
overtime, allowances, paid leave and other remuneration (but excluding bonuses). 
 
 27  
PART 11 
Inspection and detention of ships 
Inspection of United Kingdom ships and non-United K ingdom ships without MLC 
documentation 
54. —(1) For the purpose of checking compliance with th ese Regulations, a relevant inspector 
(or, in the case of a United Kingdom ship, a proper  officer) may at all reasonable times go on 
board a ship and inspect the ship, its equipment, any articles on it and any document carried on it. 
(2)  Section 258(1A), (3) and (5) of the Act( a) (powers to inspect ships and their equipment, etc.) 
apply in relation to paragraph (1) as if references  in those subsections to “subsection (1) above” 
and “this section” were references to paragraph (1). 
(3)  Sections 259(1), (2), (5), (7) and (9) to (12) and 260(1) and (2) of the Act (powers of 
inspectors in relation to premises and ships, and supplementary provisions) apply in relation to the 
inspection of a ship to which this regulation appli es for the purpose of checking compliance with 
these Regulations as if— 
(a)  references in those sections to “this Act” were to these Regulations; 
(b)  for section 259(1)(b) there were substituted a refe rence to any ship to which this 
regulation applies; 
(c)  in section 259(2)(h)(iii) the words “or any instrument made under it” were omitted; and 
(d)  in section 259(5) the reference to “subsections (2)  and (4) above for the purposes of 
Chapter II of Part VI” were to “subsection (2) abov e”, and the reference to “those 
subsections” were to “that subsection”. 
(4)  Any regulations made under section 259(8) or sectio n 260(3) of the Act apply for the 
purposes of the provisions of those sections as app lied by paragraphs (2) and (3) as they apply for 
the purposes of the Act. 
(5)  Sections 261 to 266 of the Act( b) (improvement notices and prohibition notices) app ly for 
the purposes of these Regulations as if the meaning  of “the relevant statutory provisions” in 
section 261(4) included these Regulations. 
Inspection of non-United Kingdom ships with MLC documentation 
55. —(1) A relevant inspector may— 
(a)  review a ship’s Maritime Labour Certificate and Dec laration of Maritime Labour 
Compliance or the ship’s interim Maritime Labour Certificate; and 
(b)  where Standard A5.2.1 of the MLC (inspections in port) applies, carry out a more detailed 
inspection in accordance with that Standard. 
(2)  Where a relevant inspector has power to inspect a s hip under paragraph (1)(b), regulation 54 
applies to the relevant inspector as if— 
(a)  in paragraphs (1) and (3), for the words “checking compliance with these Regulations” 
there were substituted “carrying out an inspection under regulation 55(1)(b)”; and 
(b)  in paragraph (3), for the words “to which this regu lation applies”, in both places where 
they appear, there were substituted “to which regulation 55(1)(b) applies”. 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) Subsection (1A) was inserted by the Merchant Ship ping and Maritime Security Act 1997 (c. 28), Schedule 1, paragraph 4.  
(b) Section 261 was amended by the Merchant Shipping and Maritime Security Act 1997, Schedule 6, paragraph 16 and by S.I. 
1998/2241 and S.I. 1998/2647. Section 264 was amend ed by the Arbitration Act 1996 (c. 23), Schedule 4,  and by the 
Constitutional Reform Act 2005 (c. 4), Schedule 11;  there are further amendments made by the Tribunals , Courts and 
Enforcement Act 2007 (c.15), section 50 and Schedule 10 which have yet to be brought into force.  
 28  
Detention of ships 
56. —(1) Where a relevant inspector has clear grounds for believing that— 
(a)  a ship does not comply with these Regulations; and 
(b) (i) the conditions on board are clearly hazardo us to the safety, health or security of 
seafarers; or 
(ii)  the non-compliance represents a serious breach or t he latest in a series of repeated 
breaches of these Regulations or the requirements o f the MLC (including the rights 
of seafarers referred to in Articles III and IV of the MLC which are secured by it), 
that ship is liable to be detained. 
(2)  Where a relevant inspector has clear grounds for believing that— 
(a)  the shipowner has failed to make provision in conne ction with which the Secretary of 
State has incurred costs under regulation 27; and 
(b)  the Secretary of State has requested reimbursement of those costs but has not been 
reimbursed, 
every ship which is owned by the shipowner is liable to be detained. 
(3)  Where a ship is detained under this regulation and all of the grounds for detention have 
ceased to apply, a person having power to detain th e ship must, at the request of the shipowner or 
the master of the ship, immediately release the ship— 
(a)  if no proceedings for an offence under these Regula tions are instituted within the period 
of seven days beginning with the day on which the ship is detained; 
(b)  if proceedings for an offence under these Regulatio ns, having been instituted within that 
period, are concluded without the shipowner or master of the ship being convicted; 
(c)  if either— 
(i)  the sum of £30,000 is paid to the Secretary of State by way of security; or 
(ii)  security which, in the opinion of the Secretary of State, is satisfactory and is for an 
amount not less than £30,000 is given to the Secretary of State, 
by or on behalf of the shipowner or the master of the ship; 
(d)  where the shipowner or the master of the ship is co nvicted of an offence under these 
Regulations, if any costs or expenses ordered to be  paid by that person, and any fine 
imposed on that person, have been paid; or 
(e)  if the release is ordered by a court or tribunal re ferred to in article 292 of the United 
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea( a), and any bond or other financial security 
ordered by such court or tribunal is posted. 
(4)  The Secretary of State must repay any sum paid in p ursuance of paragraph (3)(c) or release 
any security so given— 
(a)  if no proceedings for an offence under these Regula tions are instituted within the period 
of seven days beginning with the day on which the sum is paid or the security is given; or  
(b)  if proceedings for such an offence, having been ins tituted within that period, are 
concluded without the shipowner or the master of the ship being convicted. 
(5)  Where a sum has been paid, or security has been giv en, by any person in pursuance of 
paragraph (3)(c) and the shipowner or the master of the ship is convicted of an offence under these 
Regulations, the sum so paid or the amount made ava ilable under the security must be applied as 
follows— 
(a)  first in payment of any costs or expenses ordered by the court to be paid by the shipowner 
or the master of the ship; and 
(b)  next in payment of any fine imposed by the court, 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) Cmnd. 8941. 
 29  
and any balance must be repaid to the first-mentioned person. 
(6)  Section 145 of the Act (interpretation of reference s in section 144 to the institution of 
proceedings or their conclusion without conviction) applies for the purposes of paragraphs (3) and 
(4) as if— 
(a)  references to the owner of a ship were to the shipowner under these Regulations; and 
(b)  references to an offence under section 131 were ref erences to an offence under these 
Regulations. 
Failure to repatriate - detention of non-United Kin gdom ships with MLC documentation at 
request of foreign State 
57. —(1) Subject to paragraph (2), a ship is liable to be detained if the Secretary of State receives 
a request from the consul, diplomatic representative or appropriate maritime authorities of another 
State which has ratified the MLC that the ship be d etained pursuant to paragraph 6 of Standard 
A2.5 of the MLC (power for States to detain or requ est detention of ships in connection with a 
shipowner defaulting in its duty to repatriate a seafarer). 
(2)  A ship may not be detained under this regulation un less the Secretary of State receives 
satisfactory evidence that— 
(a)  the State has incurred costs pursuant to paragraph 5 of Standard A2.5 (repatriation) of the 
MLC in connection with a failure of the shipowner t o comply with its legal duties 
concerning repatriation; and 
(b)  a request for reimbursement has been made but those costs have not been reimbursed. 
(3)  Where a ship is detained under this regulation and the Secretary of State receives— 
(a)  satisfactory evidence that the costs referred to in paragraph (2) have been reimbursed; or 
(b)  a request from the consul, diplomatic representative or appropriate maritime authorities of 
the relevant State that the ship be released from detention, 
a person having power to detain the ship must immediately release the ship. 
Supplementary provisions as respects detention of ships 
58. —(1) The power under regulation 56 or regulation 57  to detain a ship may be exercised as 
regards a United Kingdom ship wherever it may be, b ut as regards a ship which is not a United 
Kingdom ship may only be exercised if the ship in question is— 
(a)  in a port or shipyard in the United Kingdom; or 
(b)  at an offshore terminal in United Kingdom waters. 
(2)  A person having powers to detain a ship may permit a ship which is liable to be detained 
under regulation 56 or regulation 57 to proceed to sea for the purpose of proceeding to the nearest 
appropriate repair yard available. 
(3)  Section 284 of the Act( a) (enforcing detention of a ship) applies where a s hip is liable to be 
detained under this regulation as if— 
(a)  references to the owner of a ship were to the shipowner under these Regulations; 
(b)  references to detention of a ship under the Act wer e references to detention of the ship in 
question under these Regulations; and 
(c)  subsection (7) were omitted. 
(4)  Where a ship is liable to be detained under regulat ion 56 or regulation 57, the person 
detaining the ship must serve on the master of the ship a detention notice which— 
(a)  states the grounds for the detention; and 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) Section 284 was amended by the Merchant Shipping and Maritime Security Act 1997, section 9 and Schedule 1. 
 30  
(b)  requires the terms of the notice to be complied wit h until the ship is released by any 
person mentioned in section 284(1) of the Act. 
(5)  Where a ship other than a United Kingdom ship is de tained, the Secretary of State must 
immediately inform the consul or diplomatic represe ntative of the State whose flag the ship is 
entitled to fly, or the appropriate maritime author ities of that State, and invite them to send a 
representative to attend the ship. 
 
PART 12 
Offences and penalties 
Penalties 
59. —(1) Subject to paragraphs (2) to (5), offences und er these Regulations are punishable on 
summary conviction by a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale. 
(2)  Offences under the following provisions are punishable on summary conviction by a fine not 
exceeding level 4 on the standard scale— 
(a)  regulation 10(3) and (7); 
(b)  regulation 12(4); 
(c)  regulation 15(2), but only in relation to an offenc e consisting of a breach of regulation 
15(1)(b); 
(d)  regulation 36(3); 
(e)  regulation 45(2); and 
(f)  regulation 46(2). 
(3)  Offences under the following provisions are punishable on summary conviction by a fine not 
exceeding level 3 on the standard scale— 
(a)  regulation 12(8); 
(b)  regulation 13(3); 
(c)  regulation 24(5), (9) and (12); 
(d)  regulation 25(3); 
(e)  regulation 28(4), but only in relation to an offenc e consisting of a breach of regulation 
28(3)(b); 
(f)  regulation 29(5); 
(g)  regulation 33(5), but only in relation to an offenc e consisting of a breach of regulation 
33(4)(a); 
(h)  regulation 36(5); and 
(i)  regulation 41(4), but only in relation to an offenc e consisting of a breach of regulation 
41(3)(b). 
(4)  Offences under the following provisions are punishable on summary conviction by a fine not 
exceeding level 2 on the standard scale— 
(a)  regulation 17(5); 
(b)  regulation 18(2); 
(c)  regulation 24(3); 
(d)  regulation 29(7); and 
(e)  regulation 33(5), but only in relation to an offenc e consisting of a breach of regulation 
33(4)(b). 
 31  
(5)  Offences under the following provisions are punishable on summary conviction by a fine not 
exceeding level 5 on the standard scale or on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a term 
not exceeding two years or to a fine, or to both— 
(a)  regulation 29(3); 
(b)  regulation 30(4); 
(c)  regulation 31(3); 
(d)  regulation 32(4); 
(e)  regulation 33(3); 
(f)  regulation 37(8); 
(g)  regulation 41(9); and 
(h)  regulation 49(3). 
Defence 
60.  In any proceedings for an offence under these Regu lations (other than an offence under 
regulation 10(5)) it is a defence for the person ch arged to show that all reasonable steps had been 
taken by that person to ensure compliance with the provision concerned. 
PART 13 
Review 
Review 
61. —(1) The Secretary of State must from time to time— 
(a)  carry out a review of these Regulations; 
(b)  set out the conclusions of the review in a report; and 
(c)  publish the report. 
(2)  In carrying out the review the Secretary of State must, so far as is reasonable, have regard to 
how the MLC is implemented in other member States. 
(3)  The report must in particular— 
(a)  set out the objectives intended to be achieved by these Regulations; 
(b)  assess the extent to which those objectives are achieved; and 
(c)  assess whether those objectives remain appropriate and, if so, the extent to which they 
could be achieved with a system that imposes less regulation. 
(4)  The first report under this regulation must be publ ished before the end of the period of five 
years beginning with the day on which these Regulations come into force. 
(5)  Reports under this regulation are afterwards to be published at intervals not exceeding five 
years. 
 
Signed by authority of the Secretary of State for Transport 
 
 Stephen Hammond  
 Parliamentary Under Secretary of State 
9th July 2014 Department for Transport 
 
 
 
 
 
 32  
 SCHEDULE 1 Regulation 10(1) 
Provision to be included in a Seafarer Employment Agreement 
PART 1 
Provision to be included in all agreements 
1.  The full name, birthplace and date of birth (or ag e at the time of entering into the agreement) 
of the seafarer. 
2.  The name and address of the shipowner. 
3.  The place where the agreement is entered into. 
4.  The date on which the agreement is entered into. 
5.  The capacity in which the seafarer is to work. 
6.  If the agreement has been made for a definite period, the termination date. 
7.  If the agreement has been made for an indefinite p eriod, the period of notice of termination 
required and the circumstances in which such notice may be given. 
8.  If the agreement has been made for a particular vo yage, the destination port and the period 
following arrival after which the agreement terminates. 
9.  The health and social security protection benefits  to be provided to the seafarer under the 
agreement. 
10.  The maximum period of service on board following w hich the seafarer is entitled to 
repatriation (which must not exceed a period of 12 months less the number of days statutory paid 
leave to which the seafarer is entitled). 
11.  The seafarer’s entitlement to repatriation (including the mode of transport and destination of 
repatriation). 
12.  The circumstances in which the seafarer is require d to meet or reimburse the shipowner for 
the costs of repatriation. 
13.  The maximum sum which the shipowner will pay to th e seafarer in respect of compensation 
for any loss of personal property arising from the loss or foundering of the ship. 
14.  Details of any collective bargaining agreement whi ch is incorporated (in whole or in part) 
into the agreement or is otherwise relevant to it. 
PART 2 
Provision to be included where seafarer is an employee 
1.  The wages (either the amount or the formula to be used in determining them). 
2.  The manner in which wages must be paid, including payment dates (the first of which must be 
no more than one month after the date on which the agreement is entered into, with all subsequent 
dates being no more than one month apart) and the c ircumstances (if any) in which wages may or 
must be paid in a different currency. 
3.  The hours of work. 
4.  The paid leave (either the amount or the formula to be used in determining it). 
5.  Any pension arrangements, including any entitlement to participate in a pension scheme. 
 33  
6.  The grievance and disciplinary procedures. 
PART 3 
Provision to be included where seafarer is not an employee 
1.  The remuneration (either the amount or the formula to be used in determining it). 
2.  The manner in which the remuneration must be paid,  including payment dates (the first of 
which must be no more than one month after the date on which the agreement is entered into, with 
all subsequent dates being no more than one month a part) and the circumstances (if any) in which 
the remuneration may or must be paid in a different currency. 
 SCHEDULE 2 Regulation 12(6) 
Provision to be included in a written record of work on a ship 
 
1.  Name, port of registry, gross or register tonnage and official number of the ship. 
2.  Description of voyage. 
3.  Capacity in which seafarer worked on the ship. 
4.  Date on which seafarer started work on the ship. 
5.  Date and location of seafarer’s discharge from the ship. 
 
 
 
EXPLANATORY NOTE 
(This note is not part of the Regulations) 
 
These Regulations implement the following provision s relating to seafarers’ working conditions 
and entitlements: 
(a)  those parts of the Maritime Labour Convention, 2006 (Cm 7049) (“the MLC”) referred to 
below and their related mandatory Standards; 
(b)  the corresponding parts of the Agreement set out in  the Annex to Council Directive 
2009/13/EC (“the 2009 Directive”) of 16 February 20 09 implementing the Agreement 
concluded by the European Community Shipowners’ Ass ociations (ECSA) and the 
European Transport Workers’ Federation (ETF) on the  Maritime Labour Convention, 
2006 (O.J. L124, 20.5.2009, p. 30); and 
(c)  clauses 6 and 11 of the Agreement set out in the An nex to Council Directive 1999/63/EC 
(“the 1999 Directive”) concerning the Agreement on the organisation of working time of 
seafarers concluded by the European Community Shipo wners’ Association (ECSA) and 
the Federation of Transport Workers’ Unions in the European Union (FST) (O.J. L167, 
2.7.1999, p. 33), as amended by Article 2(3) of the 2009 Directive. 
With some exceptions (including pleasure vessels an d fishing vessels) the Regulations apply to 
sea-going United Kingdom ships, wherever they are, and to sea-going non-United Kingdom ships 
whilst in United Kingdom waters (regulation 3). 
Part 2 implements Regulation 1.1 of the MLC (Minimu m age). Persons under the age of 16 must 
not work as seafarers and, with some exceptions, se afarers under the age of 18 must not work on 
 34  
ships at night (regulations 4 and 5). Separate provision is made in respect of non-United Kingdom 
ships with MLC documentation (regulation 6). 
Part 3 implements part of Regulation 1.4 of the MLC  (Recruitment and placement) and applies to 
all ships within the scope of the Regulations. When  recruiting seafarers, a shipowner must only 
use a recruitment and placement service which is (a ) based in a country which has ratified the 
MLC or (b) based in another country and compliant w ith the MLC standards (irrespective of 
whether it is required to be so under the domestic law of that country). 
Part 4 implements Regulation 2.1 of the MLC (Seafar ers’ employment agreements). Every 
seafarer is required to have a seafarer employment agreement (a “SEA”) with another person in 
respect of their work on a ship and the SEA must co ntain certain specified provisions (regulations  
9 and 10 ). Regulations 11 to 14  make related provision. Separate provision is made  in respect of 
non-United Kingdom ships with MLC documentation (regulation 15 ). 
Part 5 implements Regulation 2.2 of the MLC (Wages) . Provision is made for the payment of 
interest on wages or other remuneration due to a se afarer which are not paid on time ( regulation 
16 ). Seafarers are entitled to receive an account of the wages or other remuneration due to them, at 
intervals not exceeding one month (and also followi ng the termination of a SEA) ( regulation 17 ). 
Separate provision is made in relation to non-Unite d Kingdom ships with MLC documentation 
(regulation 18 ). 
Part 6 implements Regulation 2.5 of the MLC (Repatr iation). In the cases specified, a shipowner 
must make provision for the repatriation of a seafa rer (regulations 19 to 21 ) and the shipowner is 
required to make provision for that seafarer’s reli ef and maintenance pending repatriation 
(regulation 22 ). A seafarer must not be required to pay towards t he costs of such repatriation or 
relief and maintenance, other than in cases of seri ous misconduct ( regulation 23 ). Regulation 24  
makes provision with respect to seafarer property left behind on a ship. Regulation 25  requires that 
a copy of Part 6 of these Regulations and certain s pecified guidance is held on board ships and 
made available to seafarers. Where a shipowner fail s to make provision for the repatriation of 
seafarers, or for their relief and maintenance pend ing repatriation, the Secretary of State is 
required to make such provision in the case of United Kingdom ships (and may  do so in relation to 
non-United Kingdom ships) ( regulation 27 ). Separate provision with regard to the repatriati on of 
seafarers is made in respect of non-United Kingdom ships with MLC documentation ( regulation 
28 ). 
Regulation 26,  which applies to all ships within the scope of these Regulations, requires a contract 
of insurance or other security, adequate to ensure that the shipowner will be able to meet any 
liabilities arising from the duty to repatriate under regulations 19 and 21, to be in place. 
Part 7 implements Regulation 3.1 of the MLC (Accomm odation and recreational facilities). Ships 
are required to comply with the requirements relating to crew accommodation set out in Merchant 
Shipping Notice 1844 (M) and there are related inspection requirements (regulation 29 ). Provision 
is made to allow the Secretary of State to exempt s hips from certain requirements in that Notice 
and to approve requirements which are substantially  equivalent ( regulations 31 and 32 ). Ships 
which were built before the coming into force of th ese Regulations (and whose crew 
accommodation has not been substantially reconstruc ted or altered after that date) are subject to 
requirements in earlier legislation (regulation 30 ). Separate provision is made with respect to non-
United Kingdom ships with MLC documentation (regulation 33 ). 
Part 8 implements Regulation 3.2 of the MLC (Food and catering). Provision is made in relation to 
the quantity and quality of food and drinking water  provided for seafarers on board a ship and 
such food and water must be provided free of charge (regulation 34). Provision is made in relation 
to the storage and handling of food and drinking wa ter provided for seafarers and the organisation 
and equipment of catering departments on board ship s, with related inspection requirements 
(regulations 35 and 36). Certain ships are required to carry a qualified ship’s cook (regulation 37). 
Provision is made to allow the Secretary of State t o exempt ships from that requirement and to 
approve requirements which are substantially equiva lent ( regulation 37).  Related provision is 
made in relation to the issue of certificates of co mpetency as a ship’s cook and the recognition of 
existing certificates of competency ( regulations 38 and 39 ). Regulation 40 imposes requirements 
 35  
in relation to the training of catering staff and other persons processing food in the galley of a ship. 
Separate provision is made in relation to food and catering on board non-United Kingdom ships 
with MLC documentation (regulation 41). 
Part 9 implements Regulation 4.1 of the MLC (Medica l care on board ship and ashore). In 
specified circumstances, a seafarer who is sick or injured is entitled to medical care on board ship 
and, for a maximum period of 16 weeks, to certain e xpenses arising from such sickness or injury 
(regulation 43 ). Certain ships are required to carry a medical pr actitioner (as defined – see 
regulation 47 ) (regulation 44 ). In the circumstances specified, a seafarer is en titled to seek 
medical attention onshore when the ship is in a por t of call ( regulation 45). Separate provision is 
made in respect of  non-United Kingdom ships with MLC documentation (regulation 46). 
Part 10 implements Regulation 4.2 of the MLC (Shipo wners’ liability). Other than regulation 49  
(which applies to all ships within the scope of the  Regulations), Part 10 applies to United 
Kingdom ships and to non-United Kingdom ships witho ut MLC documentation only. A seafarer 
who has become unemployed when the ship on which th ey work founders or is lost is entitled to 
receive a sum equivalent to the wages which would have been payable during the period specified 
and to compensation for other injury or loss ( regulation 48). A seafarer who suffer sickness or 
injury in the circumstances specified is entitled t o any unpaid wages (as defined – see regulation 
53) for a specified period ( regulation 50). A seafarer who remains incapable of work after t hat 
period is entitled to receive any basic wages (also  defined in regulation 53 ) payable under the 
SEA for a 16 week period (less the amount of any so cial security benefits received in respect of 
that period). Provision is made in respect of prope rty left behind on a ship by such a seafarer 
(regulation 51). Provision is made in respect of expenses incurred in connection with the burial or 
cremation of a seafarer who dies on board a ship or  whilst on shore leave in a country other than 
their country of residence (regulation 52). 
Shipowners are required to ensure that a contract of insurance (or other security) is in force which 
adequately covers potential liabilities towards seafarers (regulation 49 ). 
Part 11 confers powers to allow the inspection and detention of ships where breaches of these 
Regulations have occurred. Provision is made for th e detention of a non-United Kingdom ship 
with MLC documentation at the request of a foreign State where a shipowner has defaulted in its 
duty to repatriate a seafarer (regulation 57). 
Criminal penalties are attached to many of the requ irements in the Regulations. Part 12 specifies 
the mode of trial and the maximum penalty level app licable to each offence ( regulation 59 ) and 
provides a “reasonable steps” defence for all offen ces (except an offence under regulation 10(5)) 
(regulation 60). 
Part 13 contains a provision requiring the Secretar y of State to review the Regulations and to 
publish a report of that review within five years o f their coming into force (and within every five 
years after that). Following a review it will fall to the Secretary of State to consider whether the 
Regulations should remain as they are, or be revoke d or be amended. A further instrument would 
be needed to revoke the relevant provisions or to amend them. 
Merchant Shipping Notices and Marine Guidance Notes  are published by the Maritime and 
Coastguard Agency. Copies may be downloaded from th e MCA’s website 
https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/maritime-and-coastguard-agency or by e-
subscription from mnotices@ecgroup.co.uk with ‘Subsc ribe’ in the subject heading, or obtained 
from M-Notices Subscriptions, PO Box 362, Europa Pa rk, Grays Essex RM17 9AY, tel 01375 
484548, fax 01375 484556.  
The MLC may be downloaded from the website of the I nternational Labour Organisation (“ILO”) 
at www.ilo.org/global/standards/maritime-labour-con vention/lang--en/index.htm. Copies of the 
MLC may be obtained from www.tsoshop.co.uk, by e-ma il from customer.services@tso.co.uk or 
by post from TSO, P.O. Box 29, Norwich, NR3 IGN, te l: +44 (0)870 600 5522/fax: +44 (0)870 
600 5533, as a priced publication. Copies of the ST CW Convention may be obtained via the 
website of the International Maritime Organization (“IMO”) at www.imo.org/Publications, by e-
 36  
 
UK201407105   07/2014   19585 
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2014/1613 
mail from sales@imo.org or by post from the IMO, 4 A lbert Embankment, London SE1 7SR, tel: 
+ 44 (0)20 7735 7611/fax: + 44 (0)20 7587 3241 as a priced publication. 
Nine full impact assessments of the effect that thi s instrument will have on the costs of business 
and the voluntary sector are published with the Exp lanatory Memorandum alongside this 
instrument on www.legislation.gov.uk. 
  
  
© Crown copyright 2014 
Printed and published in the UK by The Stationery O ffice Limited under the authority and superintenden ce of Carol Tullo, 
Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office and Queen’s Printer of Acts of Parliament. 