LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: SUPERFUND RECORD OF DECISION: ROCKAWAY TOWNSHIP WELLFIELD, ROCKAWAY, NJ.
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/100024
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 3dc55ce75567c40c119cae6c1e15da410e450f2f7200c542a8296937047ce4a8
Source PDF pages: 79
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                PB94-963834
                                EPA/ROD/R02-94/255
                                September 1994




EPA



      Rockaway TowmisMp Wellfield,

      1(0/5/1993




        EPA Region                                      V-

       0 Broadway, 16$h FI.
        York, NY 10007-1866
                                               100024

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          ROD FACT SHEET



SITE
Name                      Rockaway Township Wellfield
Location/State            Rockaway Township, New Jersey
EPA Region                II
HRS Score (date)          28.9 (June, 1983)

ROD
Date Signed               October 5, 1993
Remedy                    Pump and treat ground water; replace
                          the existing township air stripper with
                          a new one
Operating Unit Number     OU-1
Capital cost              $991,000   (In 1993 dollars)
Construction Completion   To be estimated during remedial design
0 & M in 1993             $661,149
Present worth             $9,848,895   (5% discount rate and 30
                                        years of O & M assumed)

LEAD
Remedial/Enforcement      Remedial
EPA/State/PRP             State
Primary contact           Mary Lou Parra, NJDEPE   (609) 984-0980
Secondary contact         Ron Rusin, USEPA         (212) 264-1873
Main PRP(s)               Thiokol Corporation
PRP Contact               Ken Ford                 (801)   629-2200


WASTE
Type                      VOCs (TCE, TCA) and inorganics
Medium                    Soil and ground water
Origin                    On-site disposal of contaminants to
                          soil (probably rocket engine
                          degreasing)
Est. quantity, cu.yd      To be determined by separate operable
                          unit

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         DECLARATION STATEMENT

                          RECORD OF DECISION

                  ROCKAWAY TOWNSHIP WELLFIELD



Site Name and Location
Rockaway Township Wellfield
Rockaway Township, Morris County, New Jersey
Statement of Basis and Purpose
This decision document presents the selected remedial action for
ground water contamination at the Rockaway Township Wellfield
site, which Has chosen in accordance with the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980,
as amended by the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of
1986, and, to the extent practicable, the National Oil and
Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan. This decision
is based on the administrative record for the site.
The State of New Jersey concurs with the selected remedy.
Assessment of the Site
Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from the
Rockaway Township Wellfield site, if not addressed by
implementing the response action selected in this Record of
Decision, may present an imminent and substantial endangerment
to public health, welfare, or the environment.
Description of the Selected Remedy
The remedy presented in this document addresses the current and
future threats to human health and the environment associated
with the contaminated ground water at the Rockaway Township
Wellfield site. It provides for the restoration of the
contaminated ground water to the more stringent of the federal
and New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant
Levels (MCLs) and the New Jersey Ground Water Quality Standards.
A subsequent decision document is planned to evaluate the need
for remediation of the contaminant sources.
The major components of the selected remedy include:
         Extraction of contaminated ground water and restoration
         of the aquifer to the more stringent of the federal and
         New Jersey MCLs and New Jersey Ground Water Quality
         Standards;

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         Treatment of the extracted ground water to levels
         attaining the more stringent of the federal and New
         Jersey MCLs and New Jersey Ground Water Quality
         Standards;
          Reinjection of the treated ground water to the extent
          needed to promote ground water restoration, with
          discharge of any surplus to the public water supply;
         Replacement of the deteriorated air stripping treatment
         system at the Rockaway Township Wellfield; and
         Appropriate environmental monitoring to ensure the
         effectiveness of the remedy.
Statutory Determinations
The selected remedy is protective of human health and the
environment, complies with federal and state requirements that
are legally applicable or relevant and appropriate to the
remedial action, and is cost effective. This remedy utilizes
permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies to the
maximum extent practicable and satisfies the statutory preference
for remedies that employ treatment that reduces toxicity,
mobility, or volume as a principal element. Subsequent actions
may be necessary to address contaminant sources at the site.
Because this remedy will result in hazardous substances remaining
on site above health-based levels, a review will be conducted
within five years after commencement of remedial action to ensure
that the remedy continues to provide adequate protection of human
health and the environment.




William J. yHuszynskj/'P.E.        Date
                                        n/f/93
Acting Regional Administrator

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                        DECISION SUMMARY

                              OF B2CXSJOB?
                           SOWSJSHSP WSLLFIILD

iit@ Kase, Location,
The Rockaway Township Wellfield Site is located in Rockaway
Township, Morris County, New Jersey. Rockaway Township is
situated in the center of Morris County, approximately 10 miles
north of Morristown and 20 miles northwest of Newark in the
north-central portion of the State.
The site, located north of Interstate 80, includes a 185-acre
area which lies in the center of a Y-shaped valley in an
otherwise hilly area of the New Jersey Highlands (Figure 1). The
area has been developed by commercial business and light industry
including service stations, restaurants, a hotel, plastic
manufacturers, truck/transit companies, and commercial office
complexes.
Near the center of the site is the Rockaway Township Well field
which serves as the source of potable water for approximately
12,000 residents in Rockaway Township. The wellfield consists of
Municipal Wells 4, 6 and 7 (PW4, PW6 and PW7) which are located
on the northeast side of Green Pond Road, south of Meadow Brook,
and west of the New Jersey Transit railroad tracks. At present,
PW7 and/or PW6 are continuously pumped at a rate of approximately
1.2 million gallons per day (mgd) , while PW4 is not utilized
within the wellfield system.
These municipal wells are situated in glacial sediments which
have been deposited in a large bedrock valley. The "valley fill"
has a thickness of up to 200 feet near the center of the Beaver
Brook valley and primarily consists of sands and gravels, with
abundant cobbles and boulders. Within the sands and gravels,
prominent lenses of clay and boulder zones occur. The Rockaway
Township production wells are screened in sand and gravel
deposits at a depth of 130 feet to 160 feet below the ground
surface. Prior to the construction of the municipal wells in the
mid to late 1960s, the predominant direction of ground water flow
in the aquifer was thought to be south-southwest.
Water levels measured in monitoring wells throughout the study
area indicate that the cone-of -depression from the wellfield
dominates local ground water flow. Within the local area, ground
water flows toward the wellfield and is thought to be recharged
by natural precipitation falling on the study area, ground water
drainage along the valley walls, ground water flowing from areas
upgradient of the site, and infiltration from surface streams.
Rockaway Township overlies a designated sole source aquifer. The
United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) designates
areas as sole source aquifers under the Safe Drinking Water Act
to protect principal drinking water sources.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Site History and Enforcement Activities
Water samples collected from the wellfield in late 1979 and early
1980 indicated the presence of trichloroethene (ICE) and other
volatile organic compounds (VOCs). The Township installed an
activated carbon adsorption treatment system as a result of
detecting the contaminants. In October 1980, the treated water
developed an unpleasant taste and odor. Analysis showed it to be
contaminated with methylene chloride, di-isopropyl ether, and
methyl tertiary butyl ether. On October 10, 1980, the Township
declared a water emergency and advised residents to avoid
consumption of the water. An air stripper was subsequently
installed at the site for additional treatment. Presently, the
only treatment system in operation is the air stripper. However,
the Township uses carbon adsorption tanks when the air stripper
is taken out of operation for repairs. The New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection and Energy (NJDEPE) then undertook an
industrial survey to identify potential sources of these
hazardous substances. The survey, along with additional
information, revealed that hydrocarbon products were present in
the ground water at a Shell Station and Town and Country Station
(presently Exxon), which are both located within the western
portion of the study area. On August 16, 1982, NJDEPE requested
that EPA consider this site for inclusion on the National
Priorities List (NPL) of Superfund sites. The site was
subsequently placed on the NPL on September 1, 1983.
In June 1986, Morton Thiokol Inc., Shell Oil Co. and the Town and
Country Gas Station were issued Directives by NJDEPE to pay for a
Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study (RI/FS). In May
1987, an Administrative Consent Order (ACO) was executed between
Morton Thiokol, Shell Oil and NJDEPE. The Town and Country Gas
Station did not comply with the Directive. Based on the
information from the Phase I RI investigation, NJDEPE determined
that it was necessary to conduct an additional investigation
(Phase II RI). In April 1989, Directives were again sent to the
Town and Country Gas Station, Shell Oil Co., Morton International
and Thiokol Corp. (Morton Thiokol had split into Morton
International and Thiokol Corp.) that would require them to pay
for the Phase II RI. Although Town and Country again failed to
respond to the Directive, Shell Oil Company, Thiokol Corp. and
Morton International did comply with the Directive for the Phase
II RI.
Highlights of Community Participation
A Community Relations Plan (CRP) was developed to ensure the
public opportunities for involvement in site-related decisions,
including site analysis and characterization, alternatives
analysis, and remedy selection.
A meeting was held in April 1987 to provide residents and local
officials with an update on past activities and to inform the

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

public of the scope of work for the RI/FS and other activities
planned for the site.
The RI and FS reports, which addressed the ground water
contamination, were released to the public in June 1993. A
Proposed Plan, that identified EPA's and NJDEPE's preferred
remedial alternative, was released on June 30, 1993. The
documents were made available to the public at information
repositories maintained at the Rockaway Township Free Public
Library, Rockaway Township, New Jersey; at the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection and Energy, Trenton, New
Jersey; and at the United States Environmental Protection Agency,
New York, New York. The administrative record for the site is
also located at each of these locations. A public comment period
was held from June 30 through August 30, 1993. A public meeting
was held on July 14, 1993 to present the findings of the RI/FS
and the Proposed Plan, and to solicit public input. The issues
raised at the public meeting and during the public comment period
are addressed in the Responsiveness Summary, which is part of
this Record of Decision (ROD).
This ROD presents the selected remedial action for the Rockaway
Township Wellfield site, chosen in accordance with the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability
Act of 1980 (CERCLA), as amended by the Superfund Amendments and
Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA), and, to the extent
practicable, the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution
Contingency Plan (NCP). The selection of the remedy described in
this ROD is based upon the administrative record.
ieop© aaS mol® ©f aetiea
This document addresses remediation of contaminated ground water
at the Rockaway Township Wellfield site. It includes remedial
alternatives which address contaminated ground water and focuses
on the protection of human health and the environment. Since the
information obtained during the Phase I and II remedial
investigations did not fully identify source areas of
contamination, potential source remediation will be addressed as
a separate operable unit. This operable unit focuses on the need
to remediate the contaminated ground water in the shallow and
deep aquifers.
        ©f Sits C&asaetQrisfeies
The Phase I and II RI was conducted at the Rockaway Township
Wellfield site to define the site geology and hydrology, define
the nature and extent of ground water contamination, examine
potential migration routes by which contamination would reach the
wellfield, and to identify potential sources of the
contamination.
The Phase I investigation initiated in 1987 consisted of a site
background investigation, aerial photography and site mapping,

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

monitoring well installation, soil boring and subsurface soil
sampling, in-situ permeability testing, borehole geophysical
logging, surface water and sediment sampling, soil gas sampling
and ground water sampling. The Phase II investigation completed
in April 1991 included a supplemental monitoring well
installation and sampling program (as summarized in Tables 1 and
2, only limited inorganic contamination was detected in the
ground water during Phase I, therefore, only 1 suspect well was
sampled for inorganics during Phase II), a seismic refraction
survey to further define the bedrock configuration at the site,
an investigation of a degreasing pit (located in Thiokol Building
|2), further investigation of business and industries located
upgradient of a monitoring well which exhibited odors, and a Risk
Assessment to evaluate the potential of human health and
environmental impacts. The following information briefly
describes the results of the Phases I and II RI.
Within the valley, bedrock is overlain by sand and rock. Coarse
glacial deposits in the valley serve as a highly productive water
source for Rockaway Township. Production wells PW-7 and/or PW-6
pump a yearly average of 1.2 mgd and are screened in the deep
aquifer. The study area contains only a shallow and deep
aquifer. Both aquifers are classified as Class 2A aquifers.
The shallow aquifer does not extend over the entire site. The
shallow ground water flow discharges to surface water bodies,
such as Beaver Brook, and to the deep aquifer. The deep aquifer
underlies the entire site area. Ground water flow within the
deep aquifer is radially inward towards the Rockaway Township
Wellfield. Ground water flow in the deep aquifer is believed to
be influenced by the pumping of the municipal wells within a 1900
foot radius. Based on ground water elevations determined during
the RI, any potential deep aquifer contamination originating from
the Denville Technical Park would be captured by the Township
Wellfield.
To describe the occurrence and distribution of chemicals present
in ground water, the site has been divided into three areas of
concern as indicated on Figure 2. These areas are defined by
potential sources and by the types of contaminants found in
ground water underlying these areas. Dividing the site in this
manner also allows an evaluation of the contaminant impact from
suspected source areas. These areas are described below.
GROUND WATER AREA 1

Ground Water Area 1 is the south central portion of the site,
encompassing most of the Denville Technical Park. Analytical
results from 20 wells (shallow and deep) were obtained from Area
1 (Tables 1, 2, 3 and 4). Chlorinated hydrocarbons were detected
in the shallow aquifer at concentrations exceeding the
promulgated Federal and New Jersey Maximum Contaminant Levels
(MCLs) which have been developed to protect drinking water, and
the New Jersey Ground Water Quality Standards (GWQS). The State

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

and Federal MCLs and GWQs are indicated in Table 5. MCLs are
enforceable standards based primarily on health risks. The MCLs
indicated as follows are State MCLs unless otherwise stated.
Specifically detected were methylene chloride at a high of 140
parts per billion (ppb) (MCL-2 ppb) and trichloroethene at 120
ppb (MCL-1 ppb). Analytes other than chlorinated hydrocarbons
detected in the shallow aquifer within Area 1 included the
pesticide dieldrin at a concentration of 0.02 ppb (GWQS-0.03 ppb)
and silver at 65 ppb (MCL-50 ppb) ; both were only detected during
the Phase I Rl. The detection of dieldrin was the only detection
of a pesticide at the site. Also, arsenic (MCL-50 ppb) was
detected at an average value of 9.8 ppb in the Phase I RI but was
not detected in Phase II. Antimony was found in only one sample,
at 67 ppb (GWQS-20 ppb). The secondary standards for manganese,
detected at 2,470 ppb (GWQS-50 ppb), aluminum detected at 2,920
(GWQS-200 ppb), and iron detected at 50,300 ppb (MCL-300 ppb)
were also exceeded. Secondary standards are not health based
standards, but are established to regulate taste and odor
characteristics.
The deep aquifer in this portion of the site exhibits the highest
degree of organic contamination within the entire study area.
All wells, except one deep well sampled in this area, had at
least one VOC detected. The highest concentrations of the
compounds detected (Phase I or Phase II) which exceeded the State
MCLs or GWQS in the deep aquifer include trans-1,2 dichloroethane
(1,2 DCA) at 190 ppb (GWQS-2 ppb), 1,1-dichloroethene (1,1~DCE)
at 40 ppb (MCL-2 ppb), 1,2-dichloroethene (1,2-DCE) at 120 ppb
(MCL-10 ppb), trichloromethane (TCA) at 93 ppb (MCL-26 ppb),
vinyl chloride at 9 ppb (MCL-2 ppb), TCE at 7,300 ppb (MCL-1
ppb), carbon tetrachloride at 11 ppb (MCL-2 ppb), and chloroform
at 17 ppb (GWQS-6 ppb),
GROUND WATER AREA 2

Ground Water Area 2 relates to the western portion of the site,
which encompasses five companies that were evaluated as potential
sources of contamination in Area 2. Fourteen wells (shallow and
deep) were sampled in Ground Water Area 2. These wells generally
contained low to moderate concentrations of TCE, TCA, and their
breakdown by-products, as well as low to high concentrations of
gasoline constituents (See Table 6).
The shallow aquifer is present in the northern and southern
portions of this area, but is absent from the central portion of
the area. Only one monitoring well was installed in the shallow
aquifer and VOC concentrations were below detection limits in the
well.
The eight VOCs detected above the State MCLs in the deep aquifer
during the Phase I and II investigations included TCE at 56 ppb
(MCL-1 ppb), methylene chloride at 35 ppb (MCL-2 ppb),
tetrachloroethene (PCE) at 4 ppb (MCL-1 ppb), benzene at 43 ppb

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

(MCL-1 ppb), toluene at 1,600 ppb (MCL-1,000), ethylbenzene at
1,900 ppb (MCL-700 ppb), and xylenes at 1,300 ppb (MCL-44 ppb).
Two gas stations, Shell and Exxon, were evaluated during the RI.
At Shell, the Phase I wells contained 43 ppb benzene (MCL-1 ppb),
1,200 ppb ethylbenzene (MCL-700 ppb) and 1,600 ppb toluene (MCL-
1,000 ppb). The Phase II results at the Shell station showed
only xylenes at 35 ppb (MCL-44 ppb). The decrease at this
station is probably due to a soil vapor extraction system
installed by Shell Oil. The Exxon station was not sampled during
the Phase I RI; results of the Phase II RI revealed the presence
of ethylbenzene at 1,900 ppb (MCL-700 ppb) and xylenes at 1,300
ppb (MCL-44 ppb).
GROUND WATER AREA 3
Ground Water Area 3 encompasses the northeast portion of the
site. Both the deep and shallow aquifers are present in this
portion of the site. Five monitoring wells were completed in the
shallow aquifer and three in the deep aquifer. The three highest
concentrations of VOCs detected in the shallow aquifer during the
Phase I and II investigations were PCE at 7.3 ppb, TCE at 2.8 ppb
and benzene at 3.2 ppb (Table 7). All were above the State MCLs.
The highest detected VOC in the deep aquifer during the Phase I
and II investigations was methylene chloride at 150 ppb (MCL 2
ppb) .
TOWNSHIP WELLFIELD AREA
Untreated ground water from Municipal Well PW-6 and Test Well P-7
was collected and analyzed in Phase I, but only Municipal Well
PW-7 was sampled in both Phase I and Phase II. During the Phase
I RI, PW-6 contained TCE at a concentration of 300 ppb (MCL-1
ppb); P-7 contained TCE at 130 ppb, TCA at 8.9 ppb (GWQS-2 ppb)
and 1,2-DCE at 6.8 ppb (MCL-2 ppb); PW-7 was found to contain TCE
at a concentration of 51 ppb and TCA at 15 ppb (Table 2).
Concentrations decreased in the Phase II investigation to 38 ppb
TCE and 4 ppb TCA. 1,1-DCA was also detected in the Phase II
sampling at a concentration of 1 ppb.
SURFACE WATER/BENTHIC SEDIMENT SAMPLES/SUBSURFACE SOIL

Thrt'a surface water and stream sediment samples were collected
during the Phase I investigation and five subsurface soil samples
were collected during the Phase II investigation. Of the three
surface water samples taken, TCE was detected in one sample at
4.2 ppb. The sample was collected in the marshy area near the
outfall of a drainage pipe within the Denville Technical Park.
Lead was detected at a concentration of 4.4 ppb, which was
slightly above chronic Federal Ambient Water Quality Criteria
(3.2 ppb). However, there was a high degree of contamination
within the blanks leading to uncertainty about the actual
concentration of lead present in the surface water.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Stream sediment samples were obtained from approximately the same
locations as surface water samples. Compounds detected in the
sediments (marshy area) in the Denville Technical Park included
TCE at 2 ppb and TCA at 19 ppb. Fluoranthene (900 ppb) , chrysene
(420 ppb) and pyrene (800 ppb) were also detected, but may be the
result of runoff water from adjacent asphaltic roads. The
highest concentrations of contaminants detected in sediment
samples taken from Beaver Brook were phenol (0.4 ppb), antimony
(95 ppb), beryllium (2 ppb), lead (54 ppb), nickel (44 ppb),
pentachlorophenol (920 ppb), arsenic (20 ppb), silver (11 ppb)
and cyanide (0.8 ppb).
Compounds detected in the subsurface soils (vadose zone) at four
test borings locations within the Denville Technical Park were
PCE at 2 parts per million (ppm) and TCE at 51 ppm. Both
compounds were detected only once in the ten samples collected
and analyzed.
SUMMARY OF SITE RISK

Based upon the results of the RI, a baseline risk assessment was
conducted to estimate the risks associated with current and
future site conditions. The baseline risk assessment estimates
the human health and ecological risk which could result from the
contamination at the site if no remedial action were taken.
Human Health Risks
The reasonable maximum human exposure is evaluated. A four-step
process is utilized for assessing site-related human health risks
for a reasonable maximum exposure scenario: Hazard Zdsatifieatioa
- identifies the contaminants of concern at the site based on
several factors such as toxicity, frequency of occurrence, and
concentration. Exposure assessment - estimates the magnitude of
actual and/or potential human exposures, the frequency and
duration of these exposures, and the pathways (e.g., ingesting
contaminated well water) by which humans are potentially exposed.
Tosieity assessment - determines the types of adverse health
effects associated with chemical exposures, and the relationship
between magnitude of exposure (dose) and severity of adverse
effects (response). Ris& Characterization - summarizes and
combines outputs of the exposure and toxicity assessments to
provide a quantitative (e.g., one-in-a-million excess cancer
risk) assessment of site-related risks.
The baseline risk assessment began with selecting contaminants of
concern which would be representative of site risks (Table 8).
Site-related contamination is present in ground water, soil,
surface water and sediment. However, soils, surface water and
sediments were found to have little potential for human health
risk because of the unlikeliness of human contact. Surface soil
contamination was infrequent and of low concentration, such that
direct contact with contaminated soil was determined to be an
exposure pathway of little significance. Continuous exposures

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

over long periods of time would have to occur to result in a
significant health risk and this situation is unlikely. A
summary of the pathways considered and those that were considered
complete, is provided in Table 9. The contaminants found in each
of the three areas and each of the two aquifers (Deep and
Shallow) were evaluated separately.
The baseline risk assessment quantitatively evaluated the health
effects which could result from exposure to contamination as a
result of ingestion of untreated ground water by residents and
inhalation of volatile organic chemicals by residents while
showering with untreated ground water. The toxicity criteria
utilized to conduct the risk assessment are presented in Table
10. For the carcinogens, risk is represented in terms of an
individual likelihood of developing cancer as a result of
exposure to a carcinogenic chemical present in the exposure
media. The future use of the untreated ground water cancer risk
and Hazard Index (noncarcinogenic effects) for a human receptor
for Areas 1, 2, 3 and the Township wells are estimated to be as
follows (See Tables 11 and 12 for more detail) :
   AREA 1             CANCER RISK       HAZARD INDEX
    Deep Aquifer         2xlOJ                40
    Shallow Aquifer      4x10^                10
   AREA 2             CANCER RISK        HAZARD INDEX
   Deep Aquifer          3x10-"                1

   AREA 3          CANCER RISK           HAZARD INDEX
   Deep Aquifer       3x10"*                  <1
   Shallow Aquifer    9x10-*                  <1
   Township Wells     CANCER RISK       HAZARD INDEX
                                              <2
Current Federal guidelines for acceptable exposures are a maximum
Health Hazard Index equal to or less than 1 and an individual
lifetime excess carcinogenic risk in the range of 10"4 to 10"6 (one
in ten thousand to one in a million) .
As can be seen, the carcinogenic risk associated with
contaminants present in the Area 1 deep aquifer, 2x10"% is
outside the cancer risk range. This risk is primarily associated
with the ingestion of ground water contaminated with TCE (1x10^) .
The carcinogenic risks associated with the ingestion of ground
water from the Area 1 shallow aquifer, 4X10"4, were at the high
end of the acceptable risk range. The significant contributors
to this risk were vinyl chloride, methylene chloride and arsenic.
The risks associated with carcinogenic contaminants present in
the other areas were all within the acceptable risk range.
The Hazard Index value of 40 for the Area 1 deep aquifer greatly
exceeded the Hazard Index value of 1 for acceptable exposures.
TCE was the major contributor to the noncarcinogenic risk posed
                                    8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

by ingestion of this ground water. The Hazard Index associated
with the Area 1 shallow aquifer ground water was at a value of
10, which is also well above the maximum Health Hazard Index of 1
for acceptable exposures„ The major contributors in this
instance were antimony, arsenic, and manganese. With the
exception of the Township wells, risks associated with
noncarcinogenic contaminants present in the other areas were all
at acceptable levels. The Hazard Index of 2, calculated for the
ingestion of ground water at the Township well, only slightly
exceeded the acceptable value. TCE was again the primary
contributor to this slightly elevated risk.
ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION

The reasonable maximum environmental exposure is evaluated. A
four-step process is utilized for assessing site-related
ecological risk for a reasonable maximum exposure scenario:
§£©bl©m Foraulatioa - a qualitative evaluation of contaminant
release, migration, and fate; identification of contaminants of
concern, receptors, exposure pathways, and known ecological
effects of the contaminants and selection of endpoints for
further study. Ssposur© ass®ssa@at - a quantitative evaluation
of contaminant release, migration, and fate; characterization of
exposure pathways and receptors, and measurement or estimation of
exposure point concentrations, geological Sffsets &ss@ssm®at -
literature reviews, field studies, and toxicity tests, linking
contaminant concentrations to effects on ecological receptors.
aisk Charaet@risati.oa - measurement or estimation of both current
and future adverse effects.
The ecological risk assessment began with evaluating the
contaminants associated with the site in conjunction with the
site-specific biological species/habitat information. As noted
above, surface water and sediment samples were collected from
Beaver Brook and the marsh. No significant impacts are expected
to aquatic organisms based on surface water concentrations of the
chemicals of potential concern. There is some potential for
adverse impacts to sensitive species from exposure to lead which
was slightly above chronic Ambient Water Quality Criteria
concentrations in the brooks and the marshy area. All other
organic and inorganic chemicals in the surface water are at
concentrations below those likely to impact aquatic communities.
In the sediment of the brooks and the marshy area, cadmium,
silver, and zinc were present at only slightly elevated
concentrations. Arsenic concentrations in the brooks were also
only slightly elevated. Because the concentrations of these
metals were only slightly elevated, potential impacts are not
likely to be significant. Sediment toxicity data was not
available for aluminum, cobalt, manganese, and vanadium.
Both terrestrial (e.g., northern goshawk, bald eagle) and aquatic
(e.g., wood turtle, bog turtle) species of special concern are
unlikely to be adversely impacted at the Rockaway Township
                                9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Wellfield site because of their mobility and large habitat range,
their limited routes of contact with the surface water and
sediment, and the low concentrations of the chemicals of
potential concern in these media.
After performing the ecological exposure assessment and an
evaluation of the concentrations of the chemicals of concern, it
was concluded that adverse impacts to ecological receptors within
the Rockaway Township Wellfield site are unlikely based on the
data collected.
CONCLUSION

Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from the
Rockaway Township Wellfield site, if not addressed by
implementing the response action selected in this ROD, may
present an imminent and substantial endangerment to public
health, welfare, or the environment.
REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES

The remedial action objectives are specific goals to protect
human health and the environment. These objectives are based on
available information, applicable or relevant and appropriate
requirements (ARARs), and risk-based levels established in the
risk assessment.
Only the remediation of ground water contamination is addressed
in this first operable unit ROD. Specific remedial objectives
are as follows:
o   Prevent potential human exposure to contaminants in the deep
    aquifer ground water which  pose a carcinogenic risk to human
    health in excess of ID"4 to 10"8 and/or which have a Hazard
    Index greater than 1.
o   Prevent potential human exposure to contaminants in the
    shallow aquifer ground water which pose a carcinogenic risk
    to human health in excess of 10"1 to 10"6 and/or which have a
    Hazard Index greater than 1.
o    Restore of water quality of the shallow and deep aquifers to
     appropriate Federal and New Jersey water quality standards.
The goal for the restoration of contaminated ground water is to
achieve the most stringent of the promulgated Federal and State
MCLs and the New Jersey Ground Water Quality Standards.
SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

CERCLA requires that each selected site remedy be protective of
human health and the environment, be cost effective, comply with
other statutory laws, and utilize permanent solutions and
alternative treatment technologies and resource recovery
                               10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

alternatives to the maximum extent practicable. In addition, the
statute includes a preference for the use of treatment as a
principal element for the reduction of toxicity, mobility, or
volume of the hazardous substances. The FS report evaluates in
detail five remedial alternatives for addressing the ground water
contamination associated with the Rockaway Township Wellfield
site.
The estimated capital -cost, operation and maintenance (O&M) cost,
and net present worth cost for each alternative discussed below
are provided for comparison.
These alternatives are:

ALTERNATIVE 1 - NO ACTION

Estimated Capital Cost: -0-
Estimate Annual O&M Cost: -0-
Estimated Net Present Worth Cost for monitoring: $124,000
Estimated Implementation Timeframe: Single event occurring after
5 years
The No Action alternative provides the baseline alternative
required by CERCLA for purposes of comparison with other remedial
alternatives.
The components of Alternative 1 include monitoring and site
review. Existing monitoring wells at the site would be sampled
once at the end of five years to monitor contaminant migration in
the aquifer system. It is assumed that the review would be
conducted approximately five years after the ROD, and would
include sampling a total of approximately 35 wells for the
Contract Laboratory Program/Target Compound List/Target Analyte
List (CLP TCL/TAL) analysis. The CLP TCP/TAL includes analysis
of both VOCs and metals.
ALTERNATIVE 2 - PUMP AND TREAT SYSTEM IN THE DENVILLE TECHNICAL
PARK (AREA 1)

The main components of Alternative 2 include extraction of
contaminated ground water in the Denville Technical Park (Area
1), on~site treatment and discharge of treated water.
Alternative 2 also includes institutional controls, monitoring
and site reviews. It is estimated that 39 water samples would be
analyzed semi-annually for CLP TCL/TAL analysis for a period of
30 years with periodic reviews. However, the specific number of
wells to be sampled and analytical parameters would be determined
during design and subsequent operation. A formal site review
would be conducted at approximately five year intervals during
remediation. Seventeen extraction wells are estimated with a
total extraction rate of 370 gallons per minute. Under
Alternative 2, there is one extraction option, five treatment
options and five disposal options. Since the three main
components of Alternative 2 (Extraction/Treatment/Discharge) are
                               11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

evaluated separately, the selected options must be added to
determine the total cost for Alternative 2.
ALTERNATIVE 2 - EXTRACTION COMPONENT (DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK)

Two sets of present worth costs for extraction, treatment, and
discharge options are presented. One estimate assumes that a
future decision is made to remove the source of groundwater
contamination, reflecting a remediation timeframe of 6 years,
while the other assumes that the source area is not remediated,
reflecting a remediation timeframe of 30 years. These estimates
can be made since the general areas of contamination at the
Denville Technical Park are known. The time during which the
system would be in operation depends mostly on the extent of
residual contamination remaining at the source areas. Once the
areas are more clearly identified and remediated, ground water
remediation time is estimated to decrease from 30 years to 6
years. This ROD proposes that the source areas be further
delineated and that alternatives for remediating the source areas
be evaluated as a separate operable unit.
                             No Source Removal    *Future Source
                                                      Removal
Estimated Capital Cost:             $450,000           $450,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost:          $391,900           $391,900
Estimated Net Present Worth Cost: $5,450,000         $2,100,731
Estimated Implementation Timeframe: 30 years           6 years
The extraction system would consist of an estimated 17 pumping
wells with submersible pumps for each well and associated piping.
The wells would collectively extract ground water at a rate of
approximately 370 gallons per minute (GPM). The exact number of
extraction wells, their locations and rate of extraction would be
determined during design. Extracted water would be piped from
each wellhead to a central treatment plant and treated to reach
ARARs. The treated water would be transferred via piping for
disposal according to the selected disposal option.
* The costs and implementation timeframes in the "Future Source
Removal" column for the (above and below) remedial alternatives
listed above and below are for present informational purposes;
the implementation timeframes represent the decrease in operation
time required for extraction if the source areas delineated and
remediated. Remediation of the contaminated soils is not within
the scope of this ROD, but will be addressed as a separate
operable unit.




                               12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               TREATMENT
ALTERNATIVE 2 - AIR STRIPPING - DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK (WT-1)
                            No Source Removal     * Future Source
                                                       Removal
Estimated Capital Cost;            $149,200           $149,200
Estimated Annual O&M Cost:          $35,000            $35,000
Estimated Net Present Worth Cost: $689,000            $327,000
Estimated Implementation Timeframe: 30 years           6 years
Air strippers transfer volatile ground water contaminants from
the extracted ground water to the gas phase. The costs provided
for this option assume a unit sized for the 370 GPM flow rate
estimated for the ground water extraction system at the Denville
Technical Park. The existing air stripper at Rockaway Township
Treatment Plant meets emission control requirements, however, the
system proposed for the Denville Technical Park may not meet
acceptable VOC emission standards. Although preliminary
estimates indicate that VOC emissions from the proposed ground
water extraction system would be slightly below the ARARs set by
NJAC 7:27, under actual operating conditions, it is possible that
without off-gas treatment the air stripper may not meet these
ARARs. The determination of whether emissions controls are
needed would be based on influent data obtained from pump tests
during design of the system. The costs associated with off-gas
treatment are included in Option WT~2 presented below.

ALTERNATIVE 2 - AIR STRIPPING WITH OFF-GAS TREATMENT USING VAPOR
PHASE CARBON ADSORPTION OR CATALYTIC OXIDATION TREATMENT -
DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK (WT-2)
                          No Source Removal      *Future Source
                                                    Removal
Estimated Capital Cost:             $220,000       $220,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost:          $145,000       $145,000
Estimated Net Present Worth Cost: $2,450,000       $960,000
Estimated Implementation Timeframe: 30 years        6 years
This ground water treatment option uses air stripping similar to
Option WT-1 but also includes treatment of off-gases. The
addition of off-gas treatment to the basic air stripper would
assure that air emission requirements are met. Treatment of
residuals such as spent carbon would be regulated, transported
and disposed of in accordance with the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA).




                               13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ALTERNATIVE 2 - POWDERED ACTIVATED CARBON TREATMENT - DENVILLE
TECHNICAL PARK (WT-3)
                             No Source Removal     *Future Source
                                                      Removal
Estimated Capital Cost:           $1,430,000          $1,430,000
Estimated Annual O&M Costs          $197,700            $197,700
Estimated Net Present Worth Cost: $4,470,000         $2,420,000
Estimated Implementation Timeframe: 30 years            6 years
Powdered activated carbon treatment is an innovative but
demonstrated biological remediation process using activated
sludge in conjunction with powdered activated carbon. Because
the compounds adsorbed to the activated carbon are recycled with
the sludge, they have a much longer system retention time,
allowing a greater degree of biological degradation. Treated
water would then be discharged by one of the discharge options
evaluated below. Treatment of residuals such as spent carbon
would be regulated, transported and disposed of in accordance
with RCRA.
ALTERNATIVE 2 -   UV OXIDATION TREATMENT - DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK
(WT-4)
                           No Source Removal     *Future Source
                                                   Removal
Estimated Capital Cost:           $657,000            $657,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost:        $289,000            $289,000
Estimated Present Worth Cost:   $5,110,000          $3,260,000
Estimated Implementation Timeframe: 30 years          6 years
Ultraviolet (UV) oxidation is a relatively new technology for
cleanup and destruction of organic compounds in ground water.
Commercial applications using hydrogen peroxide and ozone as the
oxidant have been developed. In this process, ultraviolet light
reacts with hydrogen peroxide and/or ozone molecules to form
hydroxyl radicals which break down organic contaminants. Treated
water would then be discharged using one of the discharge options
evaluated.

ALTERNATIVE 2 - AQUEOUS PHASE CARBON ADSORPTION TREATMENT -
DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK (WT-5)
                            No Source Removal    *Future Source
                                                    Removal
Estimated Capital Cost:           $68,900              $68,900
Estimated Annual O&M Cost:       $148,300            $148,300
Estimated Present Worth Cost: $2,350,000              $822,000
Estimated Implementation Timeframe: 30 years           6 years

This ground water treatment option uses aqueous carbon to adsorb
and remove the organic compounds from the water stream. The
influent water would be filtered through a series of carbon beds.
The precipitate would be discharged as filtered water using one

                                14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

of the discharge options. The spent carbon slurry would then be
transported off-site to be regenerated.
                        DISCHARGE OPTIONS
ALTERNATIVE 2 - TREATED WATER PUMPED TO THE DENVILLE WATER SUPPLY
FACILITY FROM THE DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK (Discharge Option 1)
The cost for design and construction of Discharge Option 1 is
estimated to be $171,000. The O6M costs associated with this
option are minimal. This cost estimate does not include any fees
that may be charged by the Town of Denville for tie-in to its
water distribution system. This option involves pumping the
treated water, via pipeline, to the Denvill® Water Supply
Facility for subsequent use by its customers. The ground water,
once treated, will meet the Federal and State drinking water
standards.
ALTERNATIVE 2 - TREATED WATER PUMPED TO THE ROCKAWAY TOWNSHIP
TREATMENT PLANT FROM THE DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK (Discharge
Option 2)

The cost for design and construction of Discharge Option 2 is
estimated to be $67,000. The O&M costs associated with this
option are minimal. The estimated cost does not include any fees
that may be charged by Rockaway Township for tie=in to this water
distribution system. This option involves pumping the treated
water, via pipeline, to the Rockaway Township Treatment Plant for
subsequent use by its consumers. The ground water, once treated,
would meet the Federal and State drinking water standards.
ALTERNATIVE 2 - TREATED WATER DISCHARGE TO AN ON-SITE
INFILTRATION BASIN - DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK (Discharge Option 3)

The cost for design and construction of Discharge Option 3 is
estimated at $67,000. The O&M costs associated with the option
are minimal. A series of gravel-filled trenches with central
drainage pipes would be installed downgradient of the Denville
Technical Park to maintain the flow of ground water to the
Rockaway Township Wells. The trenches would allow water pumped
into the drainage pipe to infiltrate into the ground. Ground
water reinjection could also include injection wells; however,
for costing purposes, rein ject ion trenches in the form of a leach
field is representative of the reinjection system.
ALTERNATIVE 2 - TREATED WATER PUMPED TO A POTW FACILITY FROM THE
DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK (Discharge Option 4)

The cost for design and construction of Discharge Option 4 is
estimated to be $218,000. The O&M costs associated with this
disposal option are minimal. The estimated cost does not include
any fees that may be charged by the Publicly Owned Treatment
                                15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Works (POTW) facility for tie-in to its sewer system. The fees
for treatment by the POTW would be substantially higher than
discharge to the Rockaway Township or Denville Township Water
Treatment Facility. This off-site discharge option involves
discharging treated ground water to a POTW facility located in
the Town of Boonton approximately six miles east of the site.
The ground water would be discharged into existing sewer lines
near the Denville Technical Park.
ALTERNATIVE 2 - TREATED WATER PUMPED TO SURFACE WATER FROM THE
DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK (Discharge Option 5)
The cost for design and construction of Discharge Option 5 is
estimated to be $44,000. The O&M costs associated with this
option are minimal. This option involves pumping the treated
water from the treatment plant directly into the adjacent stream,
Beaver Brook. Prior to discharge, ground water would be treated
to levels which attain New Jersey surface water discharge
limitation requirements.
ALTERNATIVE 3 - AIR SPARGING WITH SOIL VAPOR EXTRACTION; and
ALTERNATIVE 4 - UPGRADE EXISTING WATER TREATMENT SYSTEM
These alternatives, as presented in the Feasibility Study, were
deleted from further consideration as viable alternatives in the
Proposed Plan and this ROD for the following reasons: 1)
Alternative 3 involves remediation of the contaminated soils,
however, source area remediation will be addressed as a separate
operable unit; and 2) Alternative 4 is based on the existing
system operating for another five years. The Rockaway Township
Water Department has estimated that the existing treatment system
has a useful life of less than one year.
ALTERNATIVE 5 - REPLACE EXISTING TREATMENT SYSTEM - (ROCKAWAY
TOWNSHIP TREATMENT PLANT)
                              No Source Removal    *Future Source
                                                      Removal
Estimated Capital Cost:             $254,000              $254,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost:          $366,849              $366,849
Estimated Net Present Worth Cost: $5,650,000         $3,850,000
Estimated Implementation Timeframe: 30 years          15 years
The intent of Alternative 5 is to replace Rockaway Township's
deteriorating water treatment system (air stripper) with a
similar type system, with similar capacity. According to the
Rockaway Township Water Department, the existing air stripper is
experiencing extensive corrosion damage and is only expected to
last an additional year. With Alternative 5, the existing
treatment system would be replaced since the existing air
stripper is near the end of its useful life. The continued
                               16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

operation of this treatment system is necessary to maintain the
quality of Rockaway Township's drinking water; the existing
treatment system also remediates the aquifer as it extracts and
treats the ground water for drinking water purposes. Alternative
5 entails the same monitoring program and site reviews to those
discussed in Alternative 2.
SUMMARY OF COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES EVALUATION
CRITERIA

The alternatives noted above were evaluated using criteria
derived from the NCP and CERCLA, as amended by SARA. These
criteria relate directly to factors mandated by CERCLA, as
amended, in Section 121, including Section 121(b) (1) (A=G) .. The
criteria are as follows:
THRESHOLD CRITERIA

1. Overall protection of human health and the environment
addresses whether or not a remedy provides adequate protection
and describes how risks posed through each pathway are
eliminated, reduced, or controlled through treatment, engineering
controls, or institutional controls.
2. Compliance with applicable or relevant and appropriate
requirements (ARARs) addresses whether or not a remedy will meet
all of the applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements of
other federal and state environmental statutes and requirements
or provide grounds for invoking a waiver.
PRIMARY BALANCING CRITERIA

3. Long-term effectiveness and permanence refers to the ability
of a remedy to maintain reliable protection of human health and
the environment over time, once cleanup goals have been met.
4. Reduction of toxicitv. mobility, or volume through treatment
is the anticipated performance of the treatment technologies a
remedy may employ.
5. Short-term effectiveness addresses the period of time needed
to achieve protection and any adverse impacts on human health and
the environment that may be posed during the construction and
implementation period until cleanup goals are achieved.
6. Implementabi 1 ity is the technical and administrative
feasibility of a remedy, including the availability of materials
and services needed to implement a particular option.
7. Cost includes estimated capital and operation and maintenance
costs, and net present worth costs.

                                17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

MODIFYING CRITERIA

8. State acceptance indicates whether, based on its review of
the RI/FS reports and Proposed Plan, the State supports, opposes
or has no comment on the preferred alternative.
9. Community acceptance refers to the public's general response
to the alternatives described in the Proposed Plan and the RI/FS
reports. Responses to public comments are addressed in the
Responsiveness Summary of the ROD.
The following is a comparative analysis of the alternatives based
upon the evaluation criteria noted above.
OVERALL PROTECTION OF HUMAN HEALTH AND THE ENVIRONMENT

All remediation alternatives with the exception of Alternative 1
(No Action) would provide protection of human health and the
environment by eliminating the significant threat posed under the
potential future use scenario, i.e. ingestion and inhalation of
contaminants by residents. Alternatives 2 and 5 provide
protection through treatment of extracted ground water.
Alternative 2 provides protection through treatment of ground
water extracted from the most contaminated portion of the aquifer
near Denville Technical Park. This system would intercept a
majority of the contamination flowing toward the Township wells.
All water treatment options would adequately protect human health
and the environment provided that required effluent standards are
met and air emissions do not exceed the standards set by state
and federal agencies. WT-1 (Air Stripping), without off-gas
treatment, may emit more VOCs into the atmosphere than the other
treatment options, thus exposing the surrounding community to
more airborne contamination.
All five discharge options offer protection to human health and
the environment because, with the exception of discharge to a
POTW, the ground water would at a minimum be cleaned up to
drinking water standards and would no longer pose a significant
threat to human health. However, if the discharge to a POTW were
selected as the disposal alternative, the treated water would not
be required to meet drinking water standards. If the surface
water discharge option was selected, the discharge criteria could
be more stringent than drinking water standards.
COMPLIANCE WITH ARARS

Section 121(d) of CERCLA, as amended, requires that remedies for
Superfund sites comply with federal and state laws and
regulations that are applicable and legally enforceable.
Remedies must also comply with the requirements of laws and
regulations that are not applicable, but are relevant and
                               18

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

appropriate. Applicable requirements are defined as cleanup
standards, standards of control, and other substantive
environmental protection requirements, criteria, or limitations
promulgated under federal or state law that specifically address
a hazardous substance, pollutant, remedial action, location, or
other circumstance at a Superfund site. Relevant and appropriate
requirements are defined as substantive environmental protection
requirements, criteria, or limitations promulgated under federal
or state law that, while not "applicable" to a hazardous
substance, pollutant, contaminant, remedial action, location or
circumstance at a Superfund site, address problems or situations
sufficiently similar to those encountered at the Superfund site
that their use is yell suited to the particular site.
EPA has divided ARARs into three categories to facilitate their
identification:
    Action-specific ARARs are usually technology or activity
    based requirements or limitations on actions or conditions
    involving specific substances.
     Chemical-specific ARARs are usually health or risk-based
     numerical values or methodologies used to determine
     acceptable concentrations of chemicals that may be found in
     or discharged to the environment.
    Location-specific ARARs restrict actions or contaminant
    concentrations in certain environmentally sensitive areas.
    Examples of areas regulated under various federal laws
    include floodplains, wetlands, and locations where
    endangered species or historically significant cultural
    resources are present.
Alternatives 2 and 5 are similar in that they both would
remediate contaminants in the aquifer to MCLs and GWQS.
Alternative 1 would not attain ARARs in any reasonable amount of
time since it is a no-action alternative. Under Alternative 5,
the replacement treatment system would result in treated water
which meets drinking water standards prior to distribution. Each
of the discharge options under Alternative 2 would meet ARARs.
In addition, the residuals generated under treatment options WT-
2, WT-3, and WT-4 would be handled, transported, and disposed or
regenerated (WT-5 only) in accordance with ARARs. Therefore,
each of the alternatives and associated options, with the
exception of Alternative 1, are similar in their level of
compliance with ARARs as each would fully comply with ARARs.
LONG-TERM EFFECTIVENESS AND PERMANENCE

Alternatives 2 and 5 would provide effective long-term protection
since contamination in the ground water would be remediated
effectively to ARARs by the treatment systems. Alternative 1, no
                               19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

action, would not provide any long-term effectiveness and
permanence.
All five water treatment options provide permanent treatment of
the VOC contaminants in the extracted ground water.
All the discharge options evaluated are effective long-term
solutions for disposal of the treated ground water. However,
discharge options 1, 4, and 5 do not discharge treated water to
the Rockaway Township Treatment Plant or reinject it back into
the aquifer. These methods, therefore, affect the current water
supply allocations for Rockaway Township in the following ways.
Water extracted from the aquifer and not replaced would increase
the drawdown at the existing township pumping wells; this might
force a change in the directional flow of the aquifer. In this
case, contaminated ground water from the adjacent Rockaway
Borough Superfund site could be drawn toward the municipal
drinking wells. Quantification of this effect would require
ground water modeling of the Rockaway Township Wellfield site and
the Denville Water Supply Facility during design.
REDUCTION OF TOXICITY, MOBILITY, OR VOLUME THROUGH TREATMENT
Under Alternative 1, no action, the existing treatment system
would run until the end of its useful life, which has been
determined to be approximately one year. Continued operation of
the Rockaway Township Treatment Plant is required to meet
drinking water standards. As its useful life is expected to
terminate within a year, Alternative 1 would provide the least
reduction of toxicity, mobility and volume of the contaminants.
Alternative 5 reduces the toxicity and volume of the contaminants
by providing continued operation of the Rockaway Township
Treatment Plant air stripper, while also ensuring a potable
supply of water. Alternative 2 allows for treatment of the most
contaminated area of the Denville Technical Park. This would
reduce the mobility of the contaminants, thereby reducing the
volume of contaminants reaching the existing Rockaway Township
Treatment Plant. The Alternative 2 extraction system captures a
more highly contaminated portion of the contaminant plume than
Alternative 5. However, Alternative 2 does not ensure a potable
supply of water to those currently using water supplied by the
Rockaway Township Treatment Plant.
All of the water treatment options for Alternative 2 are capable
of removing the VOC contaminants from the ground water and would
provide similar levels of reduction of the toxicity and mobility
of the contaminants. However, some water treatment options would
produce a waste residual. Water treatment options WT-2 (Air
Stripping with Vapor Phase Carbon) and WT-5 (Aqueous Phase
Carbon) would create spent carbon that would need to be sent off
site for regeneration. WT-3 (Powdered Activated Carbon
Treatment) is primarily a biological process, a residual sludge
                               20

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

would be generated that would be required to be sent off site to
a permitted facility or incineration unit. The two water
treatment options that generate no residuals are WT-1 (Air
Stripping) and WT-4 (UV Oxidation). WT-4 provides the greatest
overall reduction in toxicity followed by WT-3, WT-2 and WT-5.
WT-2 through WT-5 provide similar reduction in mobility of
contaminants. WT-2 through WT-5 also provide similar reduction
in the volume of contaminants in the aquifer.

SHORT-TERM EFFECTIVENESS

Alternatives 1 and 5 are least disruptive to the current
operations and existing use of the land. Alternative 1 does not
require any modifications or additions to the existing system,
but would also provide no additional degree of effectiveness.
Alternative 2 would be somewhat disruptive to the current
operations and existing conditions since this alternative
involves the construction of wells, pump houses and treatment
units. Alternative 2 requires water treatment and disposal
facilities. Construction of these facilities may require
interruption of traffic and could interfere with existing
facility operations. Overall construction time for these
alternatives is about two years.
All five water treatment options and discharge options are about
equal in construction time and short-term effects on the
surrounding community.
IMPLEMENTABILITY
Alternatives 1, 2 and 5 are readily implementable and can be
implemented within a short time frame. All water treatment
options are commercially available and use common materials for
construction and operation. Options WT-2 and WT-5 are available
from several sources and would be easier to implement than Option
WT-3 which is produced by only one or two manufacturers.
All discharge options would be fairly easy to implement using
standard construction equipment. The major concern with
Discharge Option 1 (Discharge to the Denville Water Supply
Facility) is that it would take some additional time to
construct. Obtaining a right-of-way may be more difficult for
Option 2 (Treated Ground Water to Rockaway Water Supply) because
of a required railroad crossing. A similar potential
right-of-way and access problem may occur with the construction
of the leach field (Option 3).
COSTS (30 Years of Treatment)
The costs of each of the alternatives, not including discharge
costs, are summarized below. Figures are provided for capital
cost, annual O&M and present worth based upon a 5 percent
                                21

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     discount. The ""Total Cost" figures for each of the Alternative 2
     Options include the costs for the extraction portion of the
     remedy, ($450,000 in capital costs and $391,900 in annual O&M for
     a total present worth cost (5%) of $5,450,000).

       GROUND WATER           CAPITAL        ANNUAL      PRESENT       TOTAL
  TREATMENT ALTERNATIVES        COST           O&M      VALUE 5%        COST
Alternative 1, No Action                     $124,000                 $124,000
Alternative 2 (WT-1) , Air    $149,200       $35,000     $689,000    $6,139,000
Stripping
Alternative 2 (WT-2) , Air
Stripping with Vapor          $220,000       $145,200   $2,450,000   $7,900,000
Phase Carbon
Alternative 2 (WT-3) ,       $1,430,000      $197,700   $4,470,000   $9,920,000
PACT
Alternative 2 (WT-4), UV      $657,000       $289,000   $5,110,000   $10,560,000
Oxidation
Alternative 2 (WT-5) ,
Aqueous Carbon Phase          $68,900        148,300    $2,350,000   $7,800,000
Treatment
Alternative 5, Replace        $254,000       $366,849   $5,650,000   $5,650,000
Existing Treatment System

    The costs for each of the Discharge options for Alternative 2 are
    as follows:
    Discharge Option 1
    (Treated Water Pumped to the Denville Water Supply Plant) -
    $171,000
    Discharge Option 2
    (Treated Water Pumped to the Rockaway Township Treatment Plant) -
    $67,000
    Discharge Option 3
    (Discharge to on-site Infiltration Basin/Leach Field) - $67,000
    Discharge Option 4
    (Discharge to POTW) - $218,000
    Discharge Option 5
    (Discharge to Surface Water) - $44,000
    It should be noted that operation and maintenance costs
    associated with the discharge options are minimal and are not
    included in the costs shown.

                                        22

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The Wo Action Alternative which consists of a single sampling
event and review at the end of five years, is the least expensive
with a present worth cost (PWC) of $124,000. Alternative 2
consists of a combination of extraction/treatment/discharge
technologies for remediation of the Denville Technical Park. The
PWCs (treatment and extraction) for Alternative 2 are $6,139,000
for Air Stripping (WT-1); Air Stripping with vapor phase carbon
(WT~2) is $7,900,000; Powdered Activated Carbon Treatment (WT-3)
is $9,920,000; UV Oxidation (WT-4) is $10,560,000 and Aqueous
Phase Carbon Treatment (WT-5) is $7,800,000,
The least expensive discharge option evaluated as part of
Alternative 2 is Discharge Option 5 (Discharge to Surface Water)
at $44,000 followed by Discharge Option 2 (Treated Ground Water
to Rockaway Water Supply Plant) and Discharge Option 3 (Discharge
to On-Site Infiltration Basin/Leach Field) which are both
estimated at $67,000. Discharge Option 1 (Treated Ground Water
to Denville Technical Park) is estimated at $171,000 and the most
expensive Discharge Option is Discharge Option 4 (Discharge to
POTW) at $218,000.
The PWC of Alternative 5 (Replace Existing System) for 30 years
of present worth cost treatment is $5,650,000 and includes the
monitoring and review program (the present worth cost excluding
the monitoring and review program would be $1,881,895).
     POTENTIAL SUPPLEMENTAL TREATMENT COSTS
As noted above, there were some infrequent detections of
inorganic contaminants during the Rl. Although the levels found
did not pose a significant problem, there is some concern that
during the implementation of a remedy higher, more frequent
levels of inorganic contaminants may be present above MCLs (or
GWQS) or at levels which could interfere with the operation of
any treatment system which might be constructed. The Rockaway
Township Water Authority has not experienced a metals problem at
the on-site treatment system. However, even with this historical
information, it is not known whether treatment for inorganics
would be required to prevent fouling of the air stripper, or to
ensure that the quality of the groundwater meets MCLs and GWQS.
Therefore, additional sampling will be done during the design
phase of the treatment system to determine whether inorganics are
of concern. If necessary, any extraction/treatment system
selected would be modified to include pretreatment of the
inorganics to prevent fouling of the organic treatment system or
achieve MCLs or GWQS for inorganics in the aquifer. The increase
in present value cost for pretreatment of inorganics could range
from $678,400 for 6 years of treatment to $1,141,800 for 30 years
of treatment at the Denville Technical Park. The cost figure
shown for 6 years of treatment represents the estimated decrease
in treatment time if the contaminated soils are identified and

                               23

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

remediated. Source area remediation is planned under a separate
operable unit.
STATE ACCEPTANCE

The State of New Jersey agrees with and supports the selected
remedy presented in this ROD.
COMMUNITY ACCEPTANCE
Issues raised during the public comment period and at the public
meeting held on July 14, 1993, are addressed in the
Responsiveness Summary section of this ROD. Comments received
during the public comment period indicated that the local
residents were generally satisfied with the preferred alternative
for the cleanup of contaminated ground water. The community did
express its preference that the treated ground water be utilized
as potable water rather than reinjected back to the aquifer.
Upon review of these comments, EPA and NJDEPE have determined
that no significant changes to the remedy, as it was originally
identified in the Proposed Plan, are necessary. However, as
noted below, the remedy has been modified to accommodate the
community's preference for utilization of the treated
groundwater.
THE SELECTED REMEDY

Based upon the requirements of CERCLA, the detailed analysis of
the alternatives, and public comment, both NJDEPE and EPA have
determined that the combination of Alternatives 2 and 5 will
constitute the remedy for the Rockaway Township Superfund site.
The components of the selected remedy are: Alternative 2
Extraction and Treatment Option WT-2 (Air Stripping and Off-gas
Treatment) at the Denville Technical Park, in combination with
Alternative 5 (Replace Existing Rockaway Township Treatment
System). The present worth cost of this remedy is $9,848,895,
which represents a capital cost of $991,000 and a present worth
O&M cost of $661,149. A breakdown of the cost items for the
remedy is presented in Tables 13, 14 and 15. If the second
operable unit source control investigation reveals that source
remediation is deemed to be necessary, the cost would decrease
because the extraction and treatment time necessary to remediate
the aquifer would be reduced. In addition, if it is determined
during design that emission controls are not needed to meet
appropriate standards, Treatment Option WT-1 (Air Stripping
without emission controls) would be used in place of WT-2 at
reduced costs.
Alternative 2 will allow ground water remediation of the most
contaminated portion of the plume in the Denville Technical Park
area, thereby reducing the contamination emanating from the
Denville Technical Park to the Rockaway Township Wellfield.
                               24

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Replacement of the existing air stripper through implementation
of Alternative 5, is necessary since the existing system is
experiencing extensive corrosion damage which is jeopardizing the
quality of the Township's drinking water. The continued
operation of the Rockaway Township Treatment Plant is also
necessary to capture and remediate the residual contamination
already on its way to the wellfield.
The preferred alternative presented in the Proposed Plan entailed
discharging treated water from the system at the Denville
Technical Park to an on-site infiltration basin or leach field
(Discharge Option 3). However, based on public comment, the
discharge alternative has been revised to permit the utilization
of treated water. Any water not necessary to promote the
restoration of the aquifer may be used for potable purposes by
being pumped via pipeline to the public water supply.
To avoid any confusion regarding Alternative 5, the specific
components of this alternative are as follows:
    The selected alternative at the Rockaway Township Wellfield
    specifically requires replacement of the deteriorating air
    stripper (not the existing carbon adsorption system).
    The new air stripper to be installed at the Rockaway
    Township Wellfield will have capacity similar to the
    existing system.
    The replacement air stripper at the Rockaway Township
    Wellfield does not entail air emission controls because past
    performance of the existing air stripper has met air
    emission standards.
    Determination as to whether any existing equipment can be
    used as part of the new air stripper system at the Rockaway
    Township Wellfield will be made during design of the new
    system.
    The costs for operation and maintenance were based on
    estimates from the Feasibility Study. The annual costs
    projected for operation of the new system will be revised
    once actual costs have been determined.
Some additional activities will be performed during the remedial
design and remedial action phases for the site. These activities
are described below as follows.
    An analysis will be made during the remedial design to
    ensure that any adverse impacts to any wetland areas will be
    mitigated. If appropriate, some of the treated ground water
    could be discharged to wetland areas to help offset any
    dewatering effects created by the ground water extraction.
                               25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Ground water modeling will be performed to evaluate the
     hydrologic effects of the remedy.
     Since the remedial action will occur within the 500-year
     floodplain, a floodplain assessment will be conducted during
     the remedial design.
In summary, the selected alternative is believed to provide the
best balance of trade-offs among the alternatives with respect to
the criteria used to evaluate alternatives. Therefore, based on
information available at this time, EPA and the State of New
Jersey believe that the selected alternative would provide
overall protection of human health and the environment, would
comply with ARARs, and would be cost effective. This action
would utilize permanent solutions and alternative treatment
technologies to the maximum extent practicable.
Remediation Goals
The goal of the selected remedy is to restore the ground water to
the more stringent of the New Jersey MCLs, Federal MCLs and the
New Jersey Ground Water Quality Standards within the zone of
capture of the Rockaway Township Wellfield, which includes the
Denville Technical Park. This operable unit will remediate
contaminants present in the deep and shallow aquifers and provide
safe drinking water for Rockaway Township residents. Based on
information obtained during the RI, EPA and NJDEPE believe that
the selected remedy will achieve this goal.
It may become apparent, during implementation or operation of the
ground water extraction system, that contaminant levels have
ceased to decline and are remaining constant at levels higher
than the drinking-water standards over some portion of the
contaminated plume. In that case, the performance standards
and/or the remedy may be re-evaluated.
The selected remedy will include ground water extraction for a
period which is presently estimated to be 30 years (but which,
depending upon the degree of contaminant reduction achieved, may
ultimately be a longer or shorter period), during which the
system's performance will be carefully monitored on a regular
basis and adjusted as warranted by the performance data collected
during operation. Modifications may include any or all of the
following:
    Discontinuing pumping at individual wells where cleanup
    goals have been attained.
    Alternating pumping at wells to eliminate stagnation.
    Pulse pumping to allow aquifer equilibration and to allow
    adsorbed contaminants to partition into ground water.
                               26

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Installing additional extraction wells to facilitate or
     accelerate cleanup of the contaminated plume.
During the performance of the long-term monitoring, NJDEPE and
EPA may determine that the remedial action objective has been
met. Periodic monitoring will be used to reassess the time frame
and the technical practicability of achieving cleanup standards.
Upon meeting all remedial objectives, .including those which may
be specifies under the second operable unit, or determining that
the Site has been sufficiently purged of contaminants so that
public health is no longer threatened by contaminants at the
Site, EPA will initiate proceedings to delete the Site from the
NPL.
STATUTORY DBTBRMIH&TZON8

Superfund remedy selection is based on CERCLA, as amended, and
the regulations contained in the NCP. EPA's primary
responsibility at Superfund sites is to undertake remedial
actions that achieve adequate protection of human health and the
environment. Additionally, several other statutory requirements
and preferences have been established. These specify that, when
complete, the selected remedy must comply with ARARs, unless a
statutory waiver is justified. The remedy must also be cost
effective and utilize permanent solutions and alternative
treatment or resource recovery technologies to the maximum extent
practicable. Finally, there is a preference for remedies which
employ treatment that permanently and significantly reduce the
toxicity, mobility, or volume of hazardous wastes as their
principal element. The following sections discuss how the remedy
selected for the Rockaway Township Wellfield site meets these
requirements and preferences.
Protection of Human Health and the Environment
The selected remedy protects human health and the environment
through the extraction and treatment of contaminated ground
water. The extraction and treatment of the contaminated ground
water will eliminate the threat of potential exposure to
contaminated ground water through the ingestion of ground water
or inhalation of volatile contaminants while using the ground
water for showering.
There are no anticipated short-term adverse impacts associated
with the selected remedy which cannot be readily controlled.
While no cross-media impacts are expected from the remedy, any
environmental impacts associated with site-related contaminants
or remedial activities will be addressed in the remedial design.




                               27

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Compliance with Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate
Requirements
Attainment of chemical-specific ARARs for the aquifer will be
achieved via the extraction and treatment of groundwater.
Action- and location-specific ARARs will be complied with during
implementation of the remedy. The specific ARARs for the
selected remedy are listed below.
Action-specific ARARs;
     •    Federal Hazardous Waste Manifest Requirements for Off-
          site Waste Transport (40 CFR Part 262)
     •   Department of Transportation (DOT) Rules for Hazardous
         Materials Transport (49 CFR Part 268)
     •    Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) Land
          Disposal Restrictions Material Response (29 CFR Parts
          1904, 1910, 1926)
     •    Clean Water Act Water Quality Criteria (40 CFR Part
          131)
     •    Clean Air Act National Ambient Air Quality Standards,
          (40 CFR Part 50)
     •   New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant
         Levels (NJAC 7:10)
     •   Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) National Primary
         Drinking Water Regulations (40 CFR Parts 141, 142, and
         143)
     •   New Jersey Water Pollution Control Act Standards for
         Groundwater (NJAC 7:9-6; NJAC 7:14 A-6:15)
     •    New Jersey Water Pollution Discharge Elimination System
          (NJAC 7:14A)
     •   New Jersey Air Pollution Control (NJAC 7:27-5, 13, 16
         and 17)
     •    National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (40 CFR
          122 and 125)
     •    Standards for Hazardous Waste Transporters (40 CFR 263)
     •    Noise Pollution (NJAC 7:29-1)



                               28

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Chemical-specific ARARs:
     •    Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA), MCLs and MCL Goals (40
          CFR Part 141)
     •    Clean Water Act Water Quality Criteria (40 CFR Part
          131)
     •    Clean Air Act National Ambient Air Quality Standards,
          (40 CFR Part 50)

     •    New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant
          Levels (NJAC 7:10)

     •    New Jersey Water Pollution Control Act Standards for
          Groundwater (NJAC 7:9-6; NJAC 7:14 A-6:15)
     •    New Jersey Water Pollution Discharge Elimination System
          (NJAC 7:14A)
     •    New Jersey Air Pollution Control (NJAC 7:27-5, 13, 16
          and 17)
     •    National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (40 CFR
          Parts 122 and 125)
     •    Standards for Hazardous Waste Transporters (40 CFR Part
          263)
     •    National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
          Pollutants (40 CFR Part 61)
Location-Specific ARARs

     •    Clean Air Act National Ambient Air Quality Standards,
          40 CFR Part 50
     •    40 CFR Part 6 Appendix A (Regulations for implementing
          Executive Order 11990 - Protection of Wetlands)
     •    Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. 1344

COST-EFFECTIVENESS
The selected remedy provides overall effectiveness proportional
to its cost. The estimated present worth cost of the selected
remedy is $9,848,895, which represents capital and annual O&M
costs of $991,000 and $661,149, respectively.




                               29

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment
Technologies to the Maximum Extent Practicable
The selected remedy utilizes permanent solutions and treatment
technologies to the maximum extent practicable. The selected
remedy represents the best balance of trade-offs among the
alternatives with respect to the evaluation criteria. The
extraction and subsequent treatment of ground water will
permanently and significantly reduce the toxicity, mobility, and
volume of contaminants in the ground water.
Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element
The statutory preference calls for remedies that employ treatment
as a principal element. The selected remedy entails extraction
and treatment of contaminated ground water at the site and,
hence, satisfies the preference for the treatment.
DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES
There are no significant changes from the preferred alternative
presented in the Proposed Plan. However, there was one minor
change to the preferred alternative. The preferred alternative
presented in the Proposed Plan entailed discharging treated water
from the system at the Denville Technical Park to an on-site
infiltration basin or leach field (Disposal Option 3). However,
based on public comment, the discharge alternative has been
revised to allow for the utilization of treated water. Any water
not necessary to promote the restoration of the aquifer may be
used for potable purposes by being pumped via pipeline to the
public water supply.




                               30

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        '      ' i   \




           ARE U S G S 7'/2° MINUTE                              2DOO
QUADRANGLE MAPS, DOVES AND
@OONTON, DATED1 If54, FHOTOSEVISED'   »86.                ON '

                                                                    FIGURE I
             JERSY
             NT&L P
      TV« VTELLFELD   ROSSIS 60,
                                                 ^ DEC. §S 1991     OR.: D. BRENT

             WT7SBUR6H.PA.                   SCALE:A| MOTIB

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     itin* f"""-              ••nm   ii.tTim   »•»««•


   ^M c;-^^
   ^               WX'V^-C^''^?-''^- }.»'-•• -,.                                                           -

MW-iaif"     "V.    "»• •-• - -"4 --_-.z---


                             K^rr^ u       K 7 r-
                             ^. j. -.;••• Uv!.- '" ^ttw^r^-r
                                                                          ROpKAWAV frWP MUNICIPAL                                                                        , MW-JO
                                                                                                                                                                         'MW-tS




                                                                                                                                                         teatno
                                                                                                                                                                CXI3TI«M PROOOCTWa WELL

                                                                                                                                                                EX08TIM« MOMITORMQ WELL

                                                                                                          ,' . '        .— "V^w ^•l/f?'' ,. A MONITORINO WELL WSTALLEO ««
                                                                                               "'.._   '•..' .' .            .r*>', {'!    ^ PHASE I INVESTIGATION, I98T

                                                                                               \ i       . '        .        /• '''•'S        ijNs!      H3 MONITORING WELL INSTALLED FOR
                                                                                             • V>               • ...      .•       ' • • ' '"//•••       ™ PHASE I      INVESTIGATION, I99O

                                                                                                                                ~=h£*'''••• -         ^.__APPROXIMATC BOUNDARY BETWEEN
                                                                                                                                "          '                OROUNOWATER AREAS




                                                                                                                                                                         o   too zoo
                                                                                                                                                                       SCALE IN FEET
                                                                                              - "^-r^Sf^            __.         /                 ,..1.




                                                                                                                         ' /      '    '           .     * -'
                                                                                                                          -J        /             •       \ REFERENCE 1
                                                                                                                           •- "••   ',                   • \OATE OF PHOTOGRAPHY, MARCH 14,
                                                                                                                                                             1987 BY AERIAL DATA REDUCTIONS
                                                                                                                                    S-     'v . '      .     CONTOUR INTERVAL! 2 FT.


                                                                                                                                            J. ' < _ _ ' ';'"           | FIGURE          2    _
                                                                                   NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF
                                                                              ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND ENERGY                                      GROUNOWATER AREAS
                                                                        ROCKMAY TWP WELLFTELD SITE, MORRIS CO. NEW JERSEY

      n.\-         v->                                                          ICF KAISER ENGINEERS                                     GATE: NOV. 6, 1991              DR.: K.G.
                                                                                         P1IISHURCH. PA                                  SCALE: AS NOTED                 DWG. NO.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                          TABLE 1
                          CHEMICALS DETECTED IN THE SHALLOW AQUIFER
                                    PHASE I INVESTIGATION
                              KOCKAWAY TOWNSHIP WELLFIELD SITE

Compound                         MW-1S      MW.2S     MW-6S MW-7S          MW-8S MW-16S

Volatile Organics ua/1)

S,i,1-Trichloro€tbaae                                   3J
Tetrschloroetbene                 13
Triehlorcetheae                              2JJ
Viayl dilodde
Tolueae                           L7J
leozene                                      323

^CB/Pest?cides i
Dieldrin                                                                          .02J
Inorganics (ug/J)

Antimony                                               67
Arsenic                                                 93
Silver                                                 65.0




Note:
  3 deaots as Climated value
  Monitoring wells sampled March 2-9, 2988 by 2CF
• Only detections are presented. Blank space indicate foglow detectioa limits.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   CIBEftfllCALS DETSCfEBJ BN TOE
                                                                              PHASE B INVESTDGMTON
                                                                        EOCKA^AV TOWNSHIP WELLFBEOJ SBTS

                                                                                                                                    SfceB
                              MW-IP                  MW-3O                                          MW-I2D          I6P   .MW-|gQ . WeB

                   fusffl

                                                                                                             73CS                             38   SS®
U-Dfctitorcabene                                                                                    @.2
Telrachteroeihenc                                                                   24
                                                       9.9                  8.9     T1       SJI
I.l-Dfchloroethane

Carbon tetretfiloride
Oitorofotm
Methyfcne dteffcfe
CMoroethane                                                                                                                10*
                                                                                                                                    431
To?aene                                                                                                                   209        16Gffi
E%«>enzea@                                                                                                                .9J9       1200

            ("KO
CSstetera                                                                                           8.0
E^ad
Mctrary



J
m
  AnalyticaS rawtu from NlDEf asfnpBng E3 MW-88D, Apjffl
Al (Hten from Marcili 2-9. S^K samptog tey 8CF
    r <asiesStom sic gracsemeil Btenfe q^es SmSccJe featec? «fe«e«te?

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                 ITADOJS 3
                                                                                                   AJ3EAO
                                                                            PDQASE D AMID 00 AWALTTirilOifl, nESOJO-TS SOJCOMAQT?
                                                                                DCCOAWAff 1TOWWSIH1IIP WEJUU7HE!UI!> SUITE
                                                                                             flAd catea to q^ty

                                                                                                    "™" • •" -
                                                                 MW-6S       MW-6O      MW-5ID)                  MW-B2D    MW-BOD        EfellW" MW-     DOW-          NJOEPB MJDEP2 KAB)
                                                                                                                                                am                                                    (f
                                                                                                                                          BCS            2am    * W
   (Tm^^ar—^n H>?<Wrt*«'l     Pbocs 0      PEsacsflO   MJSOWA
                                          Rone*""1              K3Q <M      :.,,; 401 3/^ <w 3^8 W jyaa «n MS                    <V9I    s«a <m «»              4B,     <m           MO     ^>B       <Wfl   '
Vtojril Osfmnte              DL-0.2       Dt-5)        Z®
Cateshytecs Cfctatte         NO           DL-03®                     i<au                                                                    ===== 9J)                         BJLJ
                                                       10                                                                                                       05J)
Aoioooe                      NA           DIUflOB      -
                                                                                                                                                                       =====              20D
 M-DKhEnroxofecoce           DL-0®        DIUOO        2,0                  CD 18                                         0J                    3JJ
B.B-DccMjmtioCscCie      DL-B<I           DIUDO        -                    BO 0®                                                             — 3JJ
iimm-B^-IKrlbterotafczcz DIL-020          NA           11 JD                82 NA                 BCT NA                                                        _        •
oa-UJMrKKrazdttca ptoeJJ WA               DIL-82®      80                   NA 3                  NA D2UU)                               — 73          20
CManotao                 IDP^3.0 DB,07                 -             DJ)       07                 3.0J
B.O.O.Tiriri^nTOKilV^    IWL-93 OL-42                  26       sa          93 42     33 SffiJ    S.3JI 35J 2A      18    OS                  <U       M        06JJ
Ceftas TcflirctttaBEz    DL-BD   BL-9                  10                      2J     OJJ)        00 9J                   6.2                 OJJ
TTiro&tanagir-Tg?        DL-73M) DL-SWIffl             B.®                  07 27     fl&U7411    330 32dtH               TUMI 35WD           jam      B70      02W            2J)        BJJ     o
 O.tt^Tiritihtonedtoca   ND>     OL4J)                 10 •                                                         BJ
 BtoBCES                 DIL43   (D1UO                 B.O                                                                                             _
                         DL-B2MI DL-J5UO
 BC^fcH-azca                                           "
                                                                = == =                     =           =                            =>                                 — -                        ——
Totsrros                     Dlb-BCSD OBv-02                                     B2
JtyOatro p«E3c3J             NA       0IU-OJS3 00                                     —                          ——                      ——                     —                         2D
                                                                                 _                     _
2 Mmorarr-t                  IMA      IDIU2                                                                                                   29
                                                                                            -— =• •==»                                                                                    _
TcoraAtaitzabcca             iKL-ao D1X3 BJO                         _   _ 5T caj)                                                                     2JJ      B9J)
                                                                                   —   — —-            —
JKsWra
Scfcsr
                             EKU5.Q2 NA
                             IKUS7JS) OIL              3®       6S
                                                                       =   = «==, "" ~                 ®.®2D
                                                                                                                                                                       —
                                                                                                                          P) Moajtao SscQra AayxHisr
                                                                                                                          Olosfi Djpiao r^trsg

           D3P - Km
           - Kffl SacafcaifiD Otes ESSD
           J- Estimated value

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 TAtLE 4
                                        PHASE II SAMPLING SUMMARY
                                 INORGANIC CHEMICALS ABOVE DETECTION UNITS
                                     ROCKAUAY TOWNSHIP UELLFIEID SITE


  VEIL HUME*           MU-6S             MW-68              MU-AS              RB
SAMPLE NUMBER     ROC-GU-120        ROC-CU-120        ROC-GU-138       ROC-GU-143
  SAMPLE TYPE       FILTERED        UNFILTERED        UNFILTEREO       UNFILTEREO
 BATE SAMPLED         4/5/91            4/5/91            4/5/91           4/5/91
         UNIT           ug/l              ug/l              UB/t             oe/l

   1GKMCANICS

                                                             2920 J
      Aroenlc           6.6 J              9.5 i             13.6
       Oar lira         70.5 i             194 J              124 J
      Cslclura         &4600 J           76500 J            69200 J          79.0 J
                                                              8.5 J
       CcbsU                               0.4 J             10.2 J
       Copper                             56.9               40.7 J
         Iron          24900 3           50300              46600 J          42is J
         Ised                              5.0                6.7
                       30703 J           34000              S2500 A          39.4 J
                        2270 J                               24FO A           tl.3 J
      Mercury                              0.2 J
       talclcel          8.5 J            31.« J             22.9 J
                        2620 J                               3200 £
                                          13.0 J
       Sodlue          18500 J            19500 J           118800 J
        ftdlus                             12.9 J            17.5 J
         Zinc                              61.2                188 J         49.9

                     Concentration
                        spaces Indicate concentration)
                  are bslou anelytlcal datectlon llcalto.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         Table 5
                                               CHEMICAL SUMMARY AND
                                             ARARS FOR GROUND WATER

 •nrieichn-                      Frequency
                                 of Detec-
                                                Mrcaum          Averaje     Federal        KJSDWA
                                                                                           MCLt
                                                                                                           NJDEPE
 ^tflU&O                                        Detected        Deiened     MCL (u^t)                      OrouftSv.-s-
                                 tion*          Value           Value                      (u^l).          ter Quality
                                                WO              wv                                         Standard*

                                 23/43       7300.0          5574)              J            1                 1
 l,1.Dieb)arec thine             6/43           14.0           €.7              .           • •              70
 |,l,!.TrichtoroeihaBe           22/43         93.0           16.4            200          26                30
 1,1'DiGhloroeiheDe              4/43          40.0           17J               5          "7                  2
Tetmsttteroe these               9/43          40.0           11.7              5*          1                  J
 ]3.Dic&taroethcae{toul)         4,05         120.0 J         54J               5           .
 Qyerocdune                      1/43          10.0 J         10.0             - »          •                 «,
 Cfcjarotenn                     S/43          17X             1A              100 •        v                  6
'Ittweae                         4/43        1600:0          408.0           1JOOO*         =»              1000
;Xylc&t{iota1)                   3J25        1300.0          445.7          10,000*        44                 40
iEtJiytetnasne                   3/43        1900.0         10334             700*          .
                                                                                            _                700
ilcaxeae                         2/43          43.0           23.!              5           1                   1
Acetone                          3/25         140.0           C2J               «,                           700
(MetUyteetnlartte                S/43         1500 J          58.6              59           2                30
(Ctrtoe T«ra±toride              6/43           11.0           e.j              £            2                 2
Vsjyiatoride                     2/43          3CL2            5.1              A            2                 §
j»i»- 13 DieWoronbeae            2/16         190.0          101.0              0.1         10               100
                                 2/43            6.0 J         JJ               ^           —
                                 1O5             2.0 J         20               «.          •                 «r>




                                 2fB           120.0          905.              4                             30
   PoUsaUu
Idieldaa                          1/17           DJJ           OJJ                          —
                                                                                -           -                   J93
iUK«r                            1/17           «5.0          65.0             50          50
^(ywnjc                          4/17           13.6           9.8             50          50.                 S
itouaoty                          1/17          «7.0          «7.0              10 9        .                20
JLcad                            S/10            6.7           3.6             50          50                10
JMasgntse                        3M           2470.0 J      1580 J J          50 '          «.               50
 (ft^iTngHfm                      VI          2920.0 J      2060.0         50-200'         «                200
 UTOB                             3/4        50300.0       30461.0           300'           -                300

a
     » Ko value
(>
     - 100 ue/ • for uul tribitomethiaa (Lc^ the acts of chloroform, tromoehlaromethane, *nd ttwaofonn).
«>• Emvanme&ul Prweohm Aftney (EPA). 1991. Nation*! Primary Driakinj Water RejvlaUoai; Foal Rule Ftdersl
     RefBier, VoL 56. No. 20, WcdaodtY, January 30,1991.
* • Toul PCEi
  «= 7&» avera|t li tued os OMhe aaapio oaJy «nd doe* aot tedude duplicates.
     ® Jtettte sftsa&a eaet act toelude dupUena or Wank aample*.

       Enimned Valut.
            sht KJDEPE Pnciial QusnthaUoa Umh (POL) fc mrmerioUy bi|ber lhaa the NJDEPE propowd |roufid«si
       ^uaup aaadard shr POL fatroaa ttt cleanup Ka&dard.



 346*0-73.13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           AREAS
                                                                          WflASE B ANQD BB ANAUmCAIL
                                                                                      TOWNSOflBP WEUUFBEILOD SUITS
                                                                                      (JAM


                                                                               MW-5OB           MW-8D            IMW-18D                    MW-2&S MW-26O                                                  EI
                                                                                                                                                                              MW-
                                                                                                                                                                              27D
                                                                                                                                                                                          S^U^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                W2
    (OtWTOKWWtf) ITJell'PTSfil"                iPtesfflom R8SDWA
                                    IRangs"5     Blange*" Standenk         3/38    4/58    :,,-    4/5J8   3^     4^         4^1                4/98            4^1           4/9!    3^8       4/91        4/9J
 Vinjd OiJorkk                    OL-8.2       Dt^9       ro
 Meihytens Chtoriste              ND           DH50       zo                                                      01       23J                                           313
 Amorcs                           NA           DH40        -
|l,l-Dtchtaroeilteite             DIL-40       DH8         2.0
i 1 , l-Dtditorotlffiams          DB^B4        DLrlO       -                              4J                                               4J    .                                   5J
 uais- B^didjtaromltaits          DBv-15®      NA          1.0
 1t2-42tC&UGTG£t&£8££ fTdffliJ    NA           DB^B2D)     to
  Qitarofarni                     DL-S.4       DL-B7       -
  1 . 1 ,fl-TratotoraEJtats       DL-93        DL42        26         9.9         3J      8.9              JAJ             2J                                                        2B
  Cajtea TeUdfijtoraZs            DIL-BD       D1U9        2.0
  TricMnroeihaits                 OL-7305)     DL-3«MD     1.0            J7      «y              2H                                                       56            29          63       4J
1 1 . 1 £ Trittotaiosatas         ND           DIUB        iO                                                                                                                                 6J
  BenzejtE                        DaXJ3        DUrS        1.0                                                                                                                       4U
  Kikytomu&ss                     DIUB2MD      DI,!«M>     -                                                     0.9JJ                                                               1 2CO             B9OTi
  ToJuems                         DL-liSOT)    DIL.B2      -                                                     2D>                                                                 Bi&flQ
  XytenEEG (TcaodJ                NA           DIL-BSdHJ   44                                                                                                                                 3M       1303
:2HosaEons                        NA           D1L-2       -
  Teircrhtaroealliaais            BL-24        Dtt^BS*     1.0                                                   4                         2D
:
                                                                                          _
  ChkmistJiajts                                                                                                  10                                                                                    ^
]
  DtcJdran                        DWJ.2                                                                                                    "
                                                                     11
  Silvetr                         DM57J        50
                                                                     L_                                                n   ajtv^ji^'-aaa
                                                                                                                                                       ,

                                                            , MW4D, MW-8S,
          iPhaae 1 samples aim BEO VOC sksecttes •         J8S, HibarniQ Dwss
          DL - Bceecta Umsi                                                                                                                                           beta? eteaeatoa CsmSia.
          NA . Not Analyzed
          NJSDWA - New Seney Slate Drinking Wa&HT
          ND - NoJ Delected
          - Ho Standards Have Been Promulgated)
           J - Estimated value

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                  AREA 3
                                                                  PHASE I AND II ANALYTICAL SUMMARY
                                                                 g&OCKAWAY TOWNSHIP WELLF1ELD SITE
                                                                            (All valM» ta

                                                                               MW-IS      MW-ID          MW-2S           MW-2D            MW-3D   IVEX\A/5*
     Compound Detected       Phase 1 Range1" Phase U Range1" NJSDWA Standards   3/88   3/88   4/91     3/88 4/91     3/88     4/91      3/88 4/91    4/91
 Vinyl Chloride              DL-1.2          DL-9            10
 Methytene Chloride          NO              DL-150          2.0                                                             ISOJ                    46J
 Acetone                     NA              DL-140          -                                               261             I40J
 1,1-Dkhloroeihene           DL-40           DL-18           2.0
 l.l-Dtchtoroeinane          DL-14           DL-10           -
 trans-i.2-Dtchtarocihene    DL-190          NA              1.0
 1.2-Dichlorcctbene (Toul)   NA              DL-120          10
 Chiorofarm                  DL-5.4          DL-17           -
 1,1.1-Trtditaroelhane       DL-93           DL-42           26                                                             3.71       i&S
 Carbon Telrachlonde         DL-ll           DL-9            2.0
 TrktaBoroeihcne             DL-7300         DL-3900         1.0                                      2.SS
 1.12 TrkhkwoethanB          ND              DL-i            2.0
 Benzene                     DL-43           DL-1            1.0                                      3^1
 Oimyl benzene               DL-1200 :       DL-1900         -
 Totucne                     DL-1600         DL-82           -                US
 Xytcnes (Total)             NA              DL-1300         44
 2 Hraanone                  NA              DL-2            -
 Tetrachloroeihane           DL-24           DL-19           1.0              73                      IJ
 DiebMn                      DL-O2           NA              -
 Sihwr                       DD-67.0         DL              65

Note:   Lab tat Phase 11 sample from MW-iS.                                                   (1) StJcwfate
        Phaoe II sample from MW-3D contained no VOC abra® t^eectkm Iroka.                     (2) Monitors Shaiow Aquifer
        DL - Detection UmiS                                                                   Anafytkai Results fnaa MW-23S and MW-2SS were below detection* Saslte
        NA • Not Analyzed                                                                     Blanks spates bufcue coooentnuions betew detecikm tauta
        NJSDWA - New Jersey Slate Drinking Water Act Standards
        ND • Not Detected
        - No Standards Have Been Promulgated
        J - Estimated value

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                           TABLE     8-1
                  CROUNDUATER ME CONCENTRATIONS USED TO CALCULATE I IKS
      FOR THE CHEH1CALS OF POTENTIAL CONCERN AT THE tOCKAWAY TOWNSHIP UELLFIELO SITE


                                                   Upper 95th
                                            Confidence Unit
                               ArtthMtfc    on the Arithmetic   NaxtSU*     WE
Hell 6roi4>/Che»icel (•)          *ean               Mean       Detected    Value

DEEP DOUNCRADIENT • AREA 1
Organics:
  Acetone                          7.1            9.4               21         9.4
  •eruene                             1           DC                 1
 Carton tetrschloride              3.9            5.1               11         S.I
 Chloroform                        4.7            6.5               35         6.5
 Bi-n-butylphthalate               8.9              U               42          14
  1,1-Diehloroethane               3.6            4.6               14         4.6
  1,1-Dichloroethene               5.5            8.1               40         8.1
  1.2-DicMoroethene (total)         23            120              120         120
  bis(2-Ethylhexyl)phthalste        22            130              120         120
  2-Hexanone                         2             DC                2
 Mtthylerw Chloride                 MA             NC              100         100
  fetrachloroethene                6.9             13               40          13
 Toluene                           3.2            3.B               12         3.8
  1,1,1-Trier, lore* thane          15             47               93          47
 Trichloroethene                   510        210,000            7,300       7.300
 Vinyl Chloride                    5.5            6.1                9         6.1
 Xylenet (total)                     2            HC                 2           2
Inorganics:
  Cadniun (dissolved)              3.2               6.4           S.3         S.3
SHALLOW DOWNGRAD1ENT - AREA 1
Organics:
  Chloroform                         1                HC             1           1
 Bi*n-evrtylphthalate              4.6                HC           4.6         4.6
 Oieldrin                         0.02                HC          0.02        0.02
  Nethylene Chloride                HA                NC           uo          UO
  1.1,1-Trichtoroethane            2.6               3.9           5.2         3.9
  Vinyl Chloride                   1.2                HC           1.2         1.2
Inorganics:
  Alinnnun (total)                  HA                HC         2,060       2,060
  Antinony (dissolved)              35                HC            67          67
  Arsenic (total)                   HA                HC          11.6        11.6
  Bariim (total)                    HA                HC           159         159
  Calciifn (total)                  HA                HC        72,850      72,850
  Oircniktti (total)                HA                HC           5.5         5.5
  Cobalt (total)                    HA                HC           9.3         9.3
  Copper (total)                    HA                HC          46.8        48.8
  Iron (total)                      HA                NC        48,450      48,450
  Lead (total)                      HA                HC           5.9         S.9
  NapwsiuB (total)                  HA                HC        33.250      33,250
  Manganese (total)                 HA                HC         2.570       2,570
  nickel (total)                    HA                HC            27          27
  Potassiut (total)                 HA                HC        3,200        3,200
  Silver (dissolved)                19                HC            65          65
  Sedim (total)                     HA                HC        19,150      19,150
  Vanadikn (total)                  HA                DC          15.2        is. 2
  Zinc (total)                      HA                HC         124.6       124.6


HA • Hot applicable, since there MS only one
HC « Not calculated due to the wall nunber of samples.
€•) Ho chemicals of concern Mere selected for tbe Shslteu 9owngrsdient     Ar«a 2 group.
Concentrations in «g/L.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 8-2
                    SaOUSOUATER Eff BWCEHTaATIOpfS USED TO CALCULATE DISKS
        ?8S THE eHEWICALS OF POTENTIAL SCJCESW AT THE KOCSAHAT TOHUSNIP tSUPlEUB 8ITg


                                                   Uppsp 93th
                                                eenfictence Llait
                                  Apltteatle    en Kho Arfttestic    CJaatcuD     OME
tell   Speup/Chcsfcol (o)           Caon               Kaon          dotoetcd     Wolics


BEEP SOyHCRADIEHT • AREA 2
©rgontec:
  Ocraens                             7.9               20                4S            20
  ei-ft-tortylphtholote               3.7               etc              6.3           6.3
  1,1-PichloPOSthore                  2.7              3                   §             3
  1,2-OichloposthGTt2 (tetot}         2.7              3                   6             3
                                                                                   <
  gthyltonzsm                         SO          13,600               1,@00        30(?00
  Tot poeh I opeothoti                  2               ue                 2               2
  Telusre                              36           •j.eoo             1,400       •3.300
  1,1,1-Tpiehlopwthons                3.2              .$.4              9.9           4.4
  1,1,2-Tpichloreathcns               2.9              3.3                 d           3.3
  TpichlOPWthens                       IS               87                §4            ^6
  Hylcnjc (totol)                     WO           s.&oo               1,300       1.SCO

BEEP eOMCKASIEtiT » AREA 3
ergonics:
  Acetone                              73               oc               140           140
  &is(2-EthylhGityl )ph£(voloto        UA               (1C               SI            SI
  Rsthylcftt Chlorite                  04               me               ISO           ISO
  Totrochlopeethcns                     1               tie                1
  I.l.l-Triehlopeothons               2.S              2.6               2.6             ^
                                                                                       2.6
Inorganics:
  load (dicisotvcd)                    CJA              UC                             4.3


Srgonies: '
  Oeruene                             2.6              2.8               S.2           2.8
  Tetrochlorcathcna                   3.7               12               7.3           7.3
  Totuarts                            1.7               UC               1.7           1.7
                                      2.5              2.6               2.6           2.6

  toed (dissolved)                     DA               OC               3.4           S.4
           UELLS

  1,1-Ciehlorasthoro                     1            BC                   1             1
  «rcra-1,2-Ciehlorosthcn3            3.9             100                3.8           S.8
  1.1.1-TrieMoroathcns                  12             52                 18            18
  TrieMorosthenj                      -J60     1.SCO.OOO                 300           SOO

OA o act opplicablc, olneo «hopo coo snly ens ocaplo.
DC ° dot eolculotod &a to «ho err) 11 fac£sr ®f oosploo.

(o) Bo                of eeneom KSPQ detected        «he Shot lea &eta^pcdi(3it • APOO 2
eensentrotiero        cg/l.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       TABLE    8-3
8KUEB BOOM A!8 KHCESSATIONS ASSOCIATED WITH 6KOUNDUATER ME OONCEHTKAT10NS
                80CKAUAY TOWNSHIP WEUMELD SITE

                                                           Average Air
                                       BE Concentration    Conetntration For
                                         «n Shower Water   Total Shower
fefeU                  |e)                     (ue/L)      Exposure

DEEP 80H3GRADIEHT
  Acstens                                        9.4       1.15E-02
  Seraere                                          1       &.11E-03
  earfecn tetrachlor i&                          5.1       2.4K-B2
  Ehloroforai                                    *.5        .35E-02
                                                 4.6        .SAE-02
  1,1-Bichlorcsthsns                             8.1        .72E-02
  1,2-DicMoreathGra                              120        .*2£-01
                                                            .93C-03
 Wethylsns Chleride                               100       .73E-01
 7 e t reeh I ores there                           13       .UE-02
                                                 S.8        .20E-02
                                                  47        .421-01
  TrieM erect hare                              7300        .72E»01
  Vinyl Chloride                                            .15E-02
          (setol)                                           .10E-G2
SHALLCf                    - AfiEA 1

 ehlorsfor®                                         1         .15E-03
 Oisldrtn                                       8.02          .28E-06
 ^tthylem Qtlorldc                               UO           .02E-01
 1.1.1-TriehlerMthans                            3.9          .01E-02
       Chlorite                                  1.2          .16E-03
                     - &REA 2
  0 era ere                                        20      1.22E-01
  1 , 1 -B t eh I oresthans                         3      1.68E-02
  1,2-Bi eh tores there (total)                     3      1.73E-02
                                                 1900      1.05E*01
  Tetrechleresthsne                                 2      9.UE-OJ
                                                 1000      5.7VE»00
  1,1,1-lrJchlorosthart*                          4.4      2.26E-02
  1,1,2-Triehloro«than8                           3.5      1.56E-02
  trichlorocthsre                                  So      2.B6E-01
  Sylerat (tetot)                                1300      7.13E»00
     MWCRAOtEirr - AREA 3
  Acetone                                         UO       1.T1E-01
  ftethylere Chloride                             150      8.59E-01
  Tstrechlorotthen*                                 1      4.72E-03
  1,1,,1-Trietilerosthsns                         2.6      1.34E-02
          MfeWCRADIEHT - AREA 3
  Benserte                                        2.8      1.71E-02
  Tetrechlorosthana                               7.3      3.45E-02
  Toltens                                         1.7      9.83E-03
                                                  2.6      1.S3E-02


  1,1-BiehlorosthsR9                                       5.61E-03
  trww-1,2-PlchloroethQf®                                  3.86E-02
  1.1,1-Trichlore«than8                           18       9.26E-02
                                                 300       1.SSS+00

     ffls cfvsBfeals ef eancam aero Mlcetcd for th« ChallOM                ATM
     2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                            POTENTIM ewOSUtt PATMMTS fOR TNC R9CKMM? fOMSNIP VEUMEID SITC




                    Meehanla* of Ideate and
                    Transport for Che«lcal>                                 Potential                                      Petfmay*       P*thnay* That Will M
Bnpomir* Nedlua     of Potential Concern          txpoturt Point            Receptors .        Routea of Cxpoeur*          Co^>letet      Ouantltatl«ely evaluated



•roundMter          ••IcoM fro» on-atte          On-tlt« wile              Hypothetical        tngettlon. Inhalation         Tea         Inpeatton of drlnklnt Mater;
                    BOW cci( trotKport           Clacking iwtcr            realdenu <•)        of wolatllet, tferMl                      Inhalation of volatile* uMla
                    through MM wjutftr           treatment tyatciw)                            contact                                   thonerlni




MbwrfMwSolt         IvltMt fro» on-iltt          On-«lt«                   Pew »K|Het*rf;      Significant contact           Bo          lot applicable
                    tourcM                                                 poeelblv persera    unlikely
                                                                           perfomlnv
                                                                           encovatloni



                               fraa                                        Current or          Etarant contact
                    Mter                                                   9uf«tr« residents                                             to b* ifnlgnlflcant due to
                                                                                                                                                          fl fttttf £(k)/W^

                                                                                                                                                   *? the cnealcele o
                                                                                                                                         eeneom.


     1ft®?© Is wsTrentty no uas af «mtreated sreu«lt<et«r at       e9<io, sad) suds us® to                   sfes futw«.   ttas?©*®?Qe
                     fit the Hut Hi|r area are not expected*

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        TABLE 10-1
                               ORAL TOXICin OMTERIA FOB. CHEMICALS OF POTENTIAL CONCERN
                                             ROCXAUAT TOWNSHIP WELLFIELD SITE

                                        Chronic IfD           lexicological               Slope           USEPA       Slope
                                        (•B/kj-day)             Endpoint     IfD          Factor        Weight-of-    Factor
Chemical                             (Safety Factor](•)         for RfD     Souret     (•G/kg-day)-     Evidence(b)   Source

Organic*:
  Acetone                             i.ooE-1 d.ooo]          Kidney/liver    IRIS                             0      IRIS
  Benzene                                                                               2.90E-2                A      IRIS
  Bis(2-ethylhexvt )pnth«late         2.00E-2 11,000]         Hver            IRIS      1.40E-2               •2      IRIS
  Carton tetreehloride                7.0CK-4 [1.000]         Liver           IRIS      1.SOE-1               B2      IRIS
  Chlorofor*                          1.00E-2 11,000]         Liver           IRIS      6.10E-3               •2      IRIS
  »i-n-butylphthalate                 1.00E-1 [1,000]         Mortality       IRIS
   1,1-Dichloroethaoe                 1.00E-1 (1,0001         Kidney          HE AST                           C      IRIS
   1,1-Dichloroethene                 9.00E-3 tl.OOO]         Liver           IRIS      6.00E-1                c      IRIS
  tram • 1,2-D i cti I ore* then*     2.00E-2 (1,000]         Liver           IRIS
   total 1,2-Diehloroethene
      (a* cis-1.2-Diehloroeth«ne)     1.00E-2 O.OOOJ             atology      •EAST                            D      IRIS
  lieldrin                            5.00E-S [100]           Liver           IRIS      1.60E*1               •2      IRIS
  Ethylbenzene                        1.00E-1 [1,000]         Liver/kidney    IRIS                             D      IRIS
  2-Nexanone
  Methyleoe chloride                  6.005-2 [100]           Liver           IRIS      7.SOE-3               82      IRIS
  Tetrachloroethene                   1.00E-2 [1.000]         Liver           IRIS      5.10E-2               B2      HEAST
   toluene                            2.00E-1 [1,000]         Liver/kidney    IRIS                             D      IRIS
  1,1,1-Trie* loroethane              9.00E-2 [1,000] <e,d)   Liver           MEAST                            0      IRIS
   1,1,2-Trichloroethane              4.00E-3 [1,000]         Clin. chen.     IRIS      5.70E-2                C      IRIS
  Triehloroethene                     7.35E-3 [1.000]         Liver           MA        1.10E-2               82      HEAST
  Vinyl chloride                                                                        1.90E»0                A      HEAST
  lylenes (total)                     2.00£*0 [100]           CHS/nort»lity   IRIS                             D      IRIS

Inorganics:
   Aluainua                            ...                      ...           ...           .                         ...
   Antiaeny                           4.80E-4 (1,000]         Blood ehea.     IRIS          -                         ...
   Arsenic                            3.001-4 Dl              Skin            IRIS      1 73E*0   (f)          A      IRIS
   Bariua                             7.00E-2 D]              > BP            IRIS          .                                  |
   Cadniua (water)                    S.OOE-4 [10]            Kidney          IRIS          .
   Caotoiut (food)                    1.00E-3 [101            Kidney          IRIS          -                                  '
   Calcium                             ...                      ...           ...           .                         ...
   OironiuB (as Chromiua VI)          5.00E-3 COO]            CMS             IRIS          -                         ...
  .Cobalt                               ...                     ...           ...           •                         ...
   topper                             3.70E-2 [1] (g)         GI irrit        MEAST         -                         ...
   Iron                                 ...                     ...           ...           -                         ...
   Lead                                 ...                     ...           ...           -                         ...
   Magnesium                            ...                     ...           ...                              ..     ...
   Manganese                          I.OOE-1 [1]             CMS             IRIS          .                         ...
   Mickel (as nickel soluble ults)    2.00E-2 DOO] (e)        < Body weight   IRIS          -
                                                                                                                      —
   •otassiua                            ...                     ...           ...           .                         ...
   Silver                             5.00E-3 O]              Argyria         IRIS          -                         ...
   Sodium                               ...                     ...           ...           -                  • .    ...


   Vanadiu*                           7.00E-3 [100] (c)       Liver/kidney    MEAST         -                         ...
   Zinc                               2.00E-1 [10] (c)        Aneaiia         MEAST        ..


(a) Safety factors are the products of uncertainty factors and scdifytng factors. Uncertainty factors used to develop
    reference doses generally consist of avltieles of 10, with each factor representing a specific area of uncertainty
    in the data available. The standard uncertainty factors include the following:
    • A 10-fold factor to account for the variation in sensitivity among the aanturs of the huaen population;
    • A 10-fold factor to account for the uncertainty in extrapolating anint data to the case of huaens;
    • A 10-fold factor to account for the uncertainty in extrapolating fron less than chronic MOAELs to chronic MOAELs; and
    • A 10-fold factor to account for th« uncertainty in extrapolating froa LOAELs to MOAELs.
    Modifying factors are applied at the discretion of the reviewer to cover other uncertainties in the data.
Cb) USEPA Weight of Evidence classification scheme for carcinogens: A--Hunan Carcinogen, sufficient evidence from
    tpideaiological studies; »2--Probable Huaon Carcinogen, inadequate or no evidence fro* epideniological studies and
    adequate evidence fron aniaial studies; C--Po*sible Human Carcinogen, United evidence in anioals in the absence of
    husen data; and 0--Hot Classified as to huasn careinogenicity.
(c) Under review by RfD/RfC Workgroup.
(d) Based on route to route extrapolation.
(e) The oral RfD, while still available en IBIS, is being reconsidered by the RfD/RfC Work Croup.
(f) Slope factor is based on a unit risk of 5E-5 (ug/L)-1 which has been proposed by the risk assessawnt forua and scheduled
    for review (SAS). The oral unit risk was converted to 1.75 (as/kg-day)-! as*uaing a 70-kg individual ingests 2 liters
    of water per day.
(g) Value is derived fron current drinking water standard of 1.3 saj/L; drinking water docunent concluded toxlcity
     information were inadequate for calculation of an RfD for copper. This is equivalent to 3.7E-02 atj/kg-day assuifng
    a 70 kg individual ingests 2 L of water per day.
MOTE:''IK IS • Integrated Risk Information System. Sept eater 1991.
 t     MEAST • Health Effects Assessoem Sunary Tables, FT1991.
 *     MA • Health Advisory
             "Mo information available.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            TABLE . 10-2
                          INHALATION TOXICITY CRITERIA FOR CHEMICALS OF POTENTIAL CONCERN (•)
                                   ROCKAUAY TOWNSHIP UELLMELD SITE

                                  Reference Concentration         lexicological                Unit            USEPA    .Unit
Ctieaieal                              (RfC) (BB/ml)                Endpoint     RfC           Risk         Ueight-of-   Risk
                                    [Safety Factor] (b)              for RfC    Source       (ug/m3>-1     Evidence (c) Source


   Acetone                                                                                                     0        IRIS
   •enzene                                                                                   8.30E-6           A        IRIS
   Carbon tetractileride                                                                     1.50E-5 (d)       K        IRIS
   CMoroforst                                                                                2.30E-5           •2       IRIS
   1.1-Diehloroethane                     5.00E-1 11,000]         Kidney            •EAST
   1,1-Dichloroethene                                                               •••      5.00E-5                    IRIS
   trans-1,2-D ietit oroethene                                                      *•»

   total 1,2-Oichlcroethene
   Oietdrin                                                                                  4.60E-3           •2       IRIS
   Ethylbenzene                           1.00E»0 BOO]            Devel       it    IRIS                       D        IRIS
   2-Hexanone
   Methylene chloride                     3.00E»0 tlOO]           Liver             HEAST    4.70E-7           82       IRIS
   Tetrechloroetfiene                                                                        5.20E-7 (e)       82       HEAST
   Toluene                                2.00E+0 [100]           CNS/lrrit         HEAST                      D        IRIS
   1,1,1-Triehloroethane                  1.00E»0 [1,000] (g)     liver             HEAST                      0        IRIS
   1,1,2-Trichloroethane                                                                     1.60E-5            C       IRIS
   Trichloroethene                                                                           1.70E-6 (f>        82      HEAST
   Vinyl chloride                                                                            8.40E-5 (e)        A       HEAST
   Xylenes (total)                        3.00E-1 [100] ,         CNS/re*p.        , HEAST                     D        IRIS


(.1) Inhalation toxicity criteria are presented only for those cheaicals «hich are of concern in the shower scenario,
     i.e., those chemicals likely to volatilize from water into air.
<!b) Safety factors are the products of uncertainty factors and aodifying factors. Uncertainty factors used to develop
     reference doses generally consist of njltiples of 10, with each factor representing a specific area of uncertainty
     in the data available. The standard uncertainty factors include the following:
     • A 10-fold factor to account for the variation in sensitivity among the acnbers of the hunan population;
     • A 10-fold factor to account for the uncertainty in extrapolating animal data to the case of humans;
     • A 10-fold factor to account for the uncertainty in extrapolating from less than chronic NOAELs to chronic NOAILs; and
     • A 10-fold factor to account for the uncertainty in extrapolating from LOAELs to NOAELs.
     Modifyins factors are applied at the discretion of the reviewer to cover other uncertainties in the data.
(c) USEPA Weight of Evidence classification scheme for carcinogens: A--Human Carcinogen, sufficient evidence fron epidem-
     iological studies; B2--Probable Hunan Carcinogen, inadequate or no evidence from epideaiplogical studies and adequate
     evidence from aninel studies; C--Possible Human Carcinogen, United evidence in aniatals in the absence of hunen oata;
     and D--Not Classified as to hunan carcinogenicity.
(d) An absorption factor of 402 is used to calculate the unit risk for carbon tetrachloride fron its slope factor.
(e) Verified; workgroup concurrence on f i n a l data base, and I R I S input pending.
(f) Tht unit risk for trichloroethene is based on a Metabolized dose.
(g) Under review by R f O / R f C Workgroup.
IIOTE: IR!$ • Integrated Risk Information Sytteo, Septeober 1991                                                       • '
       BEAST « H e a l t h Effects Assessment Sunnary Tables, FT 1991
        --- * Not information available.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         TABLE       11-1

                                  POTENTIAL RISES ASSOCIATED WITH IHGESTION OF 6MLWDUATER BY
                              HYPOTHETICAL IESIOEKTS (0-30 Y S S . ) AT THEfiOCKAUAYTOWNSHIP WELLMELD SITE   (•)
                                           DEEP DOyWGRADJENT UELLS • AREA 1


                                             WE                                                                      «*E
                                         Chronic Daily       Slope                        Height of            Upper lou
ChMicals Exhibiting                      Intake (CDI)         factor                      Evidence           Excess Life
Carcinogenic Effects                      <«g/kg-day>      <«e/kg-day)-1                  Class (b)             Cancer R

Organic*:
•enzene                                    1.6E-05               2.9E-02                       A                   5E-07
•isC2-ethylhexyl)phthalate                 2.0E-03               1.4E-02                       B2                  3E-05
Carton tetracMoride                        B.3E-05               1.3E-01                       82                  1E-05
Chloroforn                                 1.1E-04               6.1E-03                       82                  6E-07
1,1-Dichloroethene                         1.3E-04               6.0E-01                       C                   M-05
Methylene chloride                         1.6E-03               7.5E-03                       32                  1E-05
Tetrachloroethene                          1.1E-04               S.1E-02                       •2                  1E-05
Trichloroethene                            1.2E-01               1.1E-02                       B2                  «-03
Vinyl chloride                                                   1.9E*00                       A
TOTAL                                                                                                              2E-03

                                             RME
                                        Chronic Daily        Beference Dose          Toxicological                   RKE
OMBieals Exhibiting                     intake (CD I)          (ng/kg-day)           Endpoint for                  O)I:RfD
Kencarcinogenic Effects                  (Bs/kg-day)      (Uncertainty Factor] (c)      BfD (d)                     Ratio

Organics:
Acetone                                   3.6E-04                  1E-01 11,0003     Kidrwy/Uwer                    4E-03
Itl(2-ethylhtxyl)prithalit«               6.6E-03                  2E-02 [1,000]     Uvtr                           2E-01
Carbon tetracMoride                       1.9E-04                  n-w t1,000)       Liver                          3E-01
Chloroform                                2.5E-W                   1E-02 11.000)     Hvar                           2E-02
Di-n-butylphthatate                       5.3E-W                   1E-01 M.OOO]      Mortality                      5E-03
1,1-Diehloroethane                        1.7E-W                   1E-01 C1.000)     Kidney                         2E-03
1,1-Dichloroethene                        3.1E-04                  9E-03 tl.OOO)     Liver                          3E-02
trans-1,2-0ichloroethene                  4.6E-CK                  2E-02 11.0003     liver                          2E-02
1.2-Dichloroethene (total)                4.6E-03                  1E-02 0,0003      Maaatol.                       5E-01
Hethylene chloride                        3.8E-03                  6E-02 [1003       Liver                          6E-02
Tetrachloroethene                         4.9?-W                   1E-02 [1.000]     Liver                          5E-02
Toluene                                   1.4E-W                   2E-01 [1.000]     Lfver/kidnsy                   7E-W
1,1,1-Trichloroethane                     1.6E-OJ                  9E-02 [1.0003     Liver                          2E-02
Trichloroethene                           2.SE-01                .35E-03 [1.0003     Liver                          4E*01
Xylenes (total)                           7.6E-05                  2E*00 [1003       CBS/aortslity                  4E-05
Inorganics:
Cadmium                                   2.0E-04                 9E-04 CIO]         Kidrtsy                        4E-01

MA2A8D IKDEX                                                                                                        (4E*01

(a) Risks are calculated for those chemicals of potential concern uith toxicity critarie. A risk for 2-hexanone
     is not presented due to tack of toxicity criteria.
(fa) USEPA Weight of Evidence for Carcinogenic Effects:
       (A3   Kuran carcinogen based on adequate evidence fren himan studies;
       CB1) Probable hur«n carcinogen based en United human dots;
       321 Probable human carcinogen based en insdsquata evidence frcca human studiss and ed*quata evidence free
             animel studies;
       CCI   Possible human carcinogen based en Halted evidence frea eniaal studies in the sbsance of
             human studies;
       D!    Mot classified as to human cercirtogenicity;
             Evidence of noncarcinogenicity for
le> Uncertainty factors represent'the aatxnt of uncertainty in extrapolation frea the availabls data.
(d) A lexicological endpoint is a cheaieal's toxic effect or the organ a»st oensltwe to a chemical's toxic effect.
     If the RfD was based on a study in «hich en sndpoint was not identified, then an effoct, organ or organ systao
     knourv to be affected by th« chsaical is

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                TABLE   11-2
                           POTENTIAL BISKS ASSOCIATED WITH ISGEST103 OF GBOUHDUATE8 IT
                        (TTPOTHETICAL RESIDENTS (0-30 YRS.) AT THE 80CKAUAY TOWNSHIP WELLF1ELO SITE (a)
                                            SHALLOW DOWNCRAOIEtlT - AREA 1

                                           SHE                                                                  SHE
                                       Chronic Baily           Slope                     Weight ef          Upper Bound
ChCBfcals Exhibiting                   Intake (COI)            factor                    Evidence         Iietss LHetisa
Carcinogenic Effects                    (sg/kg-dsy)                                      Class (b)           Cancer Bisk

Organics:
Chlorofora                               1.6E-05               6.1E-03                     02                 16-07
Ditldrin                                 3.3E-07               1.6E»01                     62                 SE-06
Hethyltne chloride                       1.3E-03               7.5E-03                     B2                 2E-05
Vinyl chloride                           2.0E-05               t.9E«00                     A                  4E-05
Inorganics:
ArMnic                                    1.9E-84               1.8E+00                                       SE-W
TOT At


                                             SHE
                                        Chronic Boily       Deference Cose        Toxicolosicsl                SHE
Chemicals Exhibiting                    Intake (CDI)          (wg/kg-day)         Endpoint for               Ol:RfO
Honcarcinogenic Effects                  (aa/kg-day)     fUneertainty factor] (cj   BfO (d)                   Ratio

Organics:
Chloroform                               3.8E-OS                 1E-02 11,000)     Uver                       4E-03
Di-n-bytylphthalate                      1.7E-04                 1E-01 tl.0003     Mortality                  2E-03
Oieldrin                                 7.6E-07                 5E-05 [100]       Liver                      2E-02
Nethylene chloride                       S.3E-03                 6E-02 tlOOJ       Liver                      9E-02
1.1,1-Trichtoroethane                    1.5E-04                 9E-02 11,000]     Liver                      2E-03
Inorganics:
Antiaeny                                 2.5E-03                 4E-04 t1,000]     Blood ehea.                6E«00
Arsenic                                  4.&E-W                  3E-IK [3]         Skin                       1E+00
Barium                                   6.0E-03                 7E-02 D)          increased 8P               9E-02
Chroffliuja                              2.1E-W                  5E-03 C500]       CMS                        6E-02
Copper                                   1.9E-03               3.7E-02 m           CI irrit.                  SE-02
Manganese                                9.SE-02                 16-01 tl]         CMS                        1E*00
Nickel                                   1.0E-03                 2E-02 [300]      ftecraessd body at.         SE-02
Silver                                   2.5E-03                 SE-03 D)         Argyria                     5E-01
                                         5.SE-04                 7E-03 1100]      Liver/kid*«y                BE- 02
Zinc                                     4.7E-03                 2E-01 [10]       Aneaia                      2E-02
•AZARD rwOEX                                                                                              » 1 (1E»OD

(a) lisks are calculated for those cheoicals of potential concern with toxieity criteria. The following
    chemicals of potential concern are not presented due to lack of toxieity criteria: eluBirxsn, colciun,
    cobalt, iron, lead, Mgnesiun, potassium, end sodiua.
(b) USEPA Weight of Evidence for Carcinogenic Effects:
     (A] Nvnan carcinogen bated on adequate evidence fron hunan studies;
     tBU Probable husan carcinogen based on limited hunan data;
     182) Probable huwn carcinogen based on inadequate evidence front human studies and adequate evidence from
           animal studies;
     1C] Possible hunan carcinogen based on United evidence fren eniael studies In the absence of
           human studies;
     tO] Hot classified as to human earcinogenicity;
     (EJ Evidence of noncarcinogenieily for humans.
(c) Uncertainty factors represent the aoount of uncertainty In extrapolation from the available data.
(d) A lexicological endpoint is a cheaieal's toxic effect or the organ nost »er»itive to a ehenical's toxic effect.
    If the IfO was based on a study in yhich an endpoint MBS not identified, then an effect, organ or organ systso
    known to be affected by the chemical is listed.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  TABLE      11-3
                              POTENTIAL IISKS ASSOCIATED WITH 1HCESTION Of CROUNDWATER BY
                            HYPOTHETICAL RESIDENTS (0-30 TRS.) AT THE ROCXAUAT TOWNSHIP WELLFIELD SITE
                                       DEEP DOUNUAD1ENT WELLS • AREA 2


                                          •ME                                                                     BME
                                      Chronic Daily          Slops                       Weight of            Upper Bound
Chsalcats Exhibiting                  Intake (GDI)           Factor                      Evidence           Escess Ufetims
Carcinogenic Effects                   (•e/kg-day)        «Bg/kg-day>-1                  Class (a)             Cancer Bisk


Benzem                                  3.3E-W                 2.9E-02                       A                   9£-Oo
Tetrachloroethene                       3.3E-05                5.1E-02                       32                  2E-06
1,1,2-Trichloroethsra                   5.71-05                5.7E-02                       C                   SE-06
Iricbloreathens                         9.1E-W                 1.11-02                       i2                  IE-OS
TOTAL                                                                                                            2E-05

                                           RME
                                      Chronic Daily          Reference Dose          Toxieological                SHE
duaiealt Exhibiting                   Intake (CD I)            (ng/kg-day)           Endpoint for               CDURfD
Hereercinoeenic Effects                (ng/kg-day)        (Uncertainty Factor] (b)      8fD (C)                  Sstio

Orgcnics:
Of-n-butylphth»(ate                     1.6E-W                      1E-01 M.OOO]     Mortality                   2E-03
1,1-Dichlorocthane                      1.1E-W                      1E-01 C1.0003                                1E-03
1.2-OieMoroethene (total)               1.1E-W                  1E-02 D.OOOJ         Ntnatol.                    1E-02
gthylbsruene                            7.2E-02                 1E-01 (1,000]        Liwr/kidney                 7E-01
TetraeMoreetfcsne                       7.6I-05                 1E-02 [1,000]        L<v*r                       ££•03
Toluene                                 3.8E-02                 2E-01 [1,000]        liver/kidney                2E-01
1,1,VTHchloroethane                     1.7E-04                 9E-02 [1.000]        Liver                       2E-03
1,1.2-THchloroethan*                    1.3E-W                  4E-03 [1.000]        CKn. e+ieB.                 3E-02
THchloroethene                          2.1E-03              7.35E-03 [1,000]        Liver                       3E-01
Sylenss (total)                         4.9E-02                 2E»00 [1001          OiS/aortality               2E-02
BA2ABD 1BDEX                                                                                                   1 (1E*00>

«o) USEPA Weight of Evidence for Carcinogenic Effects:
      [A]  Mtsan carcinogen based on adequate evidence froa human studies;
      til] Probable human carcinogen based on United human data;
      EB21 Probable human carcinogen based on inadequate evidence froa Hunan studies and adequate evidence from
           aninel studies;
      [C3  Possible human carcinogen based en liarfted evidence fron onieal studies in the absence of
           buasn studies;
      CD]  Not classified as to human earcinogenicity;
      [E] Evidence of noncareinogenieity for humans.
Cb) Uncertainty factors represent the amount of uncertainty in extrapolation frora the available data.
(c) A lexicological endpoint is a chemical's toxic e f f e c t or the organ Best sensitive to a chemical's toxic effect.
    If the KfO ues based on a study in which an endpoint ass not identified, then on effect, organ er organ system
    fenoun to be effected by the chemical is listed.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    TABLE
                              POTENTIAL BISKS ASSOCIATED WITH IMCESTIOM OF 680UHOUATES OY
                          HYPOTHETICAL QESIDENTS (0-30 Y8S.) AT THE BOCKAUAT TOWNSHIP HELLP1ELD SITI (D)
                                            BEEP DOy«GRA01EHT • AREA 3


                                              OME                                                                   CHE
                                          ehronie Boily        Steps                           Height of        Upper Dound
ehcaicots Exhibiting                      Intoke (CHI)         Foctor                          Evidence       Ixcess Lifetiec
Carcinogenic Effects                                                                           Close (b>         Cortcer Disk



Oio(2-othylhexyt)phtholote                  9.9E-04             1.6E-02                           32               11-05
Ojthylcns chloride                          2.&E-03             7.5E-03                           02               2E-05
liBtroeh Ioroethens                         1.6E-05             S.1E-02                           B2               8E-07
TOTAL                                                                                                              SE-05


                                               QHE
                                          Chrenie Doily        deference Dose          teaicoloBieol                (WE
9icaicolo Exhibiting                      Intoke (£81)           (Gg/kB-doy)           BHC^O 1 n* TOP             ESI:fifD
Ouneoreinogenie E f f e c t s              (•B/kB-doy)      EUneertointy foetorj (e>      BfD (d)                  Sotio



Acotons                                     i.3E-03               iE-oi ti.ooo:        tCidnsy/Uver                5E-02
OvsCl-othylhexyl)phthatote                  2.3E-03               2E-02 [1,000]        liver                       1E-01
CUithylena chloride                         i.TE-03               6E-02 [100]          tivor                       9E-02
Tj.'troch I orosthen?                       3.BE-05               1E-02 [1,000]        Hvor                        ££•03
1.1,1-Triehloro«thore                       9.9S-05               9E-02 [1,000]        Liver                       1E-03
QIIARO INDEX                                                                                                   < 1 (3E-01)

{a) Disks ore calculated for those ehcaicolB ef potential concern oith soaicity criteria. A rick for load to
      not presented due to lock of toxieity criteria.
{fcj} USEPA Ueight of Evidence for Carcinogenic Effects:
       [A]   Human corcinogen based en cdsquate evidence froa human otudies;
       [BU Probable human corcinogen based on lien ted human data;                                     •
       [B2] Probable human carcinogen based on inadequate evidence from human studies and cdequate evidence from
             onimal studies;
       tCJ   Possible human carcinogen based en (isitcd evidence frea onimal otudies in the absence of
             human studies;
       [0]   dot c l a s s i f i e d os to human coreinogenicity,•
       [E]   Evidence of noncareinogenieity for husions.
(c) Uncertainty f o c t o r s represent the onount ef unsertointy in extropolotion from the ovotloblo doto.
(d) A toxicological endpoint is a chemical's toxic effect or the organ most sensitive to o chanical'o toxic effect.
    If the BfD «as based on o study in ohich on endpoint uos not identified, then on effect, organ or organ system
    bftotm to bs affected by the cheaicol is listed.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 TABLE   H-5

                           POTENTIAL DISCS ASSOCIATED WITH 1MCESTION OF MOUffiUATES IT
                       HYPOTHETICAL RESIDENTS (0-30 TBS.) AT THE ROCKAUAY TOWNSHIP WELLFIELO SITE   (a)
                                      SHALLOW DOWNGRADIENT • AREA 3


                                           SHE                                                                  RME
                                       Chronic Daily           Slope                    Weight of           Upper
          Wiibfting                    intake (COD             factor                   Evidence          Excess Lifetime
Carcinogenic Effects                    (•B/ke-dsy)       (•g/kg-day)-1                 Class <b>            Cancer Risk

arsenics:
Benzene                                  4.6E-OS               2.9E-02                                         1E-06
Tetraehloroethen*                        1.2E-W                5.1E-02                      B2                 6C-06
Trlehloroettene                          4.2E-05               1.1E-02                      82                 5E-07
TOTAL                                                                                                          8E-06

                                            RME
                                       Chronic Daily        Btferance OMB           Texicelcgieal               ME
BMBieaU Wiibiting                      Intake CCDI)           (og/kB-day)           indpoint for              CDIiRfD
ffienearcinoesnic Effects               (eg/kg-day)      (Uncertainty Factor] (c)      8fD (d)                 Ratio

Grganius:
TetraehIerectitens                       2.8E-04                  1E-02 £1,000]     Liver                      SE-02
Toluene                                  6.5E-05                  2E-01 tl.OOO]     Ljver/kiehsy               3E-04
TrieMorestten*                           9.9E-OS               7.35E-03 [1.000J     Liver                      1E-02
GAZARS 1HDBZ                                                                                               < 1 (4E-02)

    Disks ere calculated for hose chemicals of potential concern with toxieity erltoria.       risk for l*od la
    not presented dus to lack of toxieity criteria.
    ITSEPA bright of Evidence for Carcinogenic Effects:
       W         an carcinogen cosed on ectequate evidence from human studies;
       EB13 Probable human carcinogen based on United human data;
       U21 Probable hunan carcinogen based on inadequate evidence fron human studies and adaquate evidence from
             finical studies;
             Possible human earcinsijepi tooed on Uaited evidence frw onisial studies In tho absence of
             fcuBsn studies;
       ED] Bot classified as to human carcinogen!city;
       PI] Evidence of noncarcinogenicity for human*.
(c) Uncertainty factors represent the emount of uncertainty in extrapolation from the available date.
(d) A lexicological endpoint is o chemical's toxic effect or the organ «ost sensitive to a cheaical's toxic effect.
     If the BfD uas based on o study in which an ondpoint bias not identified, then an effect, organ or organ system
            to ba effected by the chsraicol is listed.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  TABLE     U-6
                            POTENTIAL QISCS ASSOCIATED WITH IHGESTIW OF 680UttDUATEB OT
                          HYPOTHETICAL OESIBENTS (0-30 78S.) AT THE SOCKAHAT tO^SMIP HELLMEL8 SITE
                                               KUH1CIPAL UELLS


                                            BK£                                                                QME
                                        Chronic O o i l y      Slops                       Woight ef       Uppar Bound
SrcaieoU Exhibit ing                    Intake (COD            Doctor                      gvideneo      Excess Lifetise
eiircirogenie Effects                    (KB/kg-day)        (B8/kg-day)-1                  gloes (a)        Concer Si Etc

@i'gonleo:
                                          4.SS-03                 1.1E-02                      02             5E-05
                                                                                                              o •* • *

TOTAL                                                                                                         SE-05


                                              OME
                                        Chrenle doily          Qofercnco 8eoG          Tesieoleeieol           DME
ghoaieolB gahibiting                    Intake (COD              (nsg/kg-doy)          Gn£point for          S>!:8fD
Dcnsoreiragenic Effects                  (eg/lxg-doy)       tUnsertointy foctor] (b)     QfO (e)              Qotio

@rgonics:
1,1-Biehlorcsthons                        3.8E-05                 1E-01 tl.0003                               4E-04
«cofio-1,2-Bict\lor6ethene                2.6E-W                  2E-02 tl.OOOJ        Liver                  1E-02
1.1,1-Trichlorozthorte                    6.M-W                   9E-02 tl.OOOJ        Livor                  BE-03
tfiehlorosthons                           1.16-02              7.35E-03 11,0003        Liver                  2E*00
QAZABO ItffiEX                                                                                               1 (2E*00)

go) 18EPA Height ef Evidence for Carcinogenic effects:
      (A]  Htsian Gorcinogen based en wtequote ovfdonco frea husnn utudioo;
      (811 Probable human carcinogen booed en Ueitcd htsnn data;
      CB2] Probable hunsn corcinogen booed en incdo^ato ovidance frea husan otudioc ond cdo^iato ovidonee from
           oniasl studies;
      1C] Possible human corcinogen based en Uaitcd ovidenco frea oniosol otydies in tho obsoncc of
             bismn studies;
      31    dot classified os to hunan corefnogenicity;
      [E] Evidence of noncorcinogenicity for humans.
(&) Bneertointy factors represent the csaount of uncertointy in oxtropolotien frea tho ovoiloble data.
Se) & toxicological ondpoint is o chenicol's toxic effect or the organ caost censitive to o chctnicel's toxic effect.
    If the BfD oas based en o otudy in ttfiieh on ondpoint uos not identified, then on offoct, organ or organ system
    Cutoon to be effected by the chenicol io listed.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   TABLE    11-7
           POTENTIAL RISKS TO HYPOTHETICAL BES10ENTS (0-30 YRS.) ASSOCIATED WITH INHALATION OF CHEMICALS
                      WHILE SHOWERING WITH CRQUK9UATER AT THE 80CSAUAY TOWNSHIP UELLF1ELB SITE (a)
                                        DEEP OOWNC&ADIENT • AREA 1


                                 Shower Soon Air                Unit                Weight of                 Upper Bound
Chaaicals Exhibiting              Concentration                 Risk                Evidence                Excess Lifetine
Carcinogenic Effects                («6/n3)                   (ug/a3)-1             Class (b)               Cancer Risk (c)

Benzene                              6.11E-03                  8.30E-06                  A                      2.66E-07
Carbon tetrachleride                 2.4£E-02                  1.50E-05                  S2                     1.80E-06
Chlorefora                           3.35E-02                  2.30E-05                  §2                     3.73E-06
1,1-Oichloroethene                   A.72E-02                  5.00E-05                  C                      1.UE-05
Mcttiylene. chloride                 5.73E-01                  4.7DE-07                  B2                     1.31E-06
T«tr«e»iloroethene                   6. HE -02                 5.20E-07                  82                     1.55E-07
Tricfctorocthene                     3.72E»01                  1.70E-06                  B2                     3.06E-EK
Vinyl Chloride                       4.15E-02                  S.40E-05                  A                      1.69E-05
TOTAL                                                                                                              3E-CK


                                 Shower Room Air                 Chronic RfC             lexicological
Chearfcats Exhibiting             Concentration                    (t»s/m3)              Endpoint for         Concentration:
Boncarcinogenic Effects             (•8/B3)                  (Uncertainty factor]        SfC (d)              BfC Ratio (e)

1,1-Cichloroethane                   2.58E-02                  5.00E-01 11,000]          Kidney                 5.&3E-04
Methytene chloride                   5.73E-01                  3.00E*00 [100]            Liver                  2. 166-03
toluene                              2.20E-02                  2.00E+00 [1003            CMS/irrit.             1.24E-04
1,1,1-Trictilercethana               2.42E-01                  1.00E*00 [1,000]          Liver                  2.76E-03
Xylenes (total)                      1.10E-02                  3.00E-01 [100]            Cas/reep.              4.15E-04
TOTAL                                                                                                          < 1 (6E-03)

(e) licks are calculated only for chemicals ef potential concern B&ich readily volatilize. The following chemicals are
    not presented due to lack of inhalation toxicity criteria: acetone and 1,2-dichloresrhsns (total),
(b) EPA Weight of Evidence for Carcinogenic Effects:
       [A] « Hunan carcinogen bated on adequate evidence fron human (studies;
       [B1] • Probable human carcinogen based on United hunan data;
       (B21 * Probable human carcinogen based on inadequate evidence fros hunan studies end adequate Bvietence fron onima I
              studies;
       1C] • Possible human carcinogen based on United evidence froa onisal studies in the absence of hus»n
              studies;
       {&} • Not classified as to human carcinogenicity;
       [E] * Evidence of noncarcinogenicity for humara.
Cc) Carcinogenic risks are calculated by njltiplying the shower room air concentration by the unit risk and by aodifying
    factors to adjust for shower ti«e (0.2B hrt/J4 hrs), exposure frequency (350 days/365 days), and axposure duration
    (30 yrs/70 yrs).
(d) A lexicological endpoint is a chemical's toxic effect or the organ aest sensitive to s cheeical'3 toxic effect. If
    the RfC Mas based on a study in ttn'ch an endpoint was not identified, then on effect, organ or organ system knoan to
    be affected by the chemical is listed.
(e) The eoncentr»tion:RfC ratio is calculated by dividing the shower room sir concentration by the RfC find sultiplying
    by factors to adjust for shower tine (0.2S hrs/24 hrs) and exposure freouarcy (350 day«/365 days).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                      TABLE   11-8
            POTENTIAL BISKS TO HYPOTHETICAL QESIBEtfTS (0-30 7BS.) ASSOCIATED WITH ItJHALATIOa OF CHEMICALS
                       UHILE SHOyERltJG WITH GaOUKDHATES AT THE UOCSABAY TOHHSHIP tSLLPIELC SITE (0)
                                            SHALLOW BCyaCRADIEMT • AfiLA 1

                                   Shosar Qoea Air                   Unit            Waight ef            Uppzr Bound
ehoicolo Exhibiting                 Concentration                    Qiok            Evidence           Escoss lifetica
Sorcirogenic Effects                  <C9/o3)                  CuB/a3)-1             Close (b)          Cancer Qiafc (e)

eSUoroforo                           5.15E-03                 2.30E-05                  02                    5.74E-07
Oicldrin                             3.2SE-06                 4.60E-03                  82                    7.31E-08
Esthylcns eft I or ids               8.02£-01                 4.70E-07                  02                    1.a3E-06
Vinyl Chloride                       8.16E-03                 B.40E-05                  A                     3.32E-06
70TAL


                                   Shcsrar Qooa Air               Chronic QfC           Tonieologicol
ehoafeolo Exhibiting                Concent rot ion                  (G8/a3>            Snfipoint for   Conccntrotion:
Ooneorcinogenie Effects               (Bg/aJ)                 [Uncertainty focter)      DfC (d)         QfC Qatio (a)

Oothylcre chloride                   8.02E-01                 3.00E«00 [100]            Livor                 3.02E-03
                                     2.01E-02                 1.00E«00 H.OOOJ           liver                 2.271-04
TOTAL                                   0*                           o•                   o*
                                                                                                         < 1 (3E-03)

(o) Qioks ore calculated only for eheaicols ef potential eencem c/fiefi Focdily valotiliso.
(&) EPA Ueight of Evidence for Corcinsgenic Effocto:
       [A] ° Human corcinogen bated en cdsquoto evidence ires hisan ottdioa;
       tBU o Probable human corcinogen tosed en United human Sato;
       [S2J o Probable human corcinogen based en incdaquota (Fvidsnce fre=i hicnn otudioo end cdo^uato ovidonce fre3 onioal
              studies;
       EC) o Possible huaan corcinogen feasod en Hotted ovidanco frca en i en I ctudioo in the otocnco ef hu/R3n
              otudies;
      {&] o dot elossifiod os to htcnn eorcinsgcnicity;
       CE) " Evidence of noncnreirwgenieity for huasnz.
Cc) Corcirtoeenic risks ore calculated by nultiplyirtg the ohoaar poan oir eeneentrotion by the unit riok end by codifying
    factors to cdj'ust for tshex^r tics (0.28 hrs/26 hrtj), oxposuro frc^usncy (350 gays/365 tiays), end onpoeurc duration
    (30 yrs/70 yrs).
(d) A lexicological cndpoint is o chemical'o toxic offoct or tho ergon cost ocnsitivo to o ehcaicol'o toxic effect. If
    the RfC BBS based on o study in t^iich on ordpoint oos not identified, then on offoct, ergon or ergon oystca tmoun to
    te affected by the chemical is listed.
<Q) The concentration:RfC rotio is colcutatcd by dividing the ohoeer POOS oir concent rot ion by the DfC end ojltiplyirtg
    fey foctors to cdjust for sheasr tics (0.28 hrs/24 hrs) and ojtpouura frcquancy (350 days/365

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                      TABLE    11-9
              POTENTIAL RISKS TO HYPOTHETICAL RESIDENTS (0-30 TRS.) ASSOCIATED WITH INHALATION OF CHEMICALS
                         WHILE SHOWERING WITH SRCUXDUATER AT THE ROCKAUAY TOWNSHIP WELLF1ELD SITE (•)
                                           DEEP DOVNORADIENT - ABEA 2

          •                         Shower Room Air              Unit                Weight of             Upper Bound
Chemicals Exhibiting                 Concentration               Dliclc              Evidence            Excess Lifetime
Carcinogenic Effects                   («8/«3)                <ug/B3)-1              Class (b)           Cancer Risk (c)

Benzene                               1.22E-01                8.30E-06                   A                 4.91E-06
Tetrachloroethene                     9.UE-03                 5.20E-07                   B2                2.3BE-QS
1,1,2-Trichloroethane                 1.S6E-02                1.60E-05                   C                 1.21E-06
Trichloroethene                       2.86E-01                1.70E-06                   •2                2.36E-06
TOTAL                                                                                                          BE-06


                                    Shower Rooa Air               Chronic RfC            Toxfcological
Chen I'M Is Exhibiting               Concentration                  (mg/«3)              Endpoint for    Concentration:
Uoncareinogenic Effects                («8/r3)                [Uncertainty factor]       RfC (d>         RfC Ratio (e)

1,1-Dichloroethane                    1.6BE-02                5.00E-01 t 1,000:          Kidney             3.60E-M
Ethyl Benzene                         1.05E»01                1.00E»00 OOO]              Development        1.19E-01
Toluene                               5.79E»00                2.ooE*oo nooj              CNS/irrit.         3.27E-02
1,1,1-Trichloroethane                 2.26E-02                1.00E+00 [1,0003           Liver              2.56E-W
Xylenes (total)                       7.13E+00                3.00E-01 [100]             CNS/resp.          2.69E-01

TOTAL                                                                                                       < 1 (4E-01)

(a) Risks are calculated only for chejricals of potential concern which readily volatilize. The following chemicals are
    not presented due to lack of inhalation toxicity criteria: 1,2-dichloroethtne (total).
(b) EPA Weight of Evidence for Carcinogenic Effects:
      IAJ * Hunan carcinogen based on adequate evidence from hunan studies;
      IBlj « Prebablt human carcinogen based on United humn data;
      O2] * Probable hinan carcinogen based on inadequate evidence fro* hunan studies and adequate evidence froa animal
             studies;
      1C] • Possible hunan carcinogen based on United evidence from enieal studies in the cbaence of human
             studies;
      CD] • Not classified as to huajen carcinogenicity;
      CE] • Evidence of noncarcinogenicity for humans.
Cc) Carcinogenic risks are calculated by sultiplying the shower room air concentration by the unit risk and by audifying
    factors to adjust for shower tiae (0.28 hrs/24 hrs), exposure frequency (350 days/365 days), and exposure duration
    (30 yrs/70 yrs).
(d) A toxicological endpoint is a cheaical's toxic effect or the organ most sensitive to a chemical's toxic effect. If
    the RfC was based on a study in which an endpoint was not identified, then an effect, organ or organ system known to
    be affected by the chemical is listed.
(e) The concent ret ion: RfC ratio is calculated by dividing the shower room air concentration by the RfC and swltiplying
    by factors to adjust for shower tins (0.28 hrs/24 hrs) and exposure frequency (350 days/365 days).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                      TABLE   11-10
            POTENTIAL BISKS TO HYPOTHETICAL QESIDEMTS (0-SB Y&S.) ASSOCIATED WITH tOHAUTICa OF EHEHieALS
                       WHILE SHOaEBIHG HITH eSOUHDUATEK AT THE BCCKAUAT TCWHSH1P tSLLPlELB SITE (0)
                                            BEEP eoyacaADiEHT • ABEA 3
                                  Shosar Qooa Air                 Unit               Weight ef              Upper Deund
QiealeolB Exhibiting               Concent rot i en               Uisk               gvidsnce             Excess Lifctfas
Ciircinogenic Effects                «=B/a3>                                         Class (b)            Ccncer Qiok (c)

CJj'thylons efctorids               8.59E-01                  4. TOE -07                02
                                    &.72E-03                  S.20E-07                  02                   i!m-os
TOTAL



                                  Shossr Qesa Air                 Chronic BfC           Tenfeologicol
Eftealeolfi Exhibiting '    '      Concent rot i en                  (eg/aS)            Gftrijtoint for   Cenecntrotien:
aeneoreinagenie Effects           . (Eg/a3)                   (Uncertointy foetorj      QfC (d)           QfC Qotio (o)

Eathylcas eh I or ids                8.59E-01                 S.OOE»00 I100J            Liver                3.24E-03
1.1,1-Trichlereatftsw               1.S4E-Q2                  1.00E»00 11,0003          Llvor                1.32E-06
T8TAI                                                                                                      < 1 (3E-03)

Ca) Bisks ore calculated only for chemicals of potentiol concern tfhich roodily volotilixe. The following ehcniicolo ore
     rat presented 6uz to lack ef inholotion toxieity critorio: ocotcna.
g&) iPA Kaight of Evidence for Carcinogenic Effects:
        EA3 B Burnn carcinogen hosed on cdsqiQte ovidsncc frea huaan otudioc;
        8B1J o Probable human eoreifwgen based en United huaan doto;                                     . .              .
        £02] o Probable hunsn carcinogen based en incdoquoto evidence frea htson otudiofl end cdoc<i£ite ovifencc fre3 cnieal
               studies;
        K3 o Possible human carcinogen toood en United ovidanco frea cnical studies 1n tho ctoonco ef tusnn
               otudies;
        @] o Hot classified os to husan eorclnsgcniclty;
        [El ° Evidence of noncorcinogenicity for huaons.
Sell Coreinoeenic risks ore calculoted by ojltiptyirtg the ahoter rooa oir eencentrotien by the Unit Pick and by codifying
     factors to cdjist for chouer tias (0.28 hrs/26 hro), oxpocure frcqusncy (350 gays/365 gays), end exposure duration
     (30 yrs/70 yrs).
JC) A toxicologies! endpoint Is o ehesMcol'o toxic offoct or the organ coct. oensitlve to o ehcaicol'o toxic offoct. If
     the CtfC HOS based on o study in ehich on cndpoint WOE not identified, then en offoct, organ er ergon ovotca known to
     &3 affected by the chemical io listed.
go;i The concent rot ion: Rfc rotio io colcyloted by dividing the ohoasr poas oir concent rot ion by the DfC end Eultiplying
     by foctors to cdjust for shoaer ties (0.28 hrs/26 hro} ond exposure frequency (350 doyts/365 days).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                      TABLE    n-n
           WJTEttTIAL 8ISCS TO HYPOTHETICAL SESIDtMTS (0-30 Y R S . ) ASSOCIATED WITH IMHAUTIOU OF CHEMICALS
                       WHILE SHObERIHG WITH CSOLtliDkiATER AT THE tOOAUAT TOWNSHIP «LLF1ELB SITE (•)
                                            SHALLOW DOkftdftADIENT • AREA 3

                                  Shows r a oca Air              Unit                Might of              Upper Sound
Cuaicals Exhibiting                Concentration                 Risk                Evidence            Excet* Lifeline
Carcinogenic Effects                 (•g/a3>                   <ug/a3)-1             Class (b)           Cancer tick (c)

•enjene                             1.71E-02                  8.30E-06                   A                  6.88E-07
Tetrachtocoetherts                  3.45E-02                  5.20E-07                   82                 8.69E-06
Trichloreetftent                    1.33E-02                  1.70E-06                   82                 1.10E-07
•TOTAL                                                                                                         9E-07


                                  Shower Qeea Air                 Chronic BfC            Toxicological
Chsaiealg EsMbitirtg               Concentration                     («S/a3)             Endpcint for    Concentration:
Monearciroeenic Effects              Ces/a3)                  lUncortainty fector]       IfC (d)         ftfC Ratio (e)

Toluene                             S.83E-03                  2.ooE»oo nooj              CNS/irrit.         S.S6E-05
TOTAL                                  -•                        -•                           --           < 1 (6E-05)

(a) Risks are calculated only for chenicels of potential concern which readily volatilize.
(b) EPA Weight of Evidence for Carcinogenic Effects:
       W ° Huaan carcinogen beted en adequate evidence from tnaan etudfee;
       CB1] a Probable human carcinogen based on liaited hmen data;
       CB21 ° Probable Kunan carcfnosen based en inadequate evidence froa hisan etudiet end        te evidence froo aninal
              studies;
       (C1 o Possible htstsn earclns^en baaed en liaited evidence frea eniosl studies In the absence of tumn
              studies;
       CD] s got classified as to huaan carcinogen!city;
       CE1 * Evidence of noncarcinogenicity for hiaans.
(e) Carcinogenic risks are calculated by eultiptying the shower rooa sir concentration by the irn't risk and by aodifying
    factors to adjust for sho^r tiet (0.2B hrs/24 hrs), exposure frequency (3SO days/365 days), and exposure duration
    (30 yrs/70 yrs}.
{d) A toxicological cndpoint is a chenicel's toxic effect or the organ nest sensitive to a chemical's toxic effect. If
    the BfC uas based on a study in eftich en tndpoint was not Identified, then an effect, organ or organ system known to
    be affected by the chemical is listed.
(e) The concemr8tion:BfC ratio is calculated by dividing the shower room air concentration by the RfC and nultiplying
    by factors to edjust for shower tiss (0.2S hrs/24 h r s ) and exposure frequency (350 days/365 days).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                     TABLE   11-12
            POTEHTIAL BISKS TO HYPOTHETICAL DESIBIHTS (0-SO TfiS.) ASSOCIATED WITH JUHAUTI03 Of EHEniCALS
                       WHILE SHOyERlHG WITH ESOieJOHATER AT THE BOCKAHAT TOHWSH1P H2LLF1ILB SITE (0)
                                                         tSLLS

                                  Shossr Qooa flip              Unit                  Woieht ef             Uppsr Oound
ehaicols Eshibiting                Concent roti en              Qistc                 Evidsneo            SacooQ Li fat ice
eoreinogenic Effects                                          <u8/a3)-1               eioso (b)           Scncor Qiok (c)

Trieh lores there                    1.55E»00                1.70E-06                     02                 1.26£-05
TOTAL                                   •a
                                                                 «-                       0.
                                                                                                                11-05


                                  Shcsar Coca flip                   ghrenie Q?C          Tenieolegieol
ehcaieols Exhibiting               Gcnecmrotien                                           Sn^point for    eencentrotion:
Hensorcinogenic Effects               (C3/ES)                EUTteortointy foeteir]       Dfe (d)         QfC Qotio (e)

1,1-Dichloroathons                  5.61E-03                 3.00E-01 t 1,000]            Ki^rcjy            1.27E-04
1,1,1-TrieMorosthons                9.26E-02                 1.00E»00 [1,000]             Liver              1.05E-OS
TOTAL                                                                                                      < 1 (1E-03)

to) Bists ore calculated only for cheaicols ef potcntiol concern ahich roodily volotUise. the following ehcaicols ore
     not presented due to lock of inhslotion Son)city criteria: «rons-1,2-dichloroothono.
i[6) EPA bei'B^t of Evidence for Corcinogenic Effects:
        [A] ° Human corcinogen feased en cdscp£)to ovidonco frea htasn ottdioo;
        CB1] o Probable human carcinogen based en Halted fascan goto;
        CB2] ° Probable fusren corcinegen toood @n ifedoqxfflto ovi&swQ fro (HCDFI otudioc end c±^uoto Cfvidsncs frea ofiieal
               studies;
        (C] ° Possible hiaan eorcinogen tossed en lioitod ovidsnco frea onicol otu^ioc in the essence of fwsan
               studies;
       EB] o Hot c l a s s i f i e d Q8 to htosan eoreirtsgenielty;
        [E3 ° Evidence ef rtoneoreinogenicity for husons.
Cc) Corcinogenic r i s k s ore celculoted by ajltiplying tho shoaer reoa oir eoneefitpotfen by the unit riok csid by codifying
     factors to cdjust for ohowcr tiss (0.28 hrc/24 hrs), sxposure frc^uancy (350 ^aye/365 days), end oapo&ure duration
     (30 yrs/70 yrs).                                                                   .
(d) A lexicological endpoint 1s o ehcaicol'o tenic offset or the ergon cast sensitive to o chcaieol'o toxic effect. If
     the 6fC tins based on o study in trfiiefc on appoint tas not identified, then en offoct, argon er ergon oyotca tnoun to
     fej effected by the cheaicel it .listed.
(e) The concentrotion:fifC rotio is caleulotcd by dividing the ohoaer rooa oir eencentrotion by the QfC end rultiplying
     by foctors to cdjust for oheaer tic: (0.28 hro/24 firs) end o&posuro fregency (350 ^ays/365 days).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    TABLE .12
                  CUMULATIVE S1SCS ASSOCIATED WITH USE OF 6&OMDWATEK IT KTOTKETICAl RESIDENTS
                                          8COAWAY TOWNSHIP HELLFIILP SITE


                                       Cancer Si ok due to All a.ic.1.

                                           Area 1                  Are« 2             Area S
Potttosy                          deep         Shall ea                          fteep    Shallow    Mniclpel
                                  Well*         WelU                Welle        WelU      Welle      WelU

BKSaotien of   firemdweter         22*03            <&S*(H           2E-OS       SE-05    m-06         K-OS
flf&olotien Mhile Showering        3E-04            3I-0&            K-06        21-06     9E-07       IE-OS
TOTAL eflUCEB BISK                 S-03             4E-04            SE-05       SE-05      9E-06      «-05

                                      Mononeer fiUk &u» to All CheaicaU

                                           Arm 1                   AfM 2              Am 3
Patbaey                           Boep          Shallea                          Oevp      ttttllw   •tuil el pel
                                  Wells         WelU                WelU         UelU     WelU         WelU

If^asticn of Crotndweter        » 1 (liver)   » 1 (bleed etaa. )   > 1 (liver) < 1        «1         > 1 (liver)
                                              » 1 (akin)
                                              » 1 J01S)
Jfftatatien while Showering     < 1           «1                   <1           « 1       <1         « 1
&MJLATIVE HAZARD INDEX          » 1 (liver)   > 1 (blood cttm. )   » 1 (liver) « 1        <1         > 1 (liver)
PCS EACH TARGET QftOAN (a)                    » 1 (skin)
                                              » 1 (CHS)

So) Hoisrd indices greater than 1 are aaseesd by tesleolegfcol endpoint.   Toxlcologlcat «ndpoint« are shown
    in parentheses.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                       7ADLE 33
                                                                       H8TIBAT6 SCCttRY
                                                                      AITIRNATIVI 2
                                                                       AMD T&EAT SYSTEM
                                                   GSSS&SAT ?ea5JSHH> UELLFIELO FEASIBILITY

                                                               Suontlttf          eopltol    ' fiRmal        Ppocent Worth ef
                     STEM                                                          Soot .        @ fl H
                                                                                                          §S 8ioeeunt   10% Bioecunt
  8. EXTRACTION S7STEH                o
     1. Clou Extraction Hollo                                     •37 Ctollo      0174,548
     2. Si&rerslble Ptsnps .                                      17 Picas         027,812       03,400       032,300        S32.100
     S. Systca cent re IB end otoetrleol                       UG? 8«a             028,661      011,100      0170,600       0104,600


                  a&tetols                                                        CS36,&©9      014,590     0222,?00            0136,700
 81. miaTOIATOEHT8Y8TIH



811. JCtSTITUTlOSAl ACTIONS
     4. Py&Hc At«romss/Edueoti§n Pregpca 0
        8reu7t£3tor yoo Qo8trietie?n                                               5^,638
                  Subtetoli                                                        033,800                      (




 !ltf. tewC TESR K»'ITOSIKC 8 GEVIEU (SO YEARS)
                                                               00
       1. Sewi-owakil SrourrfaBtor Ksnltertftg                 000
                                                                           Sf                  0222,766   03,624,500       02,100,000
       S. Pociedie Oovioas                                                                      020,000      055,600          531,000
                  Gt&totol:                                                                    0242,7^    G3,6??,$00       02,131,900
                                                                                  oass.tee
                                                                                               OS90,SOO   03,^2,000        02,267,700
                                       fe^ftol         @3fl-                                        ^                            . .•
OJtolrt art Sofoty                                §g    §2                         013,179      014,915      0185,140        8113,385
Of^ eeatinjcncy                                  132   13E                         039,510      043,545      0555,420        0540,155
Cf&py eentifigency                               1SS   158                         839,510      043,545      0355,420        0340,155
                                                                                  0355, SOO    8391, WO    04,998,800      83,061,400
Pfl;faftttftg 8 t*@o t                            §2                               017,780
Oflirvieos During Ccrstructfofi                  102                               835,560
?S)TAL IBPLEttEHTATIBi COST                                                       0406,900
                                                 162                               C40.890
WAI 6AWA1 60ST8                                                                   5450,800
•S&T&L PQISfKT taSTH                                                                                      05,630.300       03,310,000

     C8TI: Ssst cstlato caiwc38 §0-y\3Qr psfls^ ®? cg3fot<ea tfap (Sw OKtPtstCea c?t^ spcai«C3nt oyotca.
     0
          8eot flef eelloetle?! DrtI dloehopso plpitts S® fe> Oftslu££ ttrf«h 91 £9330I @^tieo.
     00
            Oeafterffig Pof fed ef SO VCJOTOS
            39 csjtor oosplco
     0570
            Qovics 8 « o g                                                  559

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                      TABLE 14
                                                                COSt ESTIMATE SUMMARY
                                                           GKOUNDWATCR TREATMENT OPTIONS
                                                     WT-2 - AIR STRIPPING WITH VAPOR PHASE EXTRACTION
                                                       ROCKAMAY TOWNSHIP WCLLFIELD FEASIBILITY STUDY


                                                     Quantity       Capital      Annual           Prasant Worth of •                Praaant Worth of ••
                 ITEM                                                Coat         0 ft H        Annu.l OCH Coat* (30 y r a . )     Annual OCM Coata (3 y r » . )
                                                                                              38 Discount  108 Discount          38 Discount   10Z Discount

a.   AIR STRIPPING TOWER WITH OP? CAS TREATMENT

      i. Air Stripping Tower                                           943.373     93.800         935.300          933.900           913,400           913. BOO
         O«M (earbon. power, nalntananea)
      8. Off -Gas Syeteat                                              9(3.100     94.035         9(2.300          938,200           817.400          913.400
      >. Equipment Delivery and Set-up                                 824.000
     .4. Pull-Tlaw Bystam Operator                                                920,800        9319.700         0m. too            990.100          978.800
      3, Carbon Regeneration                                                      380,000      91,229,800         8754.200          9346.400         9303.300

               Subtotal I                                             8132,173   8108,459     91.4t7.100       91.022.400          8449.700          9411.100

u. TREATED WATER DISCBflROS
     1. Monthly BZClmafc SespHaa                                                   92.400         836,900          922. (00          910.400           99.100

               Subtotal i                                                          92.400         836.900          922.400           910.400           99.100


AKHUAL OCM                                                                       9110.033     91,704.(         91.045.000          9490,100          $420,200
                                   Capital   03M
•••Ith and 8«taty                       18      11                      91.32?    91.10*          917,040          818.450            94.801           94.202
Bid Contingency                       152     1SX                      919.901   916.620         9253. COO        913«.750           972,013          $63,030
Scopa Contingency                     13X      132                     919.901   81«.«20         $255.600         91St.730           972.013          863.030

CONSTRUCTION TOTAL                                                    9173.800   9143.200     92,232.200       91.3*9,000          9(28,900          9330,300

reralttlnj ft tegal                     n                               98. MO
Sarvlcaa Durlne Conatr«Mi&ioti         108                             917.380

TOTAL IMPUMWTATIOH COSt                                               9199.900

Rntlnaarlnt A Daal|B                   lot                             919,990

TOTAL CAPITAL COSTS                                                   9220.000

TOTAL PUSm WORTH                                                                               92,430.000       91.390,000          9930.000         9770,000
• Praaant worth baaad on a elaanop ti*a of 30 years. Aaauaii no aourca rawrral
•a Fraaant worth baaad on a elaanup tiaa of 3 yaera. Aeauna •ourca r«aoval.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                     TABLE 15
                                                             COST ESTIMATE SUMMARY
                                                                  ALTERNATIVE 5
                                                        REPLACE EXISTING TREATMENT SYSTEM
                                                   ROCKAWAY TOWNSHIP WELLF1ELD FEASIBILITY STUDY



ll
                                                               Quantity       Capital     Annual                            Present Worth of
                          ITEM                                                 Cost        O&M                             Annual O&M Costs
                                                                                                                         5% discount       10% discount

      1. LONG TERM MONITORING & REVIEW (30
         YEARS)"
         1. Sami-annual Groundwater Monitoring
         2. Periodic Rsviews

             Subtotal:

     U. INSTITUTIONAL ACTIONS
9        1. Public Awareness/Education Program &                              $33,000
|           Groundwater Use Restrictions

|             Subtotal:                                                       $33,000

S III. REPLACE AIR STRIPPING UNIT
|       1. Air Stripping Tower                                                $97,730
|       2. O&M (carbon, power, maintenance)                                                   $6,140                     $172,100                 $100,100
9      3. Equipment Delivery and Set-up                                       $25,000
I       4. Part-Time System Operator                                                         $20,810                     $319,700                 $196,100

3            Subtotal:                                                       $122,730        $28,940                     $491,800                 $298,200




•
CONST RUSTIONAL SUBTOTAL                                                  $155,730
     ANNUAL O&M                                                                             $28.940                        $491,800               $296,200

                                 Capital   O&M
     Haatth and Safety            5%        5%                             $7,787           0 13,587                       0198,585               $121,360
     Bid contingency              15%      15%                            $23,360           0 40,761                       $595,755               $364,080
     Scope Contingency            15%      15%                            $23,360           $ 40,761                       $595,755               $364,080

     CONSTRUCTIONAL TOTAL                                                 $210,236          $124,049                     $1,881,895               $1,145,720

     Permitting & Legal           0%
     Services During Construction 10%                                     $21,024

     TOTAL IMPLEMENTATION COST                                            $231,300

     Engineering & Design         10%                                     $23,130

     TOTAL CAPITAL COSTS                                                  8254,000

     TOTAL PRESENT WORTH                                                                                                 $2,135,895               $1,399,720




               "The long term monitoring and review costs presented in the feasibility study are not included in this cost estimate since these
               costs are included in Table 13, pump and treat system cost estimate.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                    SOWBJSHX5 CTSLLFSILD SUPSRB'USJD


This Responsiveness Summary is divided into the following
sections:
A.   Overview
Bo   summary of Comments Received During the Public Meeting and
     Agency Responses
C.   Summary of Written Comments Received During the p-iblic
     Comment Period and Agency Responses
D.   Appendices
&„   OVERVIEW

This Responsiveness Summary provides a summary of public comments
and concerns regarding the remediation of the Rockaway Township
Wellfield Superfund Site.
The public comment period extended from June 30, 1993 through
August 30, 1993 to provide interested parties the opportunity to
comment on the Proposed Plan, Remedial Investigation (RI) report,
Feasibility Study (FS) report and other supporting documents for
the Rockaway Township Wellfield Superfund Site. During the
comment period, the E3ew Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection and Energy (NJDEPE) held a public meeting on July 14,
1993 at 7:00 PM at the Rockaway Township Municipal Building, to
discuss the results of the RI/FS and to present the preferred
alternative for remediation.
On the basis of information contained in the RI/FS and supporting
documents, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has
selected the following remedy for the Rockaway Township Wellfield
Superfund Site:
     -    Extraction of contaminated ground water and restoration
          of the aquifer to the more stringent of the federal and
          New Jersey MCLs and New Jersey Ground Water Quality
          Standards;
          Treatment of the extracted ground water to levels
          attaining the more stringent of the federal and New
          Jersey MCLs and Mew Jersey Ground Water Quality
          Standards ?
          Reinjection of the treated ground water to the extent
          needed to promote ground water restoration, with
          discharge of any surplus to the public water supply;

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     -    Replacement of the deteriorated air stripping treatment
          system at the Rockaway Township Wellfield; and
     -    Appropriate environmental monitoring to ensure the
          effectiveness of the remedy.
Comments received during the public comment period focused
primarily on 1) the cost of operation and maintenance (O&M) of
the existing ground water treatment system; 2) the cost of the
entire remediation program for the Rockaway Township Wellfield
site and who will pay for it; 3) the effectiveness of the remedy;
and 4) possible alternate sources of potable water.
B.   SUMMARY OF COMMENTS RECEIVED DURING THE PUBLIC MEETING AND
     AGENCY RESPONSES
Concerns raised during public meeting for the Rockaway Township
Wellfield Superfund site held on July 14, 1993 are summarized and
addressed below.

1.   Comment: Concern was expressed that if the treated water is
     discharged to an area beyond the cone of influence of the
     Township wellfield, there may be a net loss of water supply
     to the aquifer which could affect the ability of the
     Township to meet supply demand. If the reverse happened,
     and the cone of influence extended up to 2,000 feet away
     from the wellfield area 1, the Technical Park, then the
     effect might be to discharge clean, treated water back
     through the Technical Park where it could again absorb
     contaminants that might be in soils under the Technical Park
     and bring them back to the wellfield.
     Based on these concerns, the following suggestion was made
     for consideration: If the treated water meets appropriate
     standards, it may be best to direct it to the Township water
     supply, providing that doing so would not adversely effect
     neighboring communities.
     Response: Existing information indicates that withdrawing
     the water from within the vicinity of the Technical Park and
     then recharging it in the same general area would probably
     not affect the amount of water available to the Township
     wells. However, the remedy will be designed such that any
     significant adverse effects could be mitigated. The remedy
     will also be designed to minimize the potential for
     recontamination of treated ground water.
     Based on public comments, the selected remedy now provides
     that any surplus treated ground water that is not needed to
     promote ground water restoration, will be discharged to the
     public water supply system.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

3.   Comment: A series of questions were asked concerning the
     appropriate location of the wellfield and the steps that
     could be taken to protect it: Why do we have a wellfield
     right in the midst of an industrial area? Shouldn't we be
     protecting the wellfield with building restrictions?
     Shouldn't we stop using herbicides in the area? Shouldn't
     we do something about Townships' master plans? What is the
     good of cleaning up the site if more dirt will be coming in?
     Response: NJDEPE responded that the Department's
     responsibility was to conduct a study to identify and
     address the problem of the current wellfield that is being
     affected by contamination and that locating water supply
     wells is a Township decision.
     The Mayor of Rockaway Township responded that 1) each
     municipality prepares its own master plan and zoning
     regulations and that the Technical Park is in Denville, not
     Rockaway Township; and 2) the wells for Rockaway Township's
     water supply were installed many years before problems of
     contamination (such as the problems focused on in this
     study) were ever thought of.
3,   Comment: The comment was made that the money spent on the
     remedial action being discussed might be better spent on
     looking for another source of drinking water. Water in the
     "mine area" was suggested as a possible alternate source.
     Response: NJDEPE responded that as far as the option of
     looking for other sources of drinking water is concerned,
     that can be done by any municipality. The intent at this
     site, is to clean up the ground water through extraction and
     treatment of contaminated ground water.
     The Mayor of Rockaway Township responded that as far as the
     "mine water" is concerned, it is not public property, so the
     Township doesn't have access to it. In addition, the "mine
     water" would also require treatment, which would be very
     expensive. The Township actually has conducted a search
     throughout the area for other water sources, and those that
     exist would be very expensive to treat to drinking water
     quality.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

4.   Comment! The problem with the air stripping component of
     your plan is that you put the compounds back in the air and
     then the rain comes down and they go back into the ground
     again. Is air stripping preferable in this case to using
     activated carbon?
     Response: The treatment system that was selected is air
     stripping, a process in which air removes VOCs from the
     water. The remedy includes a provision for treatment of the
     air containing the VOCs if the levels warrant such
     treatment. If necessary, the air itself will go through a
     carbon adsorption system to remove the VOCs. Therefore, the
     remedy would not discharge VOCs into the air above levels of
     concern. If the concentrations of VOCs in the air stripper
     emissions are below applicable air quality standards, off-
     gas treatment will not be required. As such, the potential
     exists for low level VOCs to be discharged to the
     atmosphere. Because of the nature of the contamination at
     this site, the use of an air stripping technology to treat
     the extracted ground water is preferable to a carbon
     adsorption technology.
5.   Comment I What are the levels of these compounds now and
     will this particular system work for these particular
     compounds at the present levels and at levels that will
     exist 10 or 20 years down the line?
     Response; Concentrations currently found are as high as
     7,000 parts per billion (ppb) of trichloroethene (TCE). All
     of the remedial options that were discussed, including the
     ground water pump and treat system, were evaluated and
     considered feasible for addressing such levels of
     contamination. It is not anticipated that levels will
     significantly increase over time.
6.   Comments With regard to the air stripper to be located in
     area 1, the area of concern, do you have an idea where it is
     going to be located yet or would that be taken care of
     during the engineering design stage?
     Responses The actual location of the treatment system, as
     well as other physical aspects of the remedial approach,
     will be determined during the remedial design.
7.   Comment? Is it correct to say that the 370 gallons of water
     a minute being discussed with regard to the pumping and
     recharge of the water is just a concept — that the details
     will be worked out during the engineering design?
     Responses Yes, operating parameters will be developed
     during the remedial design.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

©o     Comments Would it also be true that if the amount of
       chemicals being removed by the air stripper turned out to be
       lower than expected that consideration would be given to the
       option of not having off-gas treatment?
       Responses Yes, off-gas treatment will only be included if
       it is warranted.
Do     Coaments What is the total cost going to be, and who will
       pay the cost, and when? What will the effect be on
       residents and industries in Rockaway Township?
       Responses NJDEPE responded that the cost was $13,617,000,
       and was projected over a 30-year period. [Based upon
       further review of the costs associated with the remedy, and
       in response to comments, the present worth cost is now
       estimated to be approximately $9,849,000.]
       As far as payment is concerned, NJDEPE and EPA first pursue
       parties responsible for the contamination to implement
       remedies or pay the costs of remediation. Should the
       potentially responsible parties (PRPs) decline the
       opportunity to implement and/or fund the remedy, the federal
       government would entirely fund the remedial design, and fund
       90 percent of the cost of the construction and operation of
       the facility for the first 10 years of response action. The
       State of New Jersey would be reguired to fund the additional
       10 percent of the construction and operation for the first
       10 years, and would be responsible for assuring the O&M of
       the remedial system thereafter. If the federal and state
       governments were required to fund the remedy because the
       PRPs declined to do so, the governments would seek to
       recover costs from the PRPs.
       The Mayor of Rockaway Township responded that the cost of
       remediating the site should have no effect on the municipal
       tax rate, either for industry or for residents.
3.0o   Comaents The economic study doesn't seem to include the
       sale of the treated water and it seems ludicrous to treat
       half a million gallons a day to drinking water standards and
       then to re inject it in the ground when we have two
       municipalities very close by that are using drinking water
       and could get an economic benefit from that half-million
       gallons a day. Has that been considered in making this
       recommendation? In this case it is being reinjected within
       several hundred feet of where it is being pumped out again
       and treated again.
       Responses The preferred alternative presented in the
       Proposed Plan entailed treated water from the system at the
       Denville Technical Park to an on-site infiltration basin or

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      leach field. However, based on public comment, the
      discharge alternative has been revised to allow for use of
      the treated water. The remedy now calls for reinjection of
      treated ground water to the extent needed to promote aquifer
      restoration, with discharge of any surplus to the public
      water supply.
11.   Comment: Is the estimate of O&M costs for the existing
      treatment system over 30 years offset by the income from
      selling water to the residents of Rockaway during that 30-
      year period?
      Response: No. That cost estimate was based on the total
      estimated cost, regardless of who would pay for it.
12. Comment: So replacing the existing system would not
    necessarily be a cost to the taxpayers?
      Response: As noted above, EPA and the State of New Jersey
      would first seek to have PRPs implement or fund the remedy.
      If the PRPs declined, EPA and the state would share the
      costs of the remedy and then seek to recover costs from the
      PRPs.
13.   Comment: With regard to the existing air stripper at the
      municipal wells, did you talk to the Township officials to
      get an idea of their operating cost when you put your cost
      estimate together?
      Response: NJDEPE's consultant based its O&M estimate on
      discussions with the companies that actually manufacture air
      stripping systems.
      The Mayor of Rockaway Township added that the Township
      provided a report concerning the Township's costs for
      operating its air stripper to NJDEPE.
14.   Comment: With regard to the 30-year cost analysis, is it
      correct that is a present value analysis?
      Response: Yes.
15.   Comment: What did you use for the discount rate on money
      when you did that analysis?
      Response: The amounts presented at the public meeting were
      at the five percent rate. The FS report includes estimates
      at both the five percent and ten percent discount rates.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

16. Comment: An attorney representing one of the PRPs asked who
    received notice letters from EPA about the public meeting.
     Response: NJDEPE indicated that it did not have that
     information at the public meeting. [EPA has not yet issued
     CERCLA Notice Letters to PRPs for the Rockaway Township
     Wellfield site. EPA had sent letters, along with a copy of
     the Proposed Plan, to parties that it believed might have an
     interest in reviewing the proposed remedy, and encouraged
     them to do so. ]
C.   SUMMARY OF WRITTEN COMMENTS RECEIVED DURING OTE PUBLIC
     COMMENT PERIOD AND AGENCY RESPONSES

The following comments and responses pertain to written
correspondence received during the comment period.

1.   Comment: Regarding Disposal Option 3, will the estimated
     discharge of 532,000 gallons of treated water per day into
     the aquifer beyond the Rockaway Township Wellfield capture
     area reduce this critical water supply?
     Response: Existing information indicates that withdrawing
     the water from within the vicinity of the Technical Park and
     then recharging it in the same general area would probably
     not affect the amount of water available to the Township
     wells. However, the remedy will be designed such that any
     significant adverse effects could be mitigated.
2.   Comment: With regard to Disposal Option 3, treated ground
     water discharged downgradient of the Denville Technical Park
     might in fact be drawn towards the Township wellfield. This
     may result in a potential to recontaminate treated water as
     it re-enters the Denville Technical Park.
     Response: The remedy will be designed to minimize the
     potential for recontamination of treated ground water.
     Actual discharge location(s) will be determined during the
     remedial design. In addition, the remedy provides that any
     surplus treated ground water not needed to promote aquifer
     restoration will be discharged to the public water supply
     system.
3.   Comment: Treatment costs associated with the O&M of the
     proposed replacement air stripper should continue to be paid
     for by the responsible parties and that stipulation should
     be explicit in the Proposed Plan.
     Response: The purpose of the Proposed Plan was to present
     the preferred remedial alternative for the site, not to
     direct any particular party to implement the remedy.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     However, PRPs will be offered the opportunity to implement
     or fund the remedy.
4.   Commentg Thiokol has provided technical input during the
     RI/FS by providing comments on the reports. Thiokol has met
     with NJDEPE on several occasions to discuss the RI/FS.
     Finally, Thiokol has conducted its own studies at the
     Denville Technical Park to supplement the RI/FS. Reports on
     the studies have been provided to the NJDEPE for inclusion
     in the Administrative Record.
     Previous comments on the first draft FS were sent to NJDEPE
     in a letter from Conestoga-Rovers & Associates (CRA),
     consultants for Thiokol. Many of these comments on the
     first draft were not adequately addressed in the Final FS.
     Responses The information submitted by Thiokol has been
     included as part of the Administrative Record for the site.
     This information will also be considered during the design
     of the remedy.
5.   Comments The ROD should acknowledge the need to evaluate
     sources of TCE/TCA to the Rockaway Township Wellfield
     through a long-term ground water monitoring program.
     Responses The selected alternative entails a long term
     monitoring program. It is estimated that ground water
     samples will be analyzed for a period of 30 years, combined
     with periodic reviews. The specific number of wells to be
     sampled and the analytical parameters will be determined
     during design and subsequent operation.
6.   Comments It is recognized that the Township air stripper
     requires replacement. However, the Proposed Plan is unclear
     relative to this scope of work. The ROD should state the
     following:
     1)   the replacement applies only to the air stripper and
          does not apply to the carbon system;
     2)   the air stripper will have a similar capacity as the
          current system (i.e., 900 gallons per minute (gpm));
     3)   the replacement air stripper should not have air
          emission controls;
     4)   the replacement of controls, pumps and affiliated
          equipment will only be required where appropriate; and
     5)   the annual cost for operation of the Township air
          stripper was estimated and should be revised to reflect
          actual experience of Rockaway Township.




                               8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

(1) The selected alternative at the Rockaway Township
    Wellfield requires replacement of the deteriorating air
    stripper, not the existing carbon adsorption system.
(2) The new air stripper to be installed at the Rockaway
    Township Wellfield will have similar capacity to the
    existing system.
(3) It is not anticipated that the replacement air stripper
    at the Rockaway Township Wellfield will require air
    emission controls because past performance of the
    existing air stripper has met air emission standards.
    However, the actual need for emissions controls will be
    determined during the remedial design.
(4) Determination of any existing equipment to be used as
    part of the new air stripper system at the Rockaway
    Township Wellfield will be determined during design of
    the new system.
(5) The costs for O&M were based on estimates from the FS.
    The costs projected for operation of the new system
    will be revised once actual costs have been determined.
Coameats The Proposed Plan conceptually identifies a long-
term monitoring program which involves 39 wells analyzed
semi-annually for 30 years for Contract Laboratory
Parameters (CLP), Target Compound List (TCL) and Target
Analyte List (TAL) parameters. This program goes far beyond
what is necessary to monitor the remedy. Instead, the ROD
should require a monitoring program involving approximately
one-half the monitoring wells which should be monitored
annually for VOCs using SW 846 protocols for the following
reasons:
1)   First, the 39 monitoring wells were installed over a
     large area in an attempt to identify contamination from
     unknown sources. At this stage, the selection of wells
     should be oriented to known and potential sources of
     contamination. This goal can be accomplished with
     approximately one-half the number of monitoring wells.
2)   Second, TCL/TAL parameters are used under EPA guidance
     when the type of contamination is unknown. This effort
     has already been conducted under the Rl. The Proposed
     Plan stated on page 7 that TCE is the primary chemical
     of concern. Hence, the monitoring program should focus
     upon VOCs.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     3)   Third, CLP protocols are designed for RI programs where
          the nature of contamination is to be defined and
          decisions are made on two or three sampling rounds.
          Remedial programs involve situations where the
          contaminants of concern are known and analysis is done
          repeatedly. In these situations, Level III analysis is
          appropriate using SW 846 methods. EPA guidance manual
          (Data Quality Objectives for Remedial Response
          Activities Development Process, EPA/540/G-87/003, March
          1987) identifies that Level III data provides similar
          quality of results but reduces the rigorous QA/QC
          procedures associated with CLP (Level IV) procedures.
          Table 4-3 of the manual identifies that Level III
          procedures are suitable for engineering design and
          monitoring during implementation. Table 4-4 of the
          manual specifically excludes Level IV (CLP)
          requirements from long term monitoring programs
          associated with remediation.
     4)   Fourth, semi-annual monitoring is redundant given the
          slow rate of ground water movement. Changes in ground
          water chemistry occur slowly and can be effectively
          monitored on a reduced frequency, such as an annual
          basis.
          Our investigation (CRA, 1993) determined that ground
          water migrates at approximately 36 ft/year which means
          the ground water will be sampled every time it advances
          18 ft for a semi-annual round versus 36 ft for an
          annual round. Hence, semi-annual monitoring will
          develop redundant data.
     Responses The ROD presents only a conceptual monitoring
     program. The specific parameters (such as those discussed
     in the comment) will be developed during the remedial design
     and may be modified during implementation depending on the
     results obtained during the estimated 30 years.
8.   Comments The ground water extraction system is based on 17
     pumping wells, each pumping at 22 gpm. The conceptual
     design is based on a hydraulic conductivity (K) of 2.3 x 102
     centimeters per second (cm/sec.) (FS, Appendix B) which was
     based on single well response tests conducted during the RI.
     CRA conducted two short term aquifer pumping tests which
     demonstrated a K value on the order of 10"3 cm/sec. It was
     also estimated, based on these tests, that a capture width
     of 400 feet could be established with a single extraction
     well compared to the 80-foot capture width per well
     presented in the FS.
     The total pumping rate is also overestimated due to a higher
     K value. The above study demonstrated that capture at the
                               10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Denville Technical Park can be achieved at a total pumping
     rate of less than 100 gpm.
     Given the above, the conceptual design should be amended
     during the remedial design in order to account for field
     conditions.
     Response: The conceptual design presented in the FS report
     was based on data obtained during the RI. Additional field
     investigations will be performed during the remedial design
     and will be used to develop the remedial system operating
     parameters.
9.   Comment: The Proposed Plan includes air treatment on the
     air stripper due to a potential exceedance of a New Jersey
     guideline for TCE emissions (0.1 pounds per hour (lb/hr)).
     The FS (Appendix D) estimated 0.09 lb/hr of TCE based on a
     flow rate of 165 gpm and a TCE criterion and the air
     discharge emission rate is expected to be well below TCE air
     standards since the flowrate was overestimated.
     Given the above, air treatment should not be required.
     Response: As stated in the ROD, the determination of
     whether emissions controls are needed for the air stripper
     to be located at the Denville Technical Park would be based
     on data obtained during the remedial design. The
     information will indicate whether on not treatment of the
     emissions is necessary. Until the actual emissions can be
     determined, the possibility of air treatment cannot be
     excluded.
10. Comment: Three alternatives are discussed for the
    management of treated water. Comments on each alternative
    are as follows:
     1)   infiltration Basins
          The Proposed Plan required the disposal of treated
          water using an infiltration basin. The feasibility of
          an infiltration basin is questionable since no soil
          infiltration testing was conducted. It should also be
          recognized that the use of an infiltration basin could
          create operation problems due to potential clogging of
          the system and potential down-time due to maintenance.
     2)   Beneficial Reuse (Municipal Supply)
          It is recommended that treated water be considered for
          municipal supply. This alternative would beneficially
          use a resource rather than wasting it. At the public
          meeting, the Township stated a preference to use the
          water for municipal supply.

                               11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

           Another benefit of municipal supply is the reduction in
           water demand at the Township wells so that the demand
           on the aquifer remains constant and the available water
           supply increases.
      3)   Surface Water Discharge
           This alternative is a practical alternative for
           management of low flowrates (i.e., less than 100 gpm).
           The expected pumping rate does not represent a
           significant draw on the aquifer. Hence, it may be more
           practical to discharge treated water to Beaver Brook
           during the period of remediation should municipal
           supply or infiltration become difficult to implement.
           Given the above, it is recommended that an objective
           evaluation of all three alternatives be conducted
           during the remedial design and the appropriate
           alternative be implemented.
      Response: The preferred alternative presented in the
      Proposed Plan entailed discharge of treated water from the
      system at the Denville Technical Park to an on-site
      infiltration basin or leach field. However, based on public
      comment, the discharge alternative has been revised to allow
      for the utilization of treated water. The remedy provides
      that any surplus treated ground water not needed to promote
      aquifer restoration will be discharged to the public water
      supply system. Potential operational problems associated
      with the reinjection or reinfiltration of treated water will
      be considered during the remedial design.
11. Comment: The Proposed Plan provides an estimate of $13.6
    million based on the following:
  * Alternative 2 - (Pump and Treat)               $   5.45 million
  *   Discharge to Infiltration System             $   0.07 million
  *   WT2 (Air Stripping with Off Gas Treatment)   $   2.45 million
  *   Alternative 5 (Replace Township Stripper)    $   5.65 million
                              TOTAL                S 13.62 million
This cost is grossly overestimated for the following reasons:
           1)   Alternative 2 assumes 17 extraction wells when
                approximately 3 wells are required. The Proposed
                Plan is based on single well response tests (See
                Section D);
           2)   WT2 assumes 370 gpm when the required pumping rate
                should not exceed 100 gpm (See Section C);
                                12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     3)   Alternative 2 assumes TCL/TAL monitoring when only
          VOC monitoring is required (See Section C);
     4)   Monitoring costs are double-counted since
          monitoring has been included in both Alternative 2
          and 5; and
     5)   WT2 assumes that air treatment is required based
          on a potential exceedance of 0.1 Ib/hr TCE which
          is based on an assumed high ground water
          extraction rate., Air treatment is likely not
          required.
          If the factors affecting the cost are adjusted,
          the overall cost of the remedy should be less than
          $5 million.
aesponses The cost estimates presented in the FS report and
the Proposed Plan were based on assumptions which may be
conservative. The costs were intended to be used for
comparing alternatives and options. Better cost estimates
will be developed during the remedial design. The "double
counting" of monitoring costs due to the presentation of
Alternatives 2 and 5 in their entirety has been noted. The
cost estimate presented in the ROD has been adjusted to
include only one long-term monitoring program. That
resulted in an estimated present worth cost of approximately
$9,849,000.




                          13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

D.   APPENDICES




         Appendix A:   Proposed Plan


         Appendix B:   Public notice which appeared in The Daily
         Record


         Appendix C:   Public meeting transcript


         Appendix D: Written comments submitted during the
         public comment period


         Appendix E: Index to the administrative record
         developed for the site




                                      14
                        •U.S.   GOVD-NXENT PF.INTING OFFICE: H 94-38 6-54 1 / 03092
