LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: SUPERFUND RECORD OF DECISION, KIN-BUC LANDFILL, NEW JERSEY. (WITH APPENDICES)
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/100071
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 6542a5517259fe6df206814dddbbb2e06b77931cf55aa555cb9a82f002308589
Source PDF pages: 89
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      \
        United States              Office 4«           EPA/ROD/R02-88/068
        Environmental Protection   Emerg« vt and       September 1988
        Agency                     Remedit -Response




.»EPA   Superfund
        Record of

        Kin-Buc Landfill, NJ




                                                             100071

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  30273-101
   REPORT DOCUMENTATION                1. REPORT NO.                                                       3. Recipient*« Accession No.
          PAGE                                    EPA/ROD/R02-88/068
  4. Title and Subtitle                                                                                    5. Report 0«t«
    SUPERFUND RECORD OF DECISION                                                                                   09/30/88
     in-Buc Landfill, NJ
     irst Remedial Action
  7. Authors)                                                                                              8. Performing Organization Rept. No.


  9. Performing Organization Name and Address                                                              10. Project/Task/Work Unit No.


                                                                                                           11. ContracUC) or Grant(G) No.
                                                                                                           (C)

                                                                                                           (G)

   12. Sponsoring Organization Name and Address                                                            13. Type of Report & Period Covered
   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
   401 M Street, S.W.                                                                                              800/000
   Washington, D.C. 20460                                                                                  14.


   IS. Supplementary Notes




  16. Abstract (Limit: 200 words)
       The 220-acre Kin-Buc Landfill consists of a number of inactive industrial and
   municipal waste disposal areas and is located in the Raritan River 100-year flood plain
   and within a coastal zone in Edison Township, Middlesex County, New Jersey. Bordering,
   the site is an industrial park directly north, the Edison Township Municipal Landfill
   600 feet to the south, marshlands to the east, and the Raritan River bordering the
   ^est. Land use within one mile of the site includes residential, light industrial, and
     ecreational areas. Landfill operations were conducted between 1947 and 1977. Details
   "on the owners/operators of the side are unknown prior 1968 when Kin-Buc, Inc. leased the
   area from Inmar Associates. According to site records, an estimated 70 million gallons
   of liquid wastes, including 3 million gallons of oily waste and over 1 million tons of
   solid waste, were disposed of between 1973 and 1976 alone. Examples of wastes received
    include solvents, waste oils, paint sludges, cyanides, metal stripping wastes and paint
   thinners. The Kin-Buc site includes three major mounds: Kin-Buc I (30 acres), Kin-Buc
    II (12 acres) which lies directly north of Kin-Buc I, and Mound B (9 acres) which lies
   southwest of Kin-Buc I adjacent to the Raritan River. Additionally, three pits of black
   oily leachate, Pits A, B, and C, are located at the southeastern edge of Kin-Buc I;
    there is a refuse-filled low-lying area between Kin-Buc I and the Edison Landfill; and
    (See Attached Sheet)

  17. Document Analysis    a. Descriptors
   Record of Decision
   Kin-Buc Landfill, NJ
   First Remedial Action
   Contaminated Media: air, gw, sediments, sw
   Key  Contaminants: VOCs, organics metals (lead), PCBs
    V Identffiers/OpenTEnded Terms




      c. COSATI Field/Group

   Availability Statement                                                         19. Security Class (This Report)           21. No. of Pages
mf***
                                                                                          None                                           44
                                                                                  20. Security Class (This Page)             22. Price
                                                                                          None
 (SeeANSt-Z39.1S)                                        See Instructions on Reverse                                        OPTIONAL FORM 272 (4-77)
                                                                                                                            (Formerly NTIS-35)
                                                                                                                            Department of Commerce

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

o A/ROD/R02-88/068
 1n-Buc Landfill, NJ
First Remedial Action

16.   ABSTRACT (continued)

 an area of impounded, tidally affected water, Pool C, contaminated by Kin-Buc I is
 adjacent to the pits. Site activities included burying and compacting contained wastes
'in Kin-Buc II, and discharging hazardous liquid wastes into bulldozed pits at the top of
 Kin-Buc I. These practices resulted in numerous citizen complaints, caused frequent
 major onsite fires and a number of serious occupational injuries. EPA began
 investigations in January 1976 and detected the discharge of hazardous substances from
 the facility, in February 1980, EPA began cleanup activities consisting of collection,
 treatment, and disposal of Pool C leachate; a drum reduction program; oily-phase
 leachate collection and onsite storage; and aqueous-phase leachate pretreatment,
 removal, and offsite treatment, in September 1980, Kin-Buc, Inc. was ordered to cap
 Kin-Buc I and II. This source control ROD addresses remediation of the first of two
 operable units, which includes Kin-Buc I and II, Pool C, and the low-lying area between
 Kin-Buc I and Edison Landfill. A subsequent ROD will address offsite migration
 controls. The primary contaminants of concern affecting the ground water, surface
 water, sediments, soil and air are: - VOCs including benzene and toluene, other organics
 including PAHs and PCBs, and metals including arsenic and lead.

   The selected remedial action for this site includes: installation of a slurry wall
surrounding the site; RCRA capping over Kin-Buc II, a portion of the low-lying area
  tween Kin-Buc I and the Edison Landfill, and Pool C; maintenance and upgrading, if
 ecessary, of the Kin-Buc I cap; collection of approximately 3 million gallons of
oily-phase leachate with offsite incineration and residual disposal; collection and
onsite biological or carbon treatment of aqueous-phase leachate and contaminated ground
water with discharge either to surface water or POTW, and dewatering of residual sludges
and offsite disposal; ground water monitoring; and O&M. The estimated present worth
cost for this remedial action is between $16,290,000 and $16,635,000 with annual O&M
varying from $848,000 (year 1) to $405,000 (years 12-20).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       DECLARATION STATEMENT
                                                       r
                         RECORD OF DECISION            ^'

Kin-Buc Landfill - Operable Unit I, Edison Twp., Middlesex County,
New Jersey
STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE
This decision document presents the selected remedial action for
the Kin-Buc Landfill-Operable Unit I in Edison Township, New
Jersey; developed in accordance with CERCLA, as amended by
SARA, and to the extent practicable, the National Contingency
Plan. This decision is based on the administrative record for
this site. The attached index identifies the items that comprise
the administrative record upon which the selection of the
remedial action is based.
The State of New Jersey has concurred on the selected remedy.
DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY
This operable unit was developed to protect public health and the
environment by controlling the major sources of contamination as
well as treating leachate and contaminated groundwater to the
maximum extent practicable. The operable unit is fully consistent
with all planned future site activities. Future site activities
include further evaluation of potential areas of contamination
and developing measures to manage migration of contaminants as well
as the overall site remedy.
The selected remedy for the Kin-Buc Landfill - Operable Unit I
consists of the following components:
0
    circumferential slurry wall installation to bedrock on all of
    the sides of the site;
0
    maintenance, and upgrading if necessary, of the Kin-Buc I cap
    and installation of a cap in accordance with RCRA Subtitle C
    and State requirements on Kin-Buc II, portions of the low-lying
    area between Kin-Buc I and the Edison Landfill and Pool C;
0
    collection and off-site incineration of oily phase leachate;
0
    collection and on-site treatment of aqueous' phase leachate and
    contaminated groundwater with disposal via direct surface water
    discharge;
0
    periodic monitoring and
0
    operation and maintenance.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -2-
Alternatively, pre-treatment of aqueous phase leachate and
contaminated groundwater and discharge to .the Middlesex County
Utilities Authority (MCUA) publically owned treatment *orks (POTW)
(versus treatment and direct surface water discharge) "is an
acceptable option should approval to discharge to the-fOTW be
granted by the MCUA.
DECLARATION

Consistent with the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Com-
pensation, and Liability Act of 1980 as amended by the Super fund
Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, and the National Oil
and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan, 40 CFR Part
300, I have determined the selected remedy is protective of
human health and the environment, attains Federal and State
requirements that are applicable or relevant and appropriate
for this remedial action and is cost-effective. This remedy
satisfies the statutory preference for remedies that employ
treatment that reduces toxicity, mobility, or volume as a t-.
principal element and utilizes permanent solutions and alternative
treatment technologies to the maximum extent practicable.
Because this remedy will result in hazardous substances remaining
on-site above health-based levels, a review will be conducted within
five years after commencement of remedial action to ensure^that the
remedy continues to provide adequate protection of human-^health and
the environment.




Dat£       *                     William J. yftfifvyns^fT, P.Bt
                                 Acting Regional Administrator



                                                           1



                                                      •e

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

t -




                SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVE SELECTION
                    KIN-BUC LANDFILL - OPERABLE UNIT I ->
                       EDISON TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY      ":


      SITE NAME, LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION
      The Kin-Buc Landfill consists of a number of individual inactive
      disposal sites extending over 220 acres and is located at the
      end of Meadow Road in Edison Township, Middlesex County/ New
      Jersey. Directly north of the site is an industrial park.
      The Edison Township Municipal Landfill is approximately 600
      feet south of the site. Marshlands and a former borrow area
      are directly to the east of the site. The Rarfitan River
      borders the site on the west. Figure 1 depicts the general
      location of the site and Figure 2 is a site map. Figure 2 also
      shows that other landfills and a chemical company are within
      1 mile of the site.
      The Kin-Buc Landfill site includes the following components.
      The larger of.two major mounds, designated Kin-Buc If covers
      approximately 30 acres and rises to a maximum elevation of 93
      feet. The other major mound, designated Kin-Buc II, covers
      approximately 12 acres, rises to a maximum elevation of 51
      feet and>is just north of Kin-Buc I. A low lying minor mound
      covers approximately 9 acres, rises 15 to 20 feet high and is
      designated as Mound B. Mound B lies west-southwest of Kin-Buc
      I, across the Edison Township Municipal Landfill access road
      and adjacent to the Raritan River. Three pits of black, oily
      leachate have developed at the southeastern edge of Kin-Buc I
      and are known as Pits A, B, and C. Adjacent to the pits is
      an area of impounded, tidally affected water referred to as
      Pool C. Marshland to the east of Pool C is cut by numerous
      mosquito drainage channels, with its major drainage feature
      being Edmonds Creek, a tidally affected shallow stream which
      flows into the Raritan River to the south of Kin-Buc I. Pool
      C is connected to Edmonds Creek by a small channel. Mill Brook,
      is northwest of the site, flows into Martins Creek which has
      been partially filled in by Kin-Buc II. Flowing west, Martins
      Creek runs into the Raritan River just north of Mound B.
      Figure 2 depicts the aforementioned site features.
      Two residential populations are within 1 mile of the Kin-Buc
      Landfill: a densely populated residential area located north-
      west of the site across the New Jersey Turnpike near Meadow Road;
      and an apartment complex located north-northeast near the Middle-
      sex County College. There are three additional populations to
      the north and east of the site. First, Middlesex County College

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ri»urc x . Kia-Buc UadHU Site Location Map,
       —_-_. _EdJiaa Towaship, Middlesex Cooaty, New Jeney




             MUdltstx County




                Sutt of Ntw Jtrsey

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 ••    Fifare 2       Kin-Boc Landfill Site Map




      STAUFFER
      CHEMICAL




                                                                               LAWDFWL
                                                                                M1LE-




Note      Adapted from OCA Corporation. 1911, lafornatioa Evaloatioa ftr tkt Kia>
          iue tAadfill. Edison, New Jersey.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -2-
is approximately three quarters of a mile north-northeast of
Kin-Buc Landfill. Second, the Heller Industrial Park is a light
industrial complex one-half mile north of Kin-Buc II. Third, the
Mirror Lake Beach Club is approximately one-half mile northeast
of the site and is used by the employees and families of. the
Heller Industrial Park on a seasonal basis for swimming, boating,
and tennis.
Based on a review of available file information and discussions
with representatives of the local health department, there are
no public or private potable wells presently drawing groundwater
from contaminated aquifers immediately downgradient of the Kin-Buc
Landfill. Most of the public water supply in the area is predom-
inately surface water, the majority of which comes from the Rari-
tan River upstream of the site. Edison Township has six reserve
wells screened in the Brunswick formation (bedrock) within approx-
imately 2 to 2-1/2 miles upgradient of Kin-Buc II. According to
local health officials, these wells are currently not in use. In
addition, Edison Township has 700-800 private and industrial
wells upgradient of the site. None of these wells are located
between the site and the Raritan River.
SCOPE AND ROLE OF OPERABLE UNIT WITHIN SITE STRATEGY
EPA determined that the site should be remediated in operable units.
Remediation of Operable Unit I, the subject of this Record of Deci-
sion (ROD), constitutes source control measures for the site. The
components of the site addressed in Operable Unit I are as follows:
•   Kin-Buc I
•   Kin-Buc II
•   Pool C
•   Low-lying area between Kin-Buc I and the Edison Landfill
The components of the site to be addressed in Operable Unit II
(the subject of a future ROD) consist of:
•   Mound B;
• Raritan River;
•   Mill Brook;
•   Martins Creek;
                       \
•   Edmonds Creek, including the connecting channel from Pool C;
•   adjacent wetlands and
I   groundwater contamination emanating from the site.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -3-
Operable Unit II will address the measures that may be necessary
to mitigate any off-site impacts resulting from contaminant migra-
tion. EPA has determined that a Supplemental Remedial Investigation
will be required to adequately characterize the nature and extent
of off-site contamination. Upon completion of the Supplemental
Remedial Investigation for Operable Unit II, a Feasibility Study
(FS) evaluating the remedial alternatives will be conducted and
the process will culminate in a subsequent ROD.

SITE HISTORY

The Kin-Buc Landfill began operating as early as 1947. During
its period of operation/ the landfill was utilized for disposal
of municipal/ industrial and hazardous waste. Detailed infor-
mation on the owner/operators and site activities from 1947
to 1968 could not be located. However/ the site/ owned by Inraar
Associates/ was later leased to Kin-Buc/ Inc./ a division of
Scientific/ Inc-. Kin-Buc/ Inc. operated the site as a land-
fill from approximately 1968 to March 1977. From 1971 to
1976, the site was a state-approved landfill for industrial
(solid and liquid) and municipal wastes. Kin-Buc Landfill
was registered with the New Jersey Department of Environ-
mental Protection (NJDEP), Solid Waste Administration. During
this period/ the site accepted hazardous waste. In 1976/ the
NJDEP revoked Kin-Buc*s permit to operate because of violations
of a number of environmental statutes.
        '*
The total quantity of waste disposed of at Kin-Buc Landfill has
not been definitively determined. EPA estimates that at
least 70 million gallons of liquid waste/ including 3 million
gallons of oily -waste/ and over 1 million tons of solid waste
were disposed of between 1973 and 1976.
There are two major sources of information regarding the type
and diversity of chemical wastes (including hazardous wastes)
disposed of at Kin-Buc. First/ EPA sent information request
letters under CERCLA Section 104(e), to approximately 400
potentially responsible parties (PRPs). Typical categories
of wastes included in responses are:
   waste lacquer residue and ferric chloride's
   solvents, strip-away wastes/ oils/ rubber cement
   wastewater/ acetone
   waste oils
   solvent mix/ silicone                            •;
   ethyl acetate/ tolulol flammables
   chloroethane, cutting oils/ ether/ paint thinner .;.
   cyanides
   metal stripper/ cyanides/ copper
   oil/ alcohol/ kerosene

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Second, EPA compiled and summarized data from of waste shipments
accepted between 1972 and 1976. Table 1 is a summary which
lists 45 types of waste, (most of which would be considered
hazardous) disposed at the site.                     ~*L
                                                        *:P •
The mode of disposal operations while the site was active
provides useful information to evaluate the contamination that
resulted at the site. Wastes that arrived in containers were
buried on-site and then compacted with bulldozers.. Liquid waste
was discharged into a bulldozed pit, approximately 75 to 100
feet i.n diameter at the top of Kin-Buc I.
Tank trucks carrying the liquid waste would stop at the entrance
to the landfill where samples of the load would undergo limited
testing (pH and flammability). The tank trucks then proceeded
to the top of Kin-Buc I, opened their discharge ports and allowed
the contents of the truck to drain into the pit.
Liquid waste also arrived in 55-gallon drums and was received
along the northeast side of Kin-Buc I; an area now covered by
Kin-Buc II. The drum contents were emptied into temporary stor- •
age ponds from which the contents were pumped into the pit at
the top of the landfill. Once the active pit was filled, it
would be closed and another one dug. These operational practices
resulted in a large number of citizen complaints, caused frequent
major on-site fires and a number of serious occupational injuries.

SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS

The Remedial Investigation ( R I ) includes investigations of ground-
water, surface water, sediment and air. Major findings and con-
clusions of the RI as they pertain to the components of the site
addressed in Operable Unit I are as follows:
1)   The large volume of wastes in Kin-Buc I is a source of
     contamination of the immediately surrounding environment.
     These wastes included hazardous waste liquids, added to
     municipal and other solid wastes, with the intent that the
     liquids would be largely absorbed into the solid waste.
     Although the disposal of hazardous waste in Kin-Buc II has
     not been documented; liquid waste was received along the north-
     east side of Kin-Buc I (an area now covered by Kin-Buc I I ) .
     Therefore, EPA considers there to be a high probability that
     hazardous substances are in or under the Kin-Buc II mound.
2)   Precipitation infiltration into the refuse appears to be
     most significant in the lowland refuse-filled marsh area
     between Kin-Buc I and the Edison Landfill.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       Table 1
                Summary of Waste Disposed at Kin-flue Landfill 1972 1976
                        Statistical Total for Each Chemical Type
                                       (Sheet 1 of 2)

                                                        Quantity*
     Chemical Type                                   flQQQ Gallonil

Waste Material                                      47580.10
Miscellaneous Waste                                 33405.91
Waste Water/Liquid                                  17249.77
Waste Sludge                                        11176.17
Waste Chemicals                                     11067.92
Acid & Alkaline Solution                             5296.62
Waste Oil                                            2739.82
Septic                                               2265.39
Filter Aid                                           1358.97
Contaminated Dirt ft Sand                            1135.38
Waste/Spent Solvents                                 1510.89
Hazardous Materials                                   256J6
Waste Acid                                            146.68
Paint Sludge                                          133.65
Solids                                                109.56
Waste Caustic                                          5110
Hydrochloric Acid                                      45.00
Aluminum Chloride                                      40.62
Waste Slop                                              34.87
Waste Cyanide                                           24.21
Nitric Acid                                             2150
Tar                                                     21.16
Sulf uric Acid                                          19.03
Resins                                                  17.97
Industrial Waste                                        1129
Phenolics                                                9.68
Chromic Acid                                             7.09
Waste Catalyst                                           6.64
Isopropyl Alcohol                                        6.00
Scrap Metal                                              5.77
Phenols                                                  5.50
Acetic Acid                                              5.04
Still Bottoms                                            4.78




                                                                           ••*
                                                                            v

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        .
                                                   Table 1
                                             f
                           Summary of Waste Disposed at KJo-Buc Landfill 1972 • 1976
                                   Statistical Total for Each Chemical Type
                                                  (Sheet 2 of 2)


                                                                     Quantity*
                    Chemical Type                                  flOQQ Gallon?)

            Styreae                                                    4.40
            Waste Lachrymators                                         3.96
i           Gasoline                                                    150
i           Xylene                                                      240
1           Chloro Ethyleae                                            1.92
            Copper Solution                                            0.44
            Formaldehyde                                               0.40
    -       Jet Fuel          •                                       OJS
            Path Waste Material ' '                                    0.21
    I "     Lead                                                       0.16
            Lacquers                                                   0.14
            bopropyl Ether                                             0.01

            Total                                                  135790.66

            Notes:
                    Data compiled from a US. EPA Reg ion II summary (undated} of invoices from
                    Scientific, Inc. and SCA, Inc. of waste shipments accepted at Kin-Buc Landfill
                    between 1972 and 1976.
                    All waste volumes have been converted to f aliens for comparison purposes as
                    part of U.S. EPA Region II's computer summary.       .   " .

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                             :i




ecological Seetira C-C at W»- B«c Landfill

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

3) A low permeability cap over Kin-Buc I and low permeability
   cover materials over Kin-Buc II have provided reduced precipi-
   tation infiltration in these areas since the cap/cover was
   installed*                   .                '-- -"*li:-'
4) Radial subsurface flow patterns in the Kin-Buc I ant! II
   mounds have been identified. Overall/ groundwater flow
   predominates in a southerly direction to the refuse-filled,
   low-lying area immediately south of Kin-Buc It and to major
   discharge points in the area including Mill Brook, the marsh
   and the Raritan River.
5) Oily phase leachate containing polychlorinated biphenyls
   (PCBs) has migrated from Kin-Buc I into the refuse in the
   low-lying area between Kin-Buc I and the Edison Landfill.
   Flow patterns indicate the potential for the continued
   migration of this leachate toward the marsh area to the
   east, and to the Raritan River, west of the site.
6) The most significant and obvious manifestation of the sub-
   surface flow and a primary pathway for contaminant migra-
   tion are the leachate seeps over a substantial area south
   of Kin-Buc I (as discussed in 14 above) and Pool C.
7) Pool C is the source of PCB contamination (up to 68 ppm)
   found in the sediments of Edmonds Creek. The primary
   source of contamination in Pool C is Kin-Buc I.
8) Leachate at the site can be separated into two phases:
   an oily phase and an aqueous phase. Sampling and analysis
   of these two phases of leachate indicate that, the oily
   phase leachate is contaminated with PCBs (up to 5,822
   ppra) and the aqueous phase leachate contains hazardous
   substances including, but not limited to, metals, volatile
   organics, base neutral compounds, acid extractable compounds,
   PCBs, pesticides and cyanide. Sampling and analysis of
   raw leachate (prior to separation) and liquids from Pits
   B, C and Pool C show the same types of hazardous substances.
   Analytic data for sampled leachate is summarized in the Ri.
9) There are five stratigraphic units of concern at the site:
   first is the solid waste/fill material of the landfill it-
   self, second is the meadow marsh mat which immediately
   underlies the southern two-thirds of Kin-Buc I, third is
   the sand and gravel layer which lies under the meadow marsh
   mat and also underlies the southern two-thirds of Kin-Buc I.
   Finally, two bedrock formations lie below the sand and gravel
   layer. Only the sand and gravel and the bedrock formations are
   considered aquifers. Figure 3 depicts the site stratigraphy.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -6-
10) Within the solid waste/fill material (refuse layer)? two entire
    well series and a single well from a third series have been
    installed to investigate the nature of contamination. In 1981,
    Fred C. Hart & Associates installed 14 wells (FCHA series) under
    contract to EPA; 10 of which were screened in the refuse layer.
    Limited analysis of hydrocarbon material found in 6 of the 10
    wells revealed the presence of PCBs ranging in concentration
    from 111-4,478 ppm. The "A" series wells, installed by AGES for
    the owner/operators are also screened in the refuse layer.
    Analytic data revealed concentrations of PCBs in the floating
    oil in these wells ranging from 93 to 5,791 ppm. Finally, Well
    GEI-6G of the GET series, installed by GeoEngineering, Inc. for
    the owner/operators and screened in the refuse layer was sampled
    for parameters other than PCBs. Analytic data revealed concent-
    rations of volatile organics ranging from 10 to 100 ppb and
    concentrations of heavy metals ranging from 10 to 210 ppb.
11) Wells screened in the sand and gravel aquifer include the
    entire KINWT series, NJDEP-5 and NJDEP-6 and the remaining
    wells in the GEI series. Contaminant concentration ranges
    developed from 84 samples taken between 1976 - 1984 reveal
    the following:
     0
         presence of heavy metals including, but not limited
         to lead (up to 2.7 ppm), chromium (up to 0.64 ppm)
         and zinc (up to 137 ppm)?
                                                                       _/
     0
         presence of 39 organic priority pollutants including,    ffllfc
         but not limited to benzene, chlorobenzene, 4-methyl-         ^^
         2-pentanone, phenol and toluene which were detected at
         concentrations greater than 10 ppm; compounds such as
         vinyl chloride (up to 190 ppb), tetrachloroethene (up
         to 1.8 ppm) and 1,2-transdichloroethene (up to 5.4 ppm);
     0
         concentrations of chloride (60.5 to 4,670 ppm; mean
         concentration » 1838 ppm) and total dissolved solids
         (140 to 10,360 ppm; mean concentration « 4,928 ppm),
         due at least in part to the brackish nature of the
         water.
Appendix 1 summarizes the data obtained from groundwater moni-
toring wells screened in the sand & gravel aquifer.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -7-
Note that KINWT 1-A is considered to be screened in the sand
and gravel aquifer. However, further investigation of this
well has led to the conclusion that construction of this well
was faulty and that data obtained from KINWT 1-A is question-
able in terms of whether or not it is indicative of the water
quality in the sand & gravel aquifer. Therefore, data from
this well has not been utilized in discussing the aforemen-
tioned 'ranges of contaminants in the sand & gravel aquifer.
12) A limited number of wells have been screened in the
    bedrock aquifer. Comparison of wells considered
    upgradient (MW-1, MW-2, MW-3 and MW-4 which are north
    of Kin-Buc II) versus downgradient (MW-5, GEI-9R, and
    GEI-12WR) indicate the following:
   ' * presence of heavy metals at approximately the
       same mean concentrations in upgradient and downgra-
       dient wells
                                                                    •
     0
         an increase in the number and frequency of organic
         priority pollutants detected — two contaminants
         in upgradient versus nine contaminants in downgradient
         wells.
Appendix 2 summarizes data obtained from ground wetter monitoring
wells screened in the bedrock aquifer. However/ the nature
and extent of bedrock aquifer contamination is not adequately
characterized based on the data gathered to date.. The nature
and extent of groundwater contamination in this aquifer will be
a subject of the Supplemental Remedial Investigation.
13) The only significant source of air contamination is in
    the immediate vicinity of the Pool C area. The major con-
    taminants of concern in terms of air releases are volatile
    organics and PCBs.
14) Surface water and sediment data are presented in the Ri.
    However, these surface waters (Raritan River, Martins Creek,
    Mill Brook and Edmonds Creek), their sediments and adjacent
    wetlands will be the subject of further studies as part
    of a Supplemental Remedial Investigation for Operable Unit II,

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS
As an aid in determining the impact of the site on public health
and the environment, an endangerment (risk) assessment was con-
ducted by EPA.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -8-          —
Indicator contaminants utilized in the evaluation (eight indica-
tor contaminants were chosen from over one hundred contaminants
identified in the various media at the site (grouruiwater, surface
water/ sediment and air) included benzene, chloroform^-l, 1-dichloro-
ethene, PCBs, vinyl chloride, arsenic, cadmium, and read.
                                                     -s.'V.


The risks associated with exposure scenarios for the identified
populations in the endangerment assessment were characterized
and estimated. The risk characteristics and estimated risks
are summarized as follows:
0
    At present, the contaminated aquifers (sand & gravel and
    bedrock) immediately downgradient of the site are not utilized
    as a drinking water source. If these aquifers are used in
    the future, a potential upper-bound excess lifeime cancer
    risk that exceeds 10" 5 due to lifetime ingestion of contami-
    nated drinking water from the bedrock aquifer exists.
0
    For the scenarios involving inhalation of gases released from
    the leachate collection pool and pits, it was concluded that . „
    on-site concentrations of contaminants measured in air neither
    exceed occupational standards nor pose a potential significant
    risk to on-site workers or persons off-site. Estimated maximum
    concentrations of air contaminants based on models which utilize
    conservative assumptions concerning human exposure indicate a
    potential risk to on-site workers (assuming no personal protec-
    tion is used by workers) due to volatilization of PCBs from
    Pool C and average and maximum estimated concentrations of
    air contaminants considered for off-site exposure indicate
    potential risk due to volatile organics and PCBs.
0
    Workers who come in contact with the oily fraction of leachate
    may be subject to a potential upperbound excess lifetime cancer
    risk that exceeds 10~6, based on the concentration of PCBs in
    the leachate.
0
    There is a potential risk from the consumption of aquatic
    life due to the organisms' bioaccumulation of PCBs.
    Estimates of the concentration of PCBs in the tissue of
    fish found in the Raritan River could be as high as 9 ppm,
    which exceeds the Food and Drug Administration limit of 2 ppm.
0
    Aquatic populations in the creeks adjacent to the site will
    be at risk due to chronic exposure to cadmium in the surface
    water. There is also a potential for bioaccumulation of PCBs -
    by the aquatic life of PCBs from the sediments.
    The terrestrial populations, especially birds, may "b
    at a limited risk due to direct contact with leachate,
    especially the oily phase leachate.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -9-                       _
There are uncertainties associated with the estimates of risks
and the assumptions made in developing these risks tend to be
conservative. For this site, there is a level of uncertainty
associated with the data and the assumptions used. The major
uncertainties are summarized as follows:
•   Sampling data used to evaluate exposures and risks were
    collected over greater than a 10-year period by numerous
    sampling teams. Sampling and quality assurance/quality
    control procedures utilized for each sampling event often
    were not documented. A level of uncertainty is associated
    with the combining of these results.
•   Most of the exposure assumptions are based on values in
    the scientific literature or assumptions made by EPA; not
    site-specific data. Such site-specific data did not exist.
From the risk characteristics and estimations presented, it
can be concluded that releases from the site present a potential
significant risk to public health and the environment.
Additionally, it must be kept in mind that large quantities of
waste materials, many of which are highly toxic and potentially
carcinogenic, were disposed of at the site.

ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES

The Kin-Buc site was operated as a landfill from approximately
1968 until March 1977. From 1971 to 1976, the site was a
state-approved landfill for industrial (solid and liquid) and
municipal wastes and was registered with the NJDEP Solid Waste
Management Administration. During this period, the site
accepted hazardous waste.
Operational practices at the landfill resulted in frequent
on-site fires and a number of serious occupational injuries.
Twelve to fifteen major fires occurred between 1971 and 1976.
In a 1974 fire, a 55-gallon drum exploded killing a bulldozer
operator. As a result of this incident, the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration issued six citations for
violation of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                -10--       - •"
On a number of occasions/ landfill operations were in violation
of New Jersey environmental statutes. NJDEP issued Notices
of Prosecution for violations including, but not limited to,
                                        -          -.mm.».~- ^-j^y
0
    leachate seepage into the Raritan River;        "~"~~^Sr
0
    failure to provide records of the hazardous waste received;
0
    failure to maintain an adequate cover over the landfill
    surface and
0
    unauthorized excavations.
EPA investigation of the site began in January, 1976 at the time
of oil spill at the facility. Unpermitted point source discharges
were noted by EPA site investigators, leading to a full scale
monitoring investigation revealing the discharge of hazardous sub-
stances from the facility. Operation of the site was closed to
receipt of further liquid wastes by July 1, 1976. Based on these
and other violations, NJDEP revoked Kin-Buc's operating permit.
A November 1977 litigation report prepared by EPA led to the
filing of a civil complaint against 11 owner/operators of the
landfill on February 7, 1979 which directed the defendants to
take corrective action under a variety of federal environmental
statutues including the Federal Water Pollution Control Act/ the
Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act and the Rivers and Harbors Appropriation Act
of 1899.N In January 1980 a stipulation termed a "partial
settlement" was entered into between the United States and
Kin-Buc, Inc. (but not the remaining defendants) under which
Kin-Buc, Inc. was to undertake installation of a cap for the
landfill and conduct a long-term monitoring program. In Septem-
ber 1980, Kin-Buc, Inc. complied with a portion of the lawsuit
by placing a synthetic membrane and clay cap on Rin-Buc I. Clay
cover was also placed on Kin-Buc II. However, Kin-Buc, Inc.
refused to take measures to contain the flow of leachate or
clean up the area, claiming the area was not on its property.
EPA began cleanup activities at the site in February, 1980
using funds from the Federal Clean Water Act, Section 311(K).
These activities consisted of collection (in 55-gallon drums),
treatment and disposal of Pool C leachate. Beginning September,
1981 a drum reduction program was initiated (approximately 4000
drums had accumulated on-site). Oily phase leachate was collected
and continued to be stored in drums on-site and aqueous phase
leachate was pre-treated and sent to the Middlesex County
Utility Authority (MCUA) treatment plant under a 1981 emergency
permit issued by NJDEP.                              •-.
In October, 1981 the site was placed on EPA's Superfund National
Priorities List.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -11-
In September 1982, Kin-Buc, Inc. assumed the removal operation at
the Pool C area that EPA had been conducting since February 1980.
That agreement was implemented in late September 1982. In addition,
EPA attempted negotiations with Kin-Buc/ Inc. based on a proposed
CERCLA §106 consent order. Negotiations were unsuccessful and led
to issuance of a unilateral CERCLA §106 order (Findings of Fact,
Determination and Order Docket No: II-CERCLA-30102) against the 11
initial defendants of the 1979 civil action on September 23, 1983.
The unilateral CERCLA §106 order against the owner/operators required
the following:
-   a Removal Program which was ongoing and included:
     a) drum removal
     b) oil collection                *
     c) aqueous collection
    conduct of a RI/FS
    implementation of the selected remedial action and
-   operation and maintenance.
In January 1984, EPA sent correspondence to approximately 400
companies who were determined to be potentially responsible parties
(PRPs) at Kin-Buc based on information including, but not limited
to, the business records of an owner- and operator of the site
(Scientific, Inc. and/or its subsidiaries, including Kin-Buc, Inc.)
and the business records of SCA Services, Inc. and/or the Earthline
Company, in which a subsidiary of SCA Services, Inc. held a partnership
interest* The purpose of this correspondence was to notify the
companies of their status as PRPs, cost recover funds expended to
that point in time and request information from the PRPs under
CERCLA 104(e)(l).
In May, 1984 a draft RI/FS was submitted to EPA by the owners and
operators of Kin-Buc. On March 25, 1986, EPA issued an amended
unilateral CERCLA $106 administrative order (Findings of Fact,
Determination, and Amended Order Docket No.: II-CERCLA 60105). The
purpose of this order was to "update" the 1983 CERCLA order by requiring
the owners and operators to follow guidance that had been established
during the interim period on the conduct of an RI/FS, The draft RI
was submitted in April 1988 and the draft FS was submitted in May
1988.
The owner/operators are under unilateral order 'to implement the
selected remedy and subject to treble damages for failure without
cause to implement the selected remedy. Additionally, the site
will be remediated in operable units and the PRPs have expressed a
strong interest in conducting the Supplemental Remedial Investigation
and FS. The PRPs are comprised mainly of two financially viable
companies (Transtech Industries, Inc. formally Scientific, Inc.
and Waste Management, Inc. who bought SCA Services, Inc.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               -12-

DESCRIPTION OF ALTERNATIVES
The PS established five objectives for remedial action of Operable
Unit I. Remedial objectives were developed based on the RI. The
remedial objectives are:                             . ....
0
    control lateral movement of contaminants within the refuse
    layer represented by Kin-Buc I, Kin-Buc II and the low-lying
    area'.between Kin-Buc I and the Edison Landfill;
9
    control manifestation of subsurface flow as surface seeps which
    can contribute to surface water contamination;
0
    control surfioial contamination (i.e. Pool C and vicinity)
    which may contribute to air contamination;
• control migration of contaminants into the underlying sand and
  gravel aquifer and/ in so doing, evaluate the effectiveness of •
  the natural barriers which may exist (i.e. meadow marsh mat) and
4
    control of the migration of contaminants into the underlying
    bedrock considering the same issues noted above for the sand
    and gravel..
A description of each of the alternatives that were evaluated
in detail in the PS are presented on the following pages.
Each alternative is described in terms of its treatment
components, containment components and institutional controls
including operation and maintenance.
The C3 and C4 alternatives have common components developed to
achieve the objectives for the remedial action. Both alterna-
tives involve capping, containment, collection, treatment and
discharge, long-term monitoring as well as operation and
maintenance of the site. The key differences between the C3
and C4 alternatives are how specific components of each
alternative are combined to achieve the remedial objectives.
The differences are described as follows:
1) There are two options relating to the depth of installation
   of the circumferential slurry wall utilized for containment.
   The slurry wall for the C3 alternatives is installed to the
   bedrock in the northern portion of the site and to the meadow
   marsh mat in the southern portion of the site while the C4
   alternatives is installed to the bedrock on all sides of the
   site.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                       I II   ! 'II




                                                     FIGURE 4

                                MATRIX FOR COMPONENTS OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

ALTERNATIVE A - NO ACTION

ALTERNATIVE D - COMPLETE EXCAVATION                       <

ALTERNATIVE C - OONTAimENT, CAPPING, COLLECTION, AND DISCHARGE OF TREATED OF
                LEACHATE, MONITORING, OPERATION & MAINTENANCE

                    SLURRY                      DISCHARGE OF TREATED     INCINERATION OF       M3NITORING/t>PERATION
COMPONENTS           WALL              CAP      AQUEOUS PHASE LEACHATE   OILY PHASE LEACHATE   MAINTENANCE

            C3a     meadow mat existing                 POTW                     Yes               Yes
                               Kin-Buc I
                                design
            C3b     meadow mat existing
                               Kin-Buc I            Surface Water                Yes               Yes
                                design
            C3c     meadow mat        RCRA fc           POTW                     Yes               Yes
                                     State req.
            C3d     meadow mat        RCRA &        Surface Water                Yes               Yes
                                     State req.
            C4a     bedrock         existing            POTW                     Yes               Yes
                                    Kin-Buc I
                                     design
            C4b       bedrock       existing        Surface Water                Yes               Yes
               •" „'•               Kin-Buc I
        I
                                     design
            C4c     bedrock           RCRA &            POTW                     Yes               Yes
                                     State req.
             C4d    bedrock           RCRA &        Surface Water                Yes               Yes
                                     State req.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               -13-
2) There are two options for construction of a cap over
   Kin-Buc II, portions of the low-lying area between- "-
   Kin-Buc I and the Edison Landfill and Pool C. One option
   is to extend the existing Kin-Buc I cap design to the
   aforementioned areas while the other option is to €ap
   those areas in accordance with Resource Conservation and
   Recovery Act (RCRA) Subtitle C and State cap requirements.
3) There are two options for the disposal of treated aqueous
   phrase leachate. One option is complete on-site treatment
   and direct surface water discharge while the other option
   is off-site treatment at the MCUA POTW.
Figure 4 is a matrix which presents the remedial alternatives,
including each of the four subalternatives developed for the
C3 and C4 alternatives. Each of the four subalternatives for
C3 and C4 combines the capping and disposal of treated aqueous
phase leachate options discussed.
ALTERNATIVE A   —   NO FURTHER ACTION WITH MONITORING

This alternative consists of the following:
   •   continued performance of existing site mitigative
       measures and monitoring activities including:
       - inspection and maintenance of Kin-Buc I cap
         s
       - inspection and maintenance of Kin-Buc II cover materials
       - collection of aqueous phase leachate in Pool C and
         vicinity for off-site treatment
       - collection of oily-phase leachate in Pool C and
         vicinity for off-site incineration
       - a groundwater monitoring program which includes
         semi-annual water level measurements for eighteen
         wells and groundwater sampling and analysis for
         ten wells for the following parameters: volatile
         organics, pesticides, PCBs, Total Organic Carbon,
         Chemical Oxygen Demand, chloride, arsenic, barium,
         cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, mercury,, nickel,
         selenium, silver, and zinc with the ability to
         increase the number of wells if necessary
       - an air monitoring program which includes monthly
         monitoring at twenty locations on-site using an
         organic vapor analyzer                         :. -

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  -14-
ALTERNATIVE C3
Four subalternatives have undergone~detailed evaluation and
costing in the FS.                                 .-- -^
Alternatives C3a - C3b                                 "*""
Components common to these two alternatives are as follows:
0
    circumferential slurry wall installation to bedrock in the
    northern portion of the site and to the meadow marsh mat in the
    southern portion of the site;
0
    collection of oily phase leachate and off-site incineration;
4
    maintenance, and upgrading if necessary, of the Kin-Buc I cap
    and extension of the existing Kin-Buc I cap design to Kin-Buc II,
    portions of the low-lying area between Kin-Buc I and the Edison '
    Landfill and Pool C;
0
    periodic monitoring;
0
    operation and maintenance
The final component of the two alternatives addresses collection
and treatment of aqueous phase leachate. The disposal of treat-
ed aqueous phase leachate is what differentiates C3a and C3b.
Alternative C3a provides for on-site aqueous phase leachate
pretreatment with discharge to the MCUA POTW. Alternative C3b
provides for on-site aqueous phase leachate treatment with direct
surface water discharge.
Alternatives C3c & C3d
Components common to these two alternatives are as follows:
0
    circumferential slurry wall installation to bedrock in the
    northern portion of the site and to the meadow marsh mat
    in the southern portion of the site;
0
    collection of oily phase leachate and off-site incineration;
0
    maintenance, and upgrading if necessary, of the Kin-Buc I cap
    and installation of cap in accordance with RCRA Subtitle C
    and State requirements on Kin-Buc II, portions of the low-lying
    area between Kin-Buc I and the Edison Landfill and Pool C;
0
     periodic monitoring and
0
     operation and maintenance.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 -15-
The final component of the two alternatives addresses collection
and treatment of aqueous phase leachate. The disposal .of treat-
ed aqueous phase leachate is what differentiates C3c and C3d.
Alternative C3c provides for on-site aqueous phase leachate
pre-trement with discharge to the MCUA POTW. Alternative C3d
provides for on-site aqueous phase leachate treatment with
direct surface water discharge.

ALTERNATIVE C4

As with Alternative C3, four subalternatives have been developed
for detailed evaluation and costing in the FS.
Alternatives C4a - C4b
The common components of these two alternatives are as follows:
0
    circumferential slurry wall to bedrock on all sides of the site;
0
    collection of oily phase leachate for off-site incineration;
0
    maintenance, and upgrading if necessary, of the Kin-Buc I
    cap and extension of the existing Kin-Buc I cap design to
    Kin-Buc II, portions of the low-lying area between Kin-Buc
    I and the Edison Landfill and Pool C;
0
    periodic monitoring and
0
    operation and maintenance.
The final component of the two alternatives addresses collection
and treatment of aqueous phase leachate and contaminated ground-
water. The disposal of treated aqueous phase leachate and
contaminated groundwater is what differentiates C4a and C4b.
Alternative C4a provide for on-site aqueous phase leachate'and
contaminated groundwater pretreatraent with discharge to the
MCUA POTW. Alternative C4b provides for on-site aqueous phase
leachate and contaminated groundwater treatment with direct
surface water discharge.
Alternatives C4c & C4d
The common components of these two alternatives are as follows:

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  -16-
0
    circumferential slurry wall to bedrock on all sides of the site;
0
    collection of the oily phase leachate for off-siteTncineration;
0
    maintenance, and upgrading if necessary, of the Kin-Buc I cap
    and installation of a cap in accordance with RCRA Subtitle C
    and State requirements on Kin-Buc II, portions of the low-lying
    area between Kin-Buc I and the Edison Landfill and Pool C;
• periodic monitoring and
0
    operation and maintenance.
The final component of the two alternatives addresses collection
and treatment of aqueous phase leachate and contaminated ground-
water. The disposal of treated aqueous phase leachate and
contaminated groundwater is what differentiates C4c and C4d.
Alternative C4c provides for on-site aqueous phase leachate pre-
treatment with discharge to the MCUA POTW. Alternative C4d
provides for on-site aqueous phase leachate and contaminated
groundwater treatment with direct surface water discharge.

ALTERNATIVE D — COMPLETE WASTE EXCAVATION FOR OFF-SITE
                   INCINERATION

This alternative would consist of the following:
    •   excavation and off-site incineration of the source
        of contamination represented by Kin-Buc I, Kin-Buc II,
        the Pool C environs, and the contaminated portion of
        the low-lying area between Kin-Buc I and the Edison
        Landfill which totals approximately 4.6 million cubic
        yards of hazardous waste
    •   backfilling, grading, revegetation and drainage controls
    0
        verification sampling

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               -17-
SUMMARY OF COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES

EPA's selection of a remedial alternative must be in accordance
with the requirements of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA), 42 U.S.C. Sees.
9601 et seq., as amended by the Superfund Amendments and Reauthor-
ization Act (SARA) (enacted October 17, 1986), and the requirements
of its governing regulations, the National Oil and Hazardous Sub-
stances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 C.F.R. Part 300.
In this section, the relative performance of the alternatives are
summarized by highlighting the key differences between the alter-
natives in terms of the nine remedial criteria.
The nine remedial criteria summarize CERCLA §121(b)(l) (A-G) and
are as follows:
     1. overall protection of human health and the environment,
     2. compliance with applicable or relevant and appropriate
        requi reme nts (ARARs),
     3. long-term effectiveness and permanence,
     4. reduction of toxicity, mobility or volume,
     5. short-term effectiveness,
     6. implementability,
     7. cost,
     8. state acceptance and
     9. commmunity acceptance,
1.   OVERALL PROTECTION OF HUMAN HEALTH AND THE ENVIRONMENT
This criterion addresses whether or not a remedy provides adequate
protection and describes how risks posed through each pathway are
eliminated, reduced, or controlled through treatment, engineering
controls or institutional controls.
Alternatives C4a-d & C3a-d - Containment, Capping, Collection, Treat-
ment and Discharge
                                                      -.*

Containment
Circumferential slurry wall installation to bedrock on all sides
(Alts. C4a-d) eliminates the potential for continued uncontrolled

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -18-
releases of contaminants to both the bedrock aquifer and the sur-
rounding environment/ including adjacent wetlands and surface
waters. Therefore, risks to public health and the environment in
current and future use exposure scenarios would be mitigated/
resulting in protection of public health and the environment.
Circumferential slurry wall installation to the meadow marsh mat
(Alts.' C3a-d) would not adequately control releases of contaminants
to th_e environment including adjacent wetlands and surface waters*
The vertical migration of contaminants from the refuse layer through
the meadow marsh mat into the sand and gravel and potentially the
bedrock aquifer -us- well as lateral migration of contaminants to
adjacent wetlands and surface waters would continue. Risks to the
environment under current use exposure scenarios would not be
completely mitigated. Risks to public health under future use
scenarios involving ingestion of contaminated groundwater (if used
for drinking purposes) would not be mitigated. Therefore, overall
protection of public health and the environment is not achieved.
Capping
A cap utilizing the existing Kin-Buo I design for Kin-Buo II,
portions of the low-lying area between Kin-Buo I and the Edison
Landfill and Pool C appears to be protective of public health and
environment, pending verification of the integrity of the Kin-Buo I
cap (Alts. C3a, C3b, C4a, C4b).
Cap design in accordance with RCRA Subtitle C and State require-
ments (Alts. C3c, C3d, C4o, C4d) on Kin-Buo II, portions of the
low-lying area between Kin-Buc-I and the Edison Landfill and Pool C
may afford a greater level of protection since such a cap design
includes a thicker layer of clay and topsoil than the existing
Kin-Buc I cap design.
Collection/Treatment/Disoharge
Collection, treatment and discharge (whether it is direct surface
water discharge or discharge to the MCUA POTW) processes are the
same for the the C4a-d and C3a-d alternatives. The C4a-d and
C3a-d alternatives collect oily phase leaohate and incinerate
it off-site. However, the C4 alternatives collect, treat and
discharge aqueous phase leachate as well as contaminated
groundwater from the sand and gravel aquifer. The C3 alternatives
collect, treat and discharge only aqueous phase leachate.
Therefore, the C4 alternatives are considered more protective
of public health and the environment because aqueous phase
leaohate and contaminated groundwater will be treated.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -19-
Alternatiye D — Complete Excavation with Off-site Incineration
                                                    '•yjTfSr .
Implementation of the complete excavation with off-site
incineration alternative would mitigate the long-termBrisks to
public health and the environment posed by the components of
Operable Unit I. The source of contamination at the site
would-be removed. However, the short-term risks and impacts
associated with this alternative are so great that selection
of this alternative would be less protective of public health
and the environment than other alternatives evaluated. The
same level of long-term pr-*.ection of public health and the
environment can be achieved without the substantial short-term
risks and implementability problems through the other remedial
alternatives evaluated.
Alternative A — No Further Action with Monitoring
This alternative would not result in reducing the magnitude
of public health and environmental risk associated with the
components of Operable Unit I. Specifically, environmental
releases that would continue as a result of implementation of
this alternative may subject workers who come in contact with
the oily phase leachate to a potential upperbound excess life-
time cancer risk that exceeds 10~6, based on the concentration
of PCBs in the leachate. Models estimating average and maximum
concentrations of air contaminants off-site indicate a potential
risk due to exposure of volatile organics and PCBs. However,
on-site concentrations of contaminants measured in air since
the cap was installed over Kin-Buc I in 1980 neither exceed
occupational standards nor pose a potential significant risk
to on-site workers (who wear proper personal protection as
part of a health and safety plan) or persons off-site. The
continued release of contaminants that would occur despite
implementation of this alternative poses a potential risk
with respect to ingestion of groundwater under a future use
scenario. At present, both the sand and gravel aquifer (shown
to be contaminated) and the bedrock aquifer (a component of
the Supplemental Remedial Investigation for Operable Unit II
which could be potentially contaminated due to its connection
to the sand and gravel aquifer) are not utilized immediately
downgradient of the site as a drinking water source. However,
if the bedrock aquifer is used in the future, there is an
estimated potential upperbound excess lifetime cancer risk
that exceeds ID'S due to lifetime ingestion of contaminated
drinking water from the bedrock aquifer.           T #•
                                                        r»
Aquatic populations in the adjacent surface waters will be at
risk due to chronic exposure to cadmium in the surface water.
Terrestrial populations, especially birds may be at limited
risk due to direct contact with leachate.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    The long-term public health and environmental impacts of imple-
    mentation of this alternative are significant if no further action
J   is taken and source control is not achieved.           ~
»                                                        - "?~r
t
|    2. COMPLIANCE WITH ARARs.
t
I   This criterion addresses whether or not a remedy will meet all
    of the applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs)
    of other environmental statutes.
    During development of the FS, ARARs and Criteria, Guidances and
    Advisories to be considered (TBCs) were established for Operable
    Unit I site remediation. Appendix 3 represents Federal and
    State ARARs and TBCs as well as their potential applicability
    to those alternatives that have undergone a detailed evaluation
    in the FS.
    Alternatives C4a-d & C3a-d - Containment, Capping, Collection,
                                 Treatment and Discharge*
    Containment'
    Circumferential slurry wall installation to bedrock on all sides
    (Alts. C4a-d) in conjunction with collection and treatment are
    expected to meet ARARs for releases to groundwater and surface
    water.
    Circumferential slurry wall installation to the meadow marsh mat
    (Alts. C3a-d) would not provide for attainment of all ARARs be-
    cause releases of contaminants from the refuse layer through
    the meadow marsh mat to the underlying sand and gravel aquifer,
    potentially to the bedrock aquifer and to adjacent surface
    waters would continue. Contaminated groundwater in the sand
    and gravel aquifer would not be remediated by Alternatives
    C3a-d. Therefore, ARARs for releases to groundwater and
    surface water are not expected to be met.
    Capping
    A cap utilizing the existing Kin-Buc I design for Kin-Buc II,
    portions of the low-lying area between Kin-Buc I and the Edison
    Landfill and Pool C (Alts. C3a, C3b, C4a, C4b) would not meet
    State ARARs for cap design.
    Cap design in accordance with RCRA Subtitle C and Stat«'rreguire-
    ments State (Alts. C3c, C3d, C4c, C4d) for Kin-Buc II, portions of
    the low-lying area between Kin-Buc I and the Edison Landfill and
    Pool C would meet ARARs.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 -21-
    Collection/Treatment/Discharge
    The collection, treatment and discharge (whether it is direct
    surface water discharge or discharge to the NCUA POTW) processes
    are the same for the C4a-d and C3a-d alternatives. Both the C4a-d
    and C3a-d alternatives collect oily phase leachate and incinerate
    it off-site. However/ the C4 alternatives collect/ treat and
    discharge aqueous phase leachate as well as contaminated groundwater
    from the sand and gravel, aquifer. Therefore/ the collection of
,   aqueous phase leachate and contaminated groundwater in conjunction
!   with treatment and discharge would result in meeting ARARs for
!    releases to groundwater and surface water. In comparison/ the C3
[    alternatives collect, treat and discharge only aqueous phase leachate
    and contaminated groundwater would not be collected for these
    alternatives. ARARs would not be met because releases to groundwater
    and surface water would continue.
    Alternative D — Complete Excavation with Off-site Incineration
    Implementation of this alternative would result in total source
    removal of the components of Operable Unit I. Compliance
    with all Federal and State ARARs as well as TBCs is expected.
    Alternative A — No Further Action with Monitoring
    Implementation of this alternative would not result: in meeting
    the Federal and State ARARs or TBCs. Federal and/or State ARARs
    as well as TBCs would not be met under RCRA (e.g. capping/
    closure requirements). The continued release of contaminants
    to groundwater and surface waters would not comply with Federal
    and State groundwater or surface water ARARs.

    3. LONG-TERM EFFECTIVENESS AND PERMANENCE.

    This criterion refers to the ability of a remedy to maintain reliable
    protection of human health and the environment over time/ once
    clean-up goals have been met.
    Alternatives C4a-d & C3a-d - Containment, Capping/ Collection,
                                 Treatment and Discharge
    Containment
    Utilization of a circumferential slurry wall in-stalled to bedrock
    on all sides (Alts. C4a-d)/ in conjunction with the other com-
    ponents of the remedy is the most effective strategy to prevent
    the migration of contaminants both laterally and vertically to
    groundwater, surface waters, and adjacent wetlands.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                     -22-
    Installation of a circumferential slurry wall to the meadow
    marsh mat (Alts. C3a-d) would rely on the meadow marsh mat as
    an effective barrier to migration of contaminants from the
    refuse layer to the sand and gravel aquifer. Available infor-
    mation including sampling and analysis data for the sand and
    gravel aquifer and physical analysis of the meadow marsh mat
    indicate that the meadow marsh mat is neither continuous nor
    effective in precluding downward migration from the refuse layer
    to the sand and gravel aquifer. Releases to the sand and
1   gravel aquifer and potentially the bedrock aquifer as well as
I   to adjacent surface waters would continue. Therefore, this
I   containment strategy would not provide long-term effectiveness.
    Capping
    A cap utilizing the existing Kin-Buc I design for Kin-Buc II,
    portions to the low-lying area between Kin-Buc I and the Edison
    Landfill and Pool C is expected to provide long-term effective-
    ness, pending verification of the integrity of the Kin-Buc I
    cap (Alts. C3a, C3b, C4a, C4b).
    Installation of a cap designed in accordance with RCRA Subtitle C
    and State requirements on Kin-Buc II, portions of the low-lying
    area between Kin-Buc I and the Edison Landfill and Pool C (Alts.
    C3c, C3d, C4c, C4d) is expected to provide greater long-term
    effectiveness and permanence in terms of preventing precipitation
    infiltration because the cap design includes a thicker layer of
    clay and topsoil than the existing Kin-Buc I cap design.
    Collection/Treatment/Discharge
    The collection, treatment and discharge (whether'it is direct
    surface water discharge or discharge to the MCUA POTW) processes
    are the same for the C4a-d and C4a-d alternatives. Both the
    C4a-d and C3a-d alternatives collect oily phase leachate and
    incinerate it off-site. However, the C4a alternatives collect,
    treat and discharge aqueous phase leachate as well as contaminated
    groundwater from the sand and gravel aquifer. The C3 alternatives
    collect, treat and disharge only aqueous phase leachate. Therefore,
    the C4 alternatives are considered to provide greater long-term
    effectiveness because both aqueous phase leachate and contaminated
    groundwater will be treated.



                                                         -.£

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -23-
Alternative D — Complete Excavation with Off-site Incineration
Incineration of the excavated wastes would result in -a permanent
reduction in the toxicity, mobility and volume of contaminants
from the components of Operable Unit I. There would t>e total source
removal and site restoration of the components of Operable Unit I
upon successful completion of this remedy. The potential for ex-
posure of human and environmental receptors to contaminants from
Operable Unit I components would be mitigated.
Alternative A — No Further Action with Monitoring
The continued performance of existing site mitigative measures
and monitoring activities would not be sufficiently effective
for the long-term protection of public health and the environ-
ment. There would be inadequate source control and continued
environmental releases. The magnitude of the public health and
environmental risks would remain unchanged.
                    • •                                          »

4. REDUCTION OF TOXICITY, MOBILITY OR VOLUME
Alternatives C4a-d & C3a-d - Containment, Capping, Collection,
                             Treatment and Discharge
Installation of a circumferential slurry wall to bedrock (Alts.
C4a-d) will provide for the maximum reduction in the vertical and
lateral, mobility of aqueous phase leachate as well as contaminated
groundwater.
Installation of a circumferential slurry wall to the meadow marsh
mat (Alts. C3a-d) will not reduce the mobility of contaminants
in the sand and gravel aquifer since containment of contaminants
in the sand and gravel aquifer is not addressed.
Capping
The capping of Kin-Buc II, portions of the low-lying area between
Kin-Buc I and the Edison Landfill and Pool C utilizing the existing
Kin-Buc I design (Alts. C3a, C3b, C4a, C4b) will reduce the mobility
of contaminants by preventing precipitation infiltration.
The capping of Kin-Buc II, portions the low-lying area between
Kin-Buc I and the Edison Landfill and Pool C utilizing a cap design
in accordance with RCRA Subtitle C and State requirements (Alts.
C3c, C3d, C4c, C4d) is expected to provide a greater -reduction in
mobility of contaminants due to precipitation infiltration because
the cap design includes a thicker layer of clay and topsoil than
the existing Kin-Buc I cap design.                   v-

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    Collection/Treatment/Discharge
    The C4a-d alternatives include collection and off-site incinera-
    tion of the oily phase leachate, which provides maximum -reduction
    of toxicity, mobility and volume of contaminants. For the C4a-d
    alternatives, the collection, treatment and discharge (whether
    it's direct surface water discharge or discharge to the MCUA POTW)
    of aqueous phase leachate as well as contaminated groundwater
    from the sand and gravel aquifer provides the most significant
    reduction of the toxicty, mobility and volume of aqueous phase
    leachate and contaminated groundwater.
    The C3a-d alternatives include collection and off-site incinera-
    tion of oily phase leachate which provides maximum reduction of
    toxicity, mobility and volume of contaminants. However, because
    the C3a-d alternatives collect and treat only aqueous phase leach-
    ate and not contaminated groundwater; the reduction of toxicity,
    mobility and volume of contaminants in groundwater is not addressed
    Alternative D — Complete Excavation with Off-site Incineration
    Complete excavation with off-site incineration would permanently
    reduce the toxicity, mobility and volume of contaminants.
    Preliminary estimates of the waste quantity to be excavated
    at Kin-Buc for off-site incineration totals approximately
    4.6 million cubic yards. Off-site incineration would result
    in no residual contamination remaining from the components of
    Operable Unit I.
    Alternative A — No Further Action with Monitoring
    The existing cap over Kin-Buc I and the cover materials over
    Kin-Buc II provide reduced precipitation infiltration in these
    areas and thus, a reduction in the mobility of contaminants
    in the refuse layer. However, other areas of the site which
    are considered components of Operable Unit I such as the
    low-lying area between Kin-Buc I and the Edison Landfill and
    Pool C environs have not been capped. There would be no re-
    duction of vertical mobility due to precipitation infiltration
    in these areas. In fact, there may be increased mobility of
*   some contaminants from the surface to the subsurface as a result
!
    of precipitation infiltration. Existing aqueous and oily phase
    leachate collection controls in Pool C and vicinity reduce the
    lateral mobility of contaminants into Edmonds Creek, an adjacent
    surface water.                                        TJ.
    Collection and off-site treatment of aqueous phase leachate and
    collection and off-site incineration of oily phase leachate
    provides for a reduction in the toxicity and volume of collected

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                     -25-
O   leachate. However, the current site collection controls are
    passive systems and there is a significant volume of-contamina-
    ted leachate that could be remediated more actively. In addition/
    there would be no active reduction in the toxiclty, mobility and
    volume of contaminated groundwater in the sand and gravel aquifer.

    5. SHORT-TERM EFFECTIVENESS
    This-criterion addresses the period of time needed to achieve pro-
    tection and any adverse impacts on human health and the environment
    that may be posed during the construction and implementation period,
    until clean-up goals are achieved.
    Alternatives C4a-d & C3a-d - Containment/ Capping,
                                               ipj     Collection/
                                               )H
                                 Treatment and Discharge
    Containment
    Potential short-term risks to worker health and safety and the
    environment associated with the C4 and C3 alternatives pertain
    to excavation during installation of the slurry wall. These
    risks can be effectively mitigated through the use of appropriate
    controls (e.g. drainage controls/ dust suppressants) and by
    strict adherence to proper health and safety protocols during
    slurry wall installation.
    Capping*
    Short-term risks with capping the site utilizing either the exist-
    ing Kin-Buc I cap design or a design in accordance with RCRA
    Subtitle C and State requirements involve construction of the cap
    on Kin-Buc II/ portions of the low-lying area between Kin-Buc I
    and the Edison Landfill and Pool C exist to worker health and
    safety and the environment. These risks can be effectively
    mitigated through the use of appropriate controls (e.g. dust
    suppressants) and by strict adherence to proper health and safety
    protocols during cap installation.
    Collection/Treatment/Discharge
    Short-term risks to worker health and safety and the environment
    are associated with installation of the collection system due to
    excavation activities for both the C4 and C3 alternatives. These
    risks can be mitigated through the use of appropriate controls
    (drainage controls/ dust suppressents) and adherence to proper
    health and safety protocols during construction activities.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                -26-
Alternative D —Complete Excavation with Off-site Incineration
There are severe short-term impacts associated with this alterna-
tive. A 4.6 million cubic yard excavation of a wide variety of
hazardous waste will require extensive safety planning. Despite
best safety planning efforts, on-site workers utilizing Level B
(self-contained breathing apparatus) or Level A (full encapsulation
and protection from any body contact) would still be at significant
risk in working with such a large volume of unknown hazardous
material that potentially contains explosive, reactive, corrosive,
flammable or highly toxic material. During the waste excavation,
the potential for toxic air emissions, a fire or explosion would
be high. This would pose a potentially significant risk to resi-
dents in close proximity to the site as well as on-site workers.
Additionally, releases caused by accidental spills or escape of
contaminated run-off to the surrounding environment, including
adjacent surface waters could occur during excavation despite control
measures that would be implemented to prevent such releases.
Other constraints concern transport of excavated waste off-site. "
Based upon the total volume of wastes to be excavated (over an
estimated five-year excavation period), and assuming a 1600 pound
per cubic yard in-place waste density, and a 20 ton vehicle pay
load; then approximately 37,000 truck'trips to an incinerator(s)
would be required on a yearly basis. This volume of truck traffic
is anticipated to be disruptive to nearby residents and poses a
potential risk due to highway accidents.
Additionally, the length of time it may take to implement and
complete this alternative is a constraint. A considerable amount
of time will be required before actual waste excavation can
commence (estimated to be three years) due to the following
factors: 1) the time to design and construct all the necessary
on-site facilities (storage, staging, decontamination facilities,
haul roads etc.), 2) the time to gain all necessary regulatory
approvals and 3) the time it may take to obtain adjacent properties
to provide space for the necessary on-site facilities. Furthermore,
it is projected that it will take five years from the time actual
excavation commences until excavation is completed. This projection
is based upon an estimate of the minimum amount of time which may
be required using conventional excavation equipment to excavate
the estimated 4.6 million cubic yards of waste and perform all
necessary functions (segregaton, testing, packaging, etc.) for
off-site incineration. This estimate neither considers any
emergencies, unplanned events which could temporarily halt excava-
tion nor the time it will take to actually incinerate all the
waste.                                               ~f
Based upon the constraints discussed above, the short-t.erra risks
to public health and the environment are substantial.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  -27-
Alternative A — NO Further Action with Monitoring      ^.,
There would be minimal short-term effectiveness associated with
this alternative. Although existing site mitigative measures
include access restriction via a perimeter fence, cap/cover
maintenance and, collection, treatment and disposal of aqueous
and oily phase leachate; total source control is not achieved
by the No Further Action with Monitoring alternative. Public
health and environmental risks associated with components of
Operable Unit I would not be mitigated by the implementation
of this alternative.

6. IMPLEMENTABILITY

This criterion addresses the technical and administrative feasibi-
lity of a remedy, including the availability of materials and
services needed to implement a particular option.
                                                                      *

Alternatives C4a-d & C3a-d - Containment, Capping, Collection,
                             Treatment and Discharge
Containment
Constraints associated with installing a slurry wall for either
alternatives C4a-d and C3a-d include the following:
    o pre-construction compatability testing and subsurface investiga-
      tions for the slurry wall;
    o construction of a work platform for slurry wall installation
      which will require extensive excavation of hazardous waste;
    o on-site workers and residents health and safety considerations
      in light of the excavation work to be performed
Capping ,
Constraints associated with construction of a cap utilizing RCRA
Subtitle C and State requirements (Alts. C3c, C3d, C4c, C4d) would
involve obtaining a larger volume of clay and topsoil to complete
 cap construction versus utilizing existing Kin-Buc I cap design
for Kin-Buc II, portions of the low-lying area between Kin-Buc I and
the Edison Landfill and Pool C.
Collection/Treatment/Discharge                         g
Constraints associated with implementing the C4a-d and C3a-d
alternatives include the following:                  *
0
     pre-design treatability studies for the aqueous phase leachate
     treatment system,

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                     -28-    —
        construction of a work platform, and subsurface collection
        system which will require extensive excavation of hazardous
        waste,                                        —:
0
   on-site workers, POTW workers and residents health and safety
 . consideration in light of the excavation work to be performed.
On-site treatment of aqueous phase leachate (C3 alternatives)
and contaminated groundwater (C4 alternatives) with direct sur-
face water discharge requires a more complex on-site treatment
system than the treatment system anticipated for pretreatment
and discharge to the MCUA POTW. Additional constraints specific
to implementing an on-site treatment system with direct surface
water discharge include:
0
        generation of additional waste streams (e.g. sludges) that
        require greater handling, operation and maintenance, space
        requirements and proper treatment and/or disposal and
0
        the potential need to acquire adjacent properties for construc-
        tion of the on-site treatment system necessary for surface
        water discharge.
The final design of a system for on-site treatment of aqueous phase
leachate and contaminated groundwater (C4 alternative) with discharge
to a POTW or surface waters is dependent or treatability studies
necessary for various unit processes as well as specific discharge;
permit requirements by MCUA (to go to the POTW) or the State of
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (to go to surface
waters). Permit levels for discharge to surface water or the POTW
will incorporate site-specific ARARs.
The time to implement either alternative is estimated to take
one to one and one-half years but assumes initation of construc-
tion activities at the beginning of the construction season and
allows for scheduling contingencies that may extend the con-
struction time frame. Long-term management and monitoring is
required for both alternatives.
Alternative D — Complete Excavation with Off-site Incineration
Potential constraints in implementing this alternative are
as follows:
    8
         the complexity of operations and technologies required to
         protect considering the large volume and' diversity of wastes;
    0
         the need to acquire adjacent properties, as sufficient
         space does not exist on-site to accomodate construction
         of the necessary facilities;

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

o                                      -29-
            the time to design and construct all the necessary
            on-site facilities (storage, staging, haul roadB«-.ratc«
      •     the time to gain all necessary regulatory approvals and
            implement the remedy;                          :~"tzr'"
      •     the availability of sufficient and suitable incineration
            facilities and
      • cost.
    The techniques to be employed have been extensively and success-
    fully used at other hazardous waste sites. The combination of
    these technologies to construct a complex facility to excavate
    and transport wastes to an incinerator is not widely employed due
    to the- risks to on-site workers and nearby residents, short-term
    environmental impacts and costs.
    Preliminary estimates of the waste quantity to be excavated at
    Kin-Buc for off-site incineration includes:
    Wastes contaminated with PCB                   400,000 cubic yds.
    concentratons > 50 ppm
    Wastes contaminated with PCB                  4,205.000 cubic yds.
    concentrations < 50 ppm
    100,000 drums of unidentified                    27,000 cubic yds.
    liquids

    TOTAL                                         4,632,000 cubic yds.

    However, due to existing disposal demands placed upon RCRA
    incinerators, it would be difficult for a single incinerator
    facility to dedicate itself to handling such a large volume
    of hazardous waste.
    Furthermore, even if a single incinerator facility (regardless
    of whether or not it is PCB-approved or non-PCB approved) was
    capable of dedicating itself to the destruction of Kin-Buc
    wastes, there does not appear to be a RCRA incinerator in the
    country that is large enough to handle the disposal of the wastes
    from Kin-Buc within a reasonable time period. Considering the
    estimated large volume of wastes present at the Kin-Buc *ite
    requiring incineration under this alternative, even if the
    largest incinerator facility were capable of dedicating itself
    to Kin-Buc, it is estimated that it may take at least 35 years
    to complete incineration.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                -30-
Alternative A — No Further Action" with Monitor ing   "^-^
The relative ease of implementing this alternative is -evidenced
by its successful performance to date. There is operational
reliability of the existing monitoring wells. The aqueous and
oily phase leachate collection relies on proven technologies.
Readily available personnel and equipment exists on-site tor the
continued performance of this alternative.

7. COST
This criterion includes estimated capital, operation and mainte-
nance costs and net present worth costs. These costs are summarized
in Table 2 for Alternatives A, C3 (including subalternatives), C4
(including subalternatives) and D. Additional cost details are
provided below:

Alternatives C4a-d & C3a-d - Containment, Capping, Collection,
                             Treatment and Discharge

Annual operation and maintenance costs for Alternatives C4a and C4c
vary over the 30-year operational period from $762,000 in Year 1 to
$398,000 .in Years 12-30.
Annual operation and maintenance costs for Alternatives C4b and C4d
vary over the 30-year operational period from $848,000 in Year 1 to
$405,000 in Years 12-30.
Annual operation and maintenance costs tor Alternatives C3a and C3c
vary over the 30-year operational period from $753,000 in Years 1 to
Years 12-30.
Annual operation and maintenance costs tor Alternatives C3b and C3d
vary over the 30-year operational period from $397,000 in Year 1 to
Years 12-30.
Alternative D —   Complete Excavation with Off-site Incineration
For the purpose of calculating present worth, the capital cost
for construction of on-site structures was equally distributed
over the first three years of the implementation period, and the
remaining costs were equally distributed over the last five years
of the eight-year implementation period.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                             Tabled-.:—
                    COST SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES
                         KIN-BUC FEASIBILITY STUDY
 1                                                                                                - .si;. .


                                                                                   Annual*     Present
                                                                       Capital      O&M         Worth
                            Alternative"!                             ($1.000)     (S 1.000)   ($1,000)
     No further action with monitoring (BlJero^i've A)                                432          4.075
     Circumferential wall to meadow mat on the south and rock
     on the north (flj*«rnqtfv« C3 )
                                               Sub-alternative a         7,H«       varies        «,ol7
                                               Sub-alternative b       <«>8,l3«i    varies     W13.0&S
                                                                       W 7,813      varies     <x> 12,511
                                               Sub-alternative c          9,V\0     varies        u.ttt
                                               Sub-alternative d      W10.WJ        varies     («> 15541
                                                                      W10.3Z1       varies     OrH 5.1V)
     Circumferential wall to rock on all sides (ftl4tr«\*five CM )
                                               Sub-alternative a         8,303      varies         Id.UZ
                                               Sub-alternative b       <">%«fc      varies     <•> IM.I-JO
                                                                       <y> 8.711    varies     (y>i3.tt>€
                                               Sub-alternative c         10/JC7     varies        15.«O1

 |t                                            Sub-alternative d     0011,481       varies     («)!6,fcJf
                                                                     <v>ll,*6       varies     (y) t4,2tc
 | Waste excavation for off-site incineration (Qlfcrn<five Q )       7,023,455                 4,001.938

 Notes:      1. Sub-Alternative Abbreviations
                a. On-site aqueous pre-treatment with discharge to MCUA; extension of existing
                   Kin-Buc I cap design
                b. On-site aqueous treatment with direct surface water discharge; extension of
                   existing Kin-Buc I cap design
                c. On-site aqueous pre-treatment with discharge to MCUA; RCRA cap.
                d. On-site aqueous treatment with direct surface water discharge; RCRA cap.

            2. Annual 0 4 M costs of slurry wall alternatives vary over the 30-year operational
               period. See Section 5.3.5 of the report for annual O&M costs.

            3. x « Anaerobic/Aerobic Treatment
               y s Powdered Activated Carbon Treatment (PACT)




4»
                                                                                                              10 588 06316

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   -31-
Alternative A — No Further Action with Monitoring
The potential for future remedial action would be determined
based on groundwater monitoring, air monitoring/ continued perfor-
mance of existing site mitigative measures and land use changes
in the vicinity of the site. Changes in any of the aforementioned
factors that increase the magnitude of risk to public health or
the environment would require a re-assessment of the need for
further remedial action. Based on the FS, present worth costs of
any further remedial action could range from approximately tweleve
million to four billion dollars depending on the remedial alterna-
tive implemented.

8. STATE ACCEPTANCE
This criterion is utilized to support the Agency's comments.
Alternatives C4a-d & C3a-d - Containment, Capping, Collection
                                 Treatment and Discharge

Containment
NJDEP concurs with the need to install a circumferential wall to
bedrock (Alts. C4a-d) versus to the meadow marsh mat (Alts. C3a-d)
because a slurry wall to bedrock is more protective, provides
greater reduction in mobility of contaminants both laterally and
vertically and prevents uncontrolled releases to groundwater and
surface* water.
Capping
NJDEP concurs with the need to install a cap in accordance with
RCRA Subtitle C and State requirements on Kin-Buc II, portions of
the low-lying ara between Kin-Buc I and the Edison Landfill and
Pool C.
Collection/Treatment/Discharge
NJDEP concurs with the need for collection and off-site incinera-
tion of oily phase leachate as well as collection, treatment and
discharge (whether it is direct surface water discharge or dis-
charge to the MCUA POTW) of aqeuous phase leachate and contaminated
groundwater.
Alternative D — Complete Excavation with Off-site Incineration
                                                     '•f
State acceptance of this alternative is not anticipated due to
the significant public health and environmental risks associated
with excavation of such a large volume of hazardous waate.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                     -32-
      Alternative A — No Further Action with Monitoring
'.    This alternative would not adequately reduce the public health
;     and environmental risks posed by the components of Operable Unit
;     I. In addition, neither Federal or State ARARs nor TBCs would be
:     met. Therefore, there would not be State acceptance of this
      alternative.

k|
      9. COMMUNITY ACCEPTANCE
      This criterion summarizes the public's general response to the
      alternatives described in the Proposed Remedial Action Plan and
      RI/FS report. Specific responses to public comments are addressed
      in the Responsiveness Summary section of the ROD. A community
      relations history is presented in Appendix 4.
      Alternatives C4a-d & C3a-d - Containment, Capping, Collection
                                   Treatment and Discharge
      Alternative C4a-d would mitigate current and future use risks to
      public health and the environment. Use of on-site treatment of
      aqueous phase leachate and contaminated groundwater with dishcarge
      to surface water versus pre-treatment and discharge to the MCUA
      PQTW is not expected to have a significant effect on community
      acceptance. The receiving body for the treated aqueous phase
      leachate and contaminated groundwater in either alternative is
      the Raritan River. Therefore, community acceptance is expected
      to be positive.
      Alternatives C3a-d meet some of the site-specific source control
      objectives via installation of the cap, containment and collection
      system. There is reduction in the toxicity, mobility and volume of
      aqueous and oily phase leachate. Community acceptance of this is
      anticipated to be positive. Significant community concern is anti-
      cipated regarding the fact that contaminated groundwater in the sand
      and gravel aquifer and potentially, the bedrock aquifer, would not
      be addressed. Since the meadow marsh mat is not considered an
      effective barrier to prevent downward migration of contaminants,
      uncontrolled releases would continue. For these reasons, the
      overall acceptance of either alternative is not anticipated to be
      positive. Use of on-site treatment and discharge to surface water
      versus discharge to MCUA POTW is not expected to have a significant
      effect on community acceptance. The ultimate receiving body for
      treated aqueous phase leachate in either option is the Raritan River.
                                                             .
      Alternative D — Complete Excavation with Off-site Incineration
      Community acceptance of this alternative is not anticipated
      to be positive due to significant community concern over the
      potential short-term risks to the environment and public health
      associated with this alternative.


t •

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   Slurry W«l
                                                                   Limit Of .
                                                                   landfill Covtr




To EdUon Landflll



                                   ill 1'
                    Potential Detention


                                                        ALTERNATIVES C-3 AND C-4
  S-EPA                                     CDM - Federal. Programs Corporation

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                        FIGURE                                           tic
                                                                                  ' «!
                                                                                  i   ! i   '(.




                    POTW




                                                                           M
*t
46

at
M                                                                          at
                                                                           it '
                                                                           • '
                                                                          -it
        ^K;%v^fe-^^V-Vv'-; AV' I•*,:
                                                                           -to
                                                                           -3e
                                                                           -4t

-M
                                                                                               u:



                                       ALTERNATIVE C-4



                                                                                                  *\
     Not To Seal*
                                                                                                  K
                                                                                                  t

     &EPA                                 CDM - Federal Programs Corporation

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

I -—


                                         -33-
       Alternative A — No Further Action with Monitoring
       Implementation of the No Further Action with Monitoring alter-
       native would neither mitigate the public health and Environmental
       risks nor provide adequate control of releases of hazardous sub-
       stances to the environment. There has been significant community
       concern about this site over time. Therefore, it is anticipated
       that there would not be community acceptance of this alternative.

       SELECTED REMEDY
       A)     Description of the Selected Remedy
           1. Scope and Function of the Remedy
       The selected remedy for the Kin-Buc Landfill - Operable Unit I is
       Alternative C4d. This alternative consists of the following com-
       ponents:
                                                                            •i
       0
           circumferential slurry wall installation to bedrock on all
           of the sides of the site;
       0
           maintenance, and upgrading if necessary, of the Kin-Buc I cap
           and installation of a cap in accordance with RCRA Subtitle C
           and State requirements on Kin-Buc II, portions of the low-lying
           area between Kin-Buc I and the Edison Landfill and Pool C;
       0
            collection of oily phase and off-site incineration;
       0
           collection and on-site treatment of aqueous phase leachate and
           contaminated groundwater with direct surface water discharge;
       0
           periodic monitoring and
       0
           operation and maintenance.
       Figures 5 and 6 illustrate the components of the selected remedy.
       Alternatively, The C4c alternative is acceptable if the MCUA
       POTW elects to accept pre-treated aqueous phase leachate and
       contaminated groundwater in accordance with their requirements.
           2. Performance Goals
                                                      •

            a. Management of Migration                          1
                                                              -*rr-


       The RI completed in April 1988, includes investigations of ground*
       water, surface water, sediments and air. The results of the RI
       indicate the potential for off-site public health and/or environ-
       mental impacts attributable to the Kin-Buc Landfill operations.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                             -34-
            Based on the results of the RI; the magnitude and the complexity
            of the site warranted remediation of the site in discrete phases
            (Operable Units). The remediation of Operable Unit l-f the subject
;^          of this ROD, constitutes source control, treatment and removal
,• **"      measures for the site.                            _ "J_
            The components of Operable Unit I are:
i           e
;               Kin-Buc I;
            0
                Kiri-Buc II;
            0
                Pool C and
            0
                Low-Lying area between Kin-Buc I and the Edison Landfill.
            Operable Unit II will address the management of migration measures
    ••••„   that will be determined to be necessary at the site.
            EPA has determined that a Supplemental Remedial Investigation
            will be required to adequately characterize the nature and extent
            of contamination from the components of Operable Unit II. Upon
            completion of the Supplement Remedial Investigation for Operable
            Unit II, an FS to develop and evaluate remedial alternatives will
            be conducted and the process will culminate in a subsequent ROD,
            which will document the selection of a remedy for management of
            migration of contaminants at the site. The process for selection
            of a remedy for Operable Unit II (Supplemental Remedial Investigation",
            FS, ROD) is expected to be completed in 1 and 1/2 to 2 years.
            Remedy selection for both Operable Units I and II is anticipated
            to result in total site remediation.
            The components of Operable Unit II are comprised of the following:
            • Mound B
            • Raritan River
            0
                Mill Brook
    t
            • Martins Creek
            0
                Edmonds Creek, including the connecting channel from Pool C
            0
                adjacent wetlands
            0
                groundwater contamination emanating from the site T~
                                                                  •*>-

            The rationale for addressing each of the aforementioned components
            as part of Operable Unit II is provided in Appendix 5. "

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               -35-

  b. Source Control
      i. contaminated media and,
     ii. type and volume of waste
                                                    — •«-
    total quantity of waste disposed of at Kin-Buc Landfill has
not been definitively determined. EPA estimates that at least 70
million gallons of liquid waste, including 3 million gallons of
oily waste, and over 1 million tons of solid waste were disposed
of between 1973 and 1976. The type of waste disposed at the site
was previously discussed in the Site History section of the ROD.
Refer to that section of the ROD for a detailed discussion.
In addition to -the Kin-Buc I and II mounds, the low-lying area
between Kin-Buc I and the Edison Landfill is also refuse filled.
Oily-phase leachate contaminated with PCBs has been detected in
monitoring wells installed in this area.
Pool C is the most significant and obvious manifestation of both
oily and aqueous phase leachate. It is adjacent to Kin-Buc I which
is its' primary source of contamination. Pool C is the source of
PCB contamination found in the sediments of Edmonds Creek.
Groundwater in the sand and gravel aquifer beneath and down-
gradient of Kin-Buc I has been shown to be contaminated. Ground-
water of the bedrock aquifer beneath the site could be potentially
contaminated. The nature and extent of bedrock aquifer contami-
nation is a component of Operable Unit II.
The sele'cted remedy provides for collection and treatment of
aqueous phase leachate, contaminated groundwater and oily phase
leachate. A preliminary estimate of the volume of oily phase
leachate to be collected and incinerated off-site is three
million gallons. Preliminary estimates of the volume of aqueous
phase leachate and contaminated groundwater in the sand and
gravel aquifer is as follows:
Aqueous Phase Leachate                 Contaminated Groundwater
    (refuse layer)                      (sand & gravel aquifer)
Short-term    Long-term                Short-term    Long-term
  (gpd)          (gpd)                   (gpd)         (gpd)
 10,000        1,500                    70,000         50,000
(yrs. 1-4)   (yrs. 5+)                 (yrs. 1-5)    (yrs. 6+)
Therefore, the preliminary estimates of the volume of Aqueous
phase leachate plus contaminated groundwater from the sand and
gravel aquifer to be handled by the. on-site treatment system is
equal to 80,000 gpd (years 1-5) and 61,500 gpd (years 5+). The
significant difference between the short-and long-term flows
indicates the need for flexibility of operation in the treatment
process ultimately utilized.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       -36-
    It should be emphasized that the flow values are preliminary
    estimates pending further treatability study work and additional
    subsurface investigations including evaluating the bedrock aquifer
i   to determine its need for remediation. The conceptual treatment
{   processes evaluated have been determined to be applicable for
;   the aqueous phase leachate and contaminated groundwater. However/
    treatability study work on the various unit processes will be
    conducted and site specific discharge ARARS will be developed
    in conjunction with NJDEP to refine the operating parameters of
    the treatment system.
    iii.   treatment/residual levels
    During development of the feasibility study, Federal and State
    ARARs as well as TBCs were evaluated for remediation of Operable
    Unit 1. Appendix 3 is a listing of Federal and State ARARs as
    well as TBCs for Operable Unit 1. A more detailed discussion of
    ARARs can be found in the subsequent portion of this document
    addressing consistency with other environmental laws.
    The selected remedy entails collection and off-site incineration
    of oily-phase leachate. The oily-phase leachate has been shown,
    through sampling and analysis, to contain concentrations up to
    5,822 ppm PCBs. Therefore, the incinerator utilized for the
    treatment of the oily-phase leachate must achieve a destruction
    and removal efficiency of 99.9999% according to RCRA Part 264,
    Subpart*0, which discusses performance standards for incinerators.
    Aqueous phase leachate and contaminated groundwater are to be
    collected, treated and discharged to surface water as part of
    the selected remedy. For purposes of the evaluation as part of
    the feasibility study, surface water quality criteria for an SE1
    water (the surface water classification given to the Raritan
    River by the NJDEP) was utilized. These surface water quality
    criteria embodied in N.J.A.C. 7:9 - 4.1 et. seq. as well as
    wastewater discharge requirements provided in N.J.A.C. 7:9 - 5.1
    et. seq. are the minimum treatment requirements for aqueous phase
    TeacKate and contaminated groundwater. Requirements of N.J.A.C.
    7s9 - 4.1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 7:9^- 5.1 et seq. are presented in
    Tables 3 and" TV Final site-specific discEarge criteria will be
    established by NJDEP based on the results of treatability studies.


                                                        "'SET

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                     I I I




                                           TABLE 3

                       NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OP ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                         7:9-4.14(c) Surface Water Quality Criteria for     * .
                                     FW2, SErf*and SC Waters
                (Expressed as maximum concentrations unless otherwise noted)


Substance                             Criteria                            Classifications
1. Bacterial quality     i. Bacterial Indicators shall not exceed, in     Shellfish Waters
   (counts/100 ml)          all shellfish waters, the standard for
                            approved shellfish waters as established
                            by the National Shellfish Sanitation
                            Program as set forth in its current
                            manual of operations.
                        ii. Fecal Coliforms:
                            (1) Pecal coliform levels shall not exceed    PW2 (except as in (3) be-
                                exceed a geometric average of 200/100     low), SE1, and SC 1500
                                ml nor should more than 10 percent of     feet to 3 miles from the
                                the total samples taken during and        shoreline.             :
                                30-day period ecceed 400/100 ml.                                             I
                       iii. Samples shall be obtained at sufficient    All Classifications
                            frequencies and at locations during
                            periods which will permit valid inter-
                            pretation of laboratory analyses. As a
                            guideline and for the purpose fo these
                            regualtions, a minimum of five samples
                            taken over a 30-day period should be
                                                                                            it i ;
                            collected, however, the number of samples,
                            frequencies and locations will be deter-
                            mined by the department or other appro-
                            priate agency in any particular case.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                  . I •('




                                            TABLE 3

                       NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OP ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION      ' .
                         7s9-4.14(c) Surface Water Quality Criteria for
                                     FW2, SB 'and SC Waters

                  (Expressed as maximum concentrations unless otherwise noted)


Substance

2. Dissolved oxygen
   (rag/1)               io 24 hour average not less than 5.0* but         FW2-NT (except as in
                            not less than 4.0 at anytime (see para-        iv below), SE1
                            graph viii below).

                      viii. Supersaturated dissolved oxygen values         FW2-TM, FW2-NT, SE1
                            shall be expressed as their corresponding
                            100 percent saturation values for purposes
                            of calculating 24 hour averages.
   Floating, colloi-        None noticeable in the water or deposited    All Classifications
   dal, color and           along the shore or on the aquatic substata
   settleable solids;       in quantities detrimental to the natural
   petroleum hydro-         biota. None which would render the waters
   carbons and other        unsuitable for the designated uses.
   oils and grease

                        ii. For "Petroleum Hydrocarbons" the goal is     All Classifications
                            none detectable utilizing the Federal EPA
                            Environmental Monitoring and Support                       • IM
                            Laboratory Method (Freon Bxtractable -
                            Silica Gel Adsorption - Infrared Measure-
                            ment); the present criteria, however, are
                            those of paragraph i. above.
4. pH (Standard          i. 6.5-8.5                                      FW2, All SB
   Units)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                            TABLE   3

                       NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OP ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION ' •
                          7:9-4(c) Surface JWater Quality Criteria Cor
                                     FW2, SE and SC Waters

                   (Expressed as maximum concentrations unless otherwise noted)


Substance                              Criteria                          Classifications
6. Radioactivity           i. Prevailing regulations adopted by EPA       All Classifications
                              pursuant to Sees. 1412, 1445 & 1450
                              of the Public Health Services Act, as
                              amended by the Safe Drinking Water
                              Act (PL 93-523).
7. Solids* Suspended    iii. None which would render the waters         All SE, SC
   (rag/1) [Non-filter-      unsuitable for the designated uses.
   able residue]
8. Solids, Total Dis-      ii. None which would render the water        All SB
   solved (Filterable          unsuitable for the designated uses.
   Residue] (rag/1)



                                                                                     ;
                                                                                     !l
                                                                                         - <.




                                                           \   •

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    TABLE 4
                             STATE OP NEW JERSEY
                    DEPARTMENT OP ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                 NJAC 7:9-5.8 Minimum Treatment Requirements
These minimum treatment requirements apply to all discharges, where ettluent
limitations based upon water quality studies acceptable to the Department
have not been developed and are required by N.J.A.C. 7i9-4.5(e)4 or 4.6(a).

Watershed             Classfications     BOD5emova * "BOD
Raritan River Basin        SE1                85                                   All
(including Raritan                                                                                !
Bay and Sandy Hook
Bay)
                                                                                             I

*   Minimum percent reduction of BODS at all times including any tour-hour period ot a day when
    the strength of the wastes to be treated might be expected to or actually exceeds average; ,
    conditions.                                                                              ''
** Average over any four-hour period of a day, including periods when the strength of!the
   wastes to be treated might be expected to or actually exceeds average conditions.         '• ' i




                                                                                                 i :i

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      -TABLES
           NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                         QUALITY STANDARDS FOR
                      LEACHATE DISCHARGED TO POTW


                                                 Monthly ~*        Dally
                                                 Average' ~CJ£'   Maximum
     Total Toxic Organles*                       2.13 rng/1

     Total Toxic Volatile Organics               0.1 Lb/Hr
     Benzene 0.9.1)
     Carbon tetrachloride 0.12.4)
     Chloroform 0.12.3)
     Dloxane
     Ethylenlmine (aziridine)
     Ethylene bromide (1.12.30)
     Ethylene dlchloride 0.12.7),
      1,2-dichloroethane
     Tetrachloroethane 0.12.10)
     Tetrachloroethylene 0.12.26)
     1,1,2 trichloroethane 0.12.9)
    ^Trichloroethylene 0.12.23)

     Metals (ppb)
     Cyanide                                      650              1,200
     As                                         1,000              3,000
     Cd                                          260                 690
     Cr                                          120                 230
•    Cn                                          360               1,100
     Pb                                          400                 600
     Nl                                          170                 360
•    Zn                                          660               2,200
     Cr                                           60                 110
•    Ag                                          240                 430
    HE                                            48
•
    •No PCB's, pesticides, insecticides

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 -37-
    Sludges generated by the on-site treatment system for aqueous
    phase leachate and contaminated groundwater will be dewatered.
    The dewatered sludges are anticipated to be considered hazardous
    and therefore land disposal in a RCRA subtitle C facility would
    be required. However, the dewatered sludges will be subject to
    treatability studies to determine the potential for further
    reduction in toxicity, mobility and volume as well as to determine
    the optimal treatment and/or disposal option theit is in accordance
    with RCRA and in an environmentally sound manner.


I   Any discharge into the air from the treatment of aqueous phase
    leachate and contaminated groundwater will require meeting the
    substantive requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:27-8.2.
    The C4c alternative, which is the same as C4d except that
    aqueous phase leachate and contaminated groundwater would be
    pre-treated on-site and discharged to the MCUA POTW for final
    treatment, is an acceptable alternative provided approval to
    discharge is granted by the MCUA POTW. The typical reported
    discharge standards for the MCUA facility are:
        Total petroleum hydrocarbons less than 100 ppra
        PCB concentrations less than 1 ppm
        No hazardous vapors
        pH 6-9
        Possible restricted discharge times
    NJDEP has established quality standards for leachates being
    discharged to POTWs. In addition to the basic MCUA discharge
    standards, NJDEP regulates total toxic organics, total toxic
    volatile organics and specific metals. Table 5 summarizes
    these quality standards. Final site-specific pro-treatment
    criteria for discharge to the MCUA POTW would be based on
    results of treatability studies and established by NJDEP and
    the MCUA. Approval to discharge to the POTW would have to
    be granted by the MCUA. Sludges generated by this on-site
    pre-treatment system for aqueous phase leachate and contaminated
    groundwater would be handled in the same manner as described
    for the on-site treatment and surface water discharge alternative.
    iv. estimated timeframe
    Pre-design work including, but not limited to treatability
    studies and subsurface investigations are estimated to take 6
    months to 1 year after the signing of the ROD.. Design of the
    selected remedy is estimated to take 6 months to 1 year, but to
    a degree, can commence concurrently with pre-design work. The
    time required to construct the remedy is estimated to be 1 to 1
    1/2 years. Therefore, the estimated timeframe for the selected
    remedy is 1 1/2 to 3 1/2 years.                      •""

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -38-
                                                       ''

B) STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS                            ~
1. Protectiveness
The selected remedy is protective of human health and the environment
in that the source of groundwater contamination will be contained;
thereby reducing lateral and vertical migration of aqueous phase
leachate and contaminated groundwater. In addition, the collection
and treatment of aqueous phase leachate and contaminated groundwater
in the sand and gravel aquifer to meet surface water discharge
criteria or alternatively criteria for discharge to the MCUA POTW
will significantly reduce the toxicity and volume of contaminants
in the groundwater and prevent further degradation of groundwater
quality in the sand and gravel aquifer and potentially, the bedrock
aquifer. The nature and extent of any bedrock aquifer contamination
is a component of Operable Unit II. A determination of the need to
remediate the bedrock aquifer will be made based on the RI/FS for
Operable Unit II. However, the treatment system for operable Unit
I will be designed to consider the potential need to remediate
groundwater in the bedrock aquifer.
The selected remedy mitigates the potential risk to public health
by capping the Pool C environs (as well as Kin-Buc II and portions
of the low-lying area between Kin-Buc I and the Edison Landfill);
thereby preventing the uncontrolled release of contaminants to the
air. Gas vents installed as part of the capping would be monitored
in terms of the rate and composition of any airborne emissions and
gases would be treated, if necessary. Meeting the substantive
requirements of State air permits will be required for all landfill
gas vents. In addition, the containment, collection and treatment
of oily phase leachate (by off-site incineration) as well as aqueous
phase leachate and contaminated groundwater (via onsite treatment
and discharge to surface water or a POTW) reduces the mobility,
toxicity and volume of contaminants which would be source of any
air releases.
Workers who come in contact with oily phase leachate may be sub-
ject to a potential upperbound excess lifetime cancer risk that
exceeds 10~ , based on the concentration of PCBs in the leachate.
This risk is primarily mitigated by the use of proper personal pro-
tection and strict adherence to health and safe'ty protocols during
any handling of oily phase leachate as part of the remedial action.
Ultimately, collection and off-site incineration of oily phase
leachate would remove the source of the potential risk to workers
who would conduct long-term operation and maintenance at the site.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                           .
     There is a potential risk from the consumption of aquatic life
I    due to their bioaccumulation of PCBs. Estimates of -the troncentra-
•"   tion of PCBs in the tissue of fish found in the ftari-tan River could
     be as high as 9 ppm, which exceeds the Food and Drug Administration
     limit of 2 ppm. Aquatic populations in the creeks'adjacent to the
i    site may be at risk due to chronic exposure to cadmium. The on-
     going removal action has controlled the release of aqueous and oily
     phase*leachate to the Raritan River and Edmonds Creek. The area
i    had also been posted as a "No Fishing" area due to PCB contamination.
     The selected remedy will continue to control release of oily phase
     leachate as well as collect the material for off-site incineration.
     Removal and off-site incineration of oily phase leachate and col-
     lection and treatment of aqueous phase leachate and contaminated
     groundwater reduce the toxicity, mobility and volume of aqueous
     oily-phase leachate; thereby mitigating the risk to public health
     and the environment. During the Supplemental Remedial Investigation
     for Operable Unit II, impacts on surface water and sediments due -
     to release of contaminants will be more fully evaluated.
                                                                     «•
     Terrestrial populations, especially birds may be limited risk due
     to direct contact with leachate, predominately oily phase leachate.
     The capping of Pool C and its environs (the most overt manifes
     tations of leachate) will preclude direct contact with leachate
     by terrestrial populations, especially birds; thereby mitigating
     the potential risk.
     2. Consistency With Other Laws
            \
     During development of the feasibility study, applicable or relevant
     and appropriate requirements (ARARs) as well as TBCs were established
     for Operable Unit I site remediation based on current EPA guidance.
     Appendix 3 represents Federal and State ARARs and TBCs as well as
     their potential applicability to the selected remedy.
     Applicable requirements are defined as those cleanup standards,
     standards of control, and other substantive environmental protec-
     tion requirements, criteria, or limitations promulgated under
     Federal or State law that specifically address a hazardous substance,
     pollutant/ contaminant, remedial action, location or other cir-
     cumstance at a CERCLA site.
     Relevant and appropriate requirements are defined as those cleanup
     standards of control, and other substantive environmental protection
     requirements, criteria, or limitations promulgated under Federal
     of State law that, while not "applicable" to a hazardous substance,
     pollutant, contaminant, remedial action, location or other circum-
     stances at a CERCLA site, address problems or situations sufficiently
     similar to those encountered at the CERCLA site that their use is
     well suited to the particular site.                   '-. ~

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               -40-
Non-promulgated advisories or guidance documents issued by Federal
or State governments do not have the status of potential ARARs.
However, they may be considered in determining the necessary level
of cleanup for protection of public health and the environment.
There are several different types of requirements that Superfund
actions may have to comply with. The classification of ARARs is
presented below:
Location-specific requirements are restrictions on activities
depending on the site or its immediate environs. As presented
in Appendix 3, location specific requirements with regard to
Kin-Buc Landfill-Operable Unit I pertain to portions of the site
being within a 100-year floodplain and within a coastal zone.
Location-specific ARAR requirements are expected to be met by
the selected remedy.
Action-specific requirements set controls or restrictions on
particular kinds of activities related to management of hazardous
substances/ pollutants or contaminants. These requirements are
triggered by the remedial activities selected to accomplish a
remedy. Action-specific requirements may specify particular
performance levels, actions or technologies, as well as specific
levels (or a methodology for setting specific levels) for discharg-
ed or residual chemicals. As presented in Appendix 3, action-spe-
cific Federal and State requirements as well as TBCs pertain
predominately to requirements under RCRA and the Clean Water Act
and are expected to be met.
Chemical-specific requirements are usually health or risk-based
concentration limits or ranges in various environmental media for
specific hazardous substances, pollutants or contaminants. These
requirements can indicate an acceptable level of discharge (e.g. air
emission or wastewater discharge taking into account water quality
standards) where one occurs in a remedial activity. Aqueous
phase leachate and contaminated groundwater are to be collected,
treated and discharged to surface water as part of the selected
remedy for Operable Unit I.
With respect to capping the Kin-Buc site, EPA has selected a remedy
which requires maintenance, and upgrading if necessary, of the Kin-
Buc I cap and installation of a cap in accordance with RCRA
Subtitle C and State requirements on Kin-Buc II, portions of the low-
lying area between Kin-Buc I and the Edison Lnadfill and Pool C.
However, NJDEP has utilized the RCRA guidance documents to develop
design specifications for capping hazardous waste landfills and
codified them into their hazardous waste landfill regulations.
Therefore, cap design specifications contained in NJDEP's hazardous
waste regulations are ARARs and must be met.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  -41-
41   The existing cap design on Kin-Buc I was installed in 1980 as part
     of a partial stipulation under a Federal enforcement action. This
     cap meets performance criteria of RCRA Subtitle C requirements,
     assuming the integrity of the existing Kin-Buc I cap is-verified
     during the Supplemental Remedial Investigation for Operable Unit
1    II. For this reason, EPA does not believe that application of the
     State requirements to the Kin-Buc I cap is appropriate at this time.
     The continued maintenance, and upgrading if necessary, for the
     Kin-Buc I cap is the selected capping remedy for Kin-Buc I. However,
     Kin-Buc II, portions of the low-lying area between Kin-Buc I and
     the Edison Landfill and Pool C must be capped in accordance with
     RGRA Subtitle and State requirements.
     For purposes of the evaluation of alternatives in the feasibility
     study, surface water quality criteria for an SE1 water (the surface
     water classification given to the Raritan River by NJDEP) was
     utilized. These surface water quality criteria provided in N.J.A.C.
     7:9-4.1 et seq. as well as waste water discharge requirements
     proved in N.J.A.C. 7:9-5.1 et seq. are the minimum treatment re-
     quirements for aqueous phase leachate and contaminatd groundwater
     (see Tables 3 and 4 which present, surface water quality criteria
     and wastewater discharge requirements respectively). Final site-
     specific discharge ARARs will be established by NJDEP based on
     treatability studies and are expected to be met by the selected
     remedy.
     In the event that MCUA grants approval to discharge to their
     POTW, the quality standards for leachates beingT discharged to
     POTWs established by NJDEP in addition to MCUA s basic discharge
     standards would be the minimum requirements pending final
     site-specific pre-treatment criteria. Site-specific pre-treatment
     criteria for discharge to the MCUA POTW would be based on the
     results of treatability studies and established by NJDEP and
     the MCUA and are expected to be met by the selected remedy.
     Finally, Title 7, Chapter 27, Subchapter 8 of the New Jersey
     Administrative Code describes general provisions required for
     landfill vents. The substantive requirements for air permits
     for landfill gas vents would be met. Upon installation of
     gas vents as part of the remedy, the rate and compositions of
     any volatile organic compounds emitted would be evaluated to
     determine the need for any chemical-specific requirements.
     The selected remedy is expected to meet those requirements.
     3.   Cost-Effectiveness
     After careful consideration of all reasonable alternatives, EPA
     selected Alternative C4d for the remediation of Kin-Buc Landfill-
     Operable Unit I. However, the C4c alternative, which is the same
     as C4d except for on-site aqueous phase leachate and contaminated

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -42-

groundwater pre-treatment with discharge to the MCUA POTW is an
acceptable alternative which can be implemented should approval
to discharge be obtained from the MCUA. The selected remedy
was determined to provide the greatest overall effectiveness pro-
portionate to its costs.
4.   Utilisation of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment
     Technologies to the Maximum Extent Practicable
This section provides the overall rationale for remedy selection,
that is, how the remedy was judged to provide the best balance
of trade-offs among the alternatives examined in detail. It
also discusses the alternatives' utilization of permanent
solutions and treatment to the maximum extent practicable.
Alternative A - No Further Action With Monitoring
This alternative was eliminated since no further action would allow
for the continued uncontrolled release of hazardous substances into
the environment, would not mitigate the potential public health and
environmental risks posed by the site and would not provide control
or adequate removal of the source of contamination. Therefore,
this alternative would not utilize permanent solutions or treatment
to the maximum extent practicable.
Alternatives C3a-d — slurry wall installation to bedrock in the
northern portion of the site and to the meadow marsh mat in the
southern portion of the site, collection of oily-phase leachate
for off-site incineration, collection and treatment of aqueous
phase leachate, capping, periodic monitoring, operation & maintenance
These alternatives were eliminated because slurry wall installation
to the meadow marsh mat in the southern portion of the site would
not provide adequate source control. Contaminants would continue
to be released to the sand and gravel aquifer; contaminated
groundwater would not be collected or treated as part of these
alternatives to the degree necessary. Hence, the potential for
downward migration of contaminants Into the bedrock aquifer and
lateral migration of contaminants into the surrounding environment,
including adjacent surface waters, would not be controlled.
Additionally, Alternatives C3a and C3b do not provide for a cap
on Kin-Buc II, Pool C and the low-lying area between Kin-Buc I
and the Edison Landfill which would be in compliance with ARARs.
Therefore, uncontrolled releases of hazardous substances into the
environment would occur, compliance with ARARs would not be achieved,
there would not be utilization of permanent solutions and
treatment to the maximum extent practicable, and the potential
public health and environmental risks posed by the site may
not be adequately mitigated.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -43-
Alternatives C4a and C4b - slurry wall installation to bedrock on
all sides, collection of oily-phase leachate for ogf-site incin-
eration, collection and treatment of aqueous-phase leachate and
groundwater, existing cap design on Kin-Buc I extended to Kin-Buc II,
portions of the low-lying area between Kin-Buc I and the Edison
Landfill and Pool C, periodic monitoring, operation & maintenance
These two alternatives were eliminated, because the cap would
not be in compliance with ARARs.
Alternative D - Complete Waste Excavation for Off-Site Incineration
Utilization of permanent solutions and treatment would be to the
maximum extent practicable. However, this alternative was
eliminated because of the significant short-term risks posed
to workers who would be remediating the site and nearby
residents during implementation of this alternative. In
addition, there are significant technical complexities (e.g. on-
site space constraints, sequencing of operators) associated with a
waste excavation of this magnitude.
If a single incinerator was capable or dedicating itself to the
destruction of Kin-Buc wastes (unlikely), there does not appear
to be an incinerator in the country that is large enough to
handle the disposal of wastes from Kin-Buc within a reasonable
time period. If the largest incinerator were capable of dedicating
itself to incinerating Kin-Buc wastes, it is estimated that may
take at least 35 years to complete incineration of the excavated
wastes from the site.
5.   Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element
The selected remedy satifies the statutory preference for
treatment as a principal element for remediation of the source
of contamination.
 To date, approximately 26,000 gallons of oily-phase leachate
 has been collected and incinerated off-site via a passive system.
 Oily-phase leachate, containing PCBs, will be actively collected
•and incinerated off-site. Containment, capping, active collection
 and treatment by off-site incineration of this material will
 significantly reduce its toxicity, mobility and volume. The
 public health threat that the continued release, of oily-phase
 leachate poses via potential exposure through direct contact,
 bioaccumulation or air and the environmental threat posed via
 potential exposure through direct contact to animal and/or
 bird populations, bioaccumulation, surface water as well as
 continued degradation of the surrounding wetlands is mitigated.
 Contamination that has migrated beyond the source control area
 determined for Operable Unit I will be addressed in Operable
 Unit II.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                -44-                  -^
To date, approximately 1.4 million gallons of aqueous phase
leachate has been collected utilizing a passive collection
system. Aqueous-phase leachate and contaminated groundwater will
be actively collected and treated on-site for discharge to surface
water (or alternatively, pre-treated and discharged to the MCUA
POTW). Containment, active collection and treatment (whether
entirely on-site or by the POTW) of this material will result in a
significant reduction in its toxicity, mobility and volume. The
potential public health and/or environmental threats posed by the
continued release and aqueous-phase leachate and potential exposure
through groundwater, surface water, air and direct contact will be
mitigated.
The selected remedy was determined to be the most appropriate
solution for the site. It represents the best combination of the
remedial evaluation criteria to achieve a preference for treatment
to the maximum extent practicable. Alternative C4d best addresses
public health and environmental concerns, compliance with ARARs,
technical performance and cost-effectiveness.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  Kin-Buc Ground-Water Monitoring Wells
                                       Screened IB Sand and Gravel*
                                                Sheet 1 of 3
                                                                          ;!".•   Geometric
                                  Frequency            Minimum    Maximum /        Mean"
       Element/Compound                                            f ppmi
r,
                                 of Detection           fppml                      (tmm\

     Ammonium Nitrogen                16/16           OJ9           122.6             7.38
     BOD                              10/10           1.00        11.106.0          106.0

r.   COD
     Chloride
     Cyanide (total)
                                      12/12
                                      13/13
                                      27/27
                                                      1.00
                                                     60.5
                                                     <0.001«
                                                                    727.0
                                                                  4,750.0
                                                                       0.5
                                                                                    340.0
                                                                                   1853.8
                                                                                      0.012

r.
     Dissolved Solids                 16/16         140          10,360.0          4928.0
     Fluoride                         1/1             2.10             2.10           2.10
     Kjeldahl Nitrogen                4/4            13 J             96.50          39.2
     Nitrate                          13/13           0.07             2.43           OJ7
     Oil A Grease                     9/9            <1.0              5.0            3.2
     Organic Nitrogen                 13/13          <0.1            23.4             3.1
     Sulfate                          8/8            36.2           300.0           169.0
     Suspended Solids                 5/5            67.0         7,640.0           822,0
     TOC                              17/17            1.7        1.100.0            75.9
     Aluminum                         13/13          0.064           21.6             0.977
     Antimony                         17/24           ND              2.0             0.093
     Arsenic                          33/34           ND              0.22            0.018
     Barium                           17/17           OJ              5.40            0.767
     Beryllium                        17/24           ND              0.026           0.006
     Cadmium             .            26/29          ND               0.02            0.008
     Chromium                         24/34           ND              0.640           0.022
     Cobalt    •:                     5/8              ND             0.073           0.031
     Copper                           23/34           ND              0.58            0.039
     Iron                             15/15         <0.1            5810             10.740
     Lead                             35/45           ND              2.7             0.021
     Manganese                        14/14          0.470           13 J             1.489
     Mercury                          17/24           ND              0.0132          0.0004
     Nickel                           24/29           ND              0.48            0.093
     Selenium                         18/29           ND              0.021           0.005
     Silver                           14/20           ND              0.029           0.009
     Thallium                         20/29     .     ND              0.2             0.016
     Tin                             4/8              ND              0.083           0.041
     Vanadium                         3/8             ND              0.08            0.050
     Zinc .                  .        45/45          0.01           137.0             0.506

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                             Analytical Results From
                                      Kin-Buc Ground-Water Monitoring Wells
                                           Screened In Sand and Gravel*
                                                 ' Sheet 2 of 3

                                                                                   Geometric
          *                               Frequency     Minimum       Maximum       Meanb
        Element/Compound                 of Detection    fppnO                      fppm )
      Acetone                                 2/34      ND              840.0        0.015
       Benzene                                40/78     ND               21.0        0.015
       BenzoicAcid                            1/33      ND                <U         0.057
       Bis (2-chloroethyl) ether              1/49      ND                O.OOS      0.010
      •Bis (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate           18/54     ND                3.40       0.021
       Bromodiehloromethane                   1/44      ND                0.033      0.005
       2-Butanone                .            1/33      ND              340.0        0.014
       Butyl benzyl phthalate                 6/53      ND                0.058      0.011
       Chlorobenzene                          23/74     ND               12.6        0.009
       Chloroethane                           10/73     ND                0.111      0.011
      Chloroform                              7/52      ND                0.170      0.005
      p-Chloro-nvcresol                       2/44      ND                0.01       0.010

 i:   4,4-DDD
      1,2-Dichlorobeniene
      1,1-Dichloroethane
                                              1/55
                                              3/57
                                              8/74
                                                        ND
                                                        ND
                                                        ND
                                                                         <0.01 «
                                                                          0.085
                                                                          0.071
                                                                                      0.0001
                                                                                      0.010
                                                                                      0.006


 r    U-Dichloroethane
      1,1-bichloroethene
      Diethyl phthalate
      2,4-Dimethyl phenol
                                              5/74
                                              4/52
                                              8/55
                                              1/4
                                                        ND
                                                        ND
                                                        ND
                                                        ND
                                                                          0.660
                                                                          0.016
                                                                          0.340
                                                                          0.015
                                                                                      0.006
                                                                                      0.005
                                                                                      0.01
                                                                                      0.01

 r:
 •^
      Di-n-butyl phthalate
      Di-n-octyl phthalate
                                              20/54
                                              15/53
                                                        ND
                                                        ND
                                                                          0.170

                                                                          0.018
                                                                                      0.010
                                                                                      0.010


 r:   Ethylbenzene
      Methylene chloride
      4-Methyl-2>pentanone
                                              20/72
                                              30/71
                                              1/28
                                                        ND
                                                        ND
                                                        ND
                                                                          2.80
                                                                          OJ70
                                                                         98.0
                                                                                      0.010
                                                                                      0.010
                                                                                      0.010


 i:
      Naphthalene                             5/57      ND                0.210       0.010
      n-Nitrosodiphenylamine                  1/47      ND                0.0053      0.010
      PCS: Total                              1/4       ND                0.116       0.002



 i:
 i:
 L:
 L:
;L

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    r.                                               /\PP6iv)OlV 1-
                                              Analytical Results From
                                       Kin-Hue Ground-water Monitoring Wells
                                            Screened In Sand and Gravel*
                                                     Sheet 3 of 3

                                                                                       Geometric
                                       Frequency          Minimum      Maximum          Meanb
          Element /Compound           of Detection                      fpprn)          fppml

         Phenols (total)                   31/40          ND             103                 0.040
         Tetrachloroethene                 19/80          ND               1.80              0.009
         Toluene                           34/77          ND              42.0               O.OOS
         trans-1.2-dichloroethene          14/71          ND               5.40              0.007
         1,1,1'Trichloroethane             1/56           ND               0.56              0.005
         Trichloroethene          .        10/78          ND               2.0               0.007
I        Vinyl chloride
         Xylene
                                           6/74
                                           10/23
                                                          ND
                                                          ND
                                                                           0.19
                                                                           0.016
                                                                                             0.010
                                                                                             0.005
         o-Xylene                          4/29           ND               1.60              0.007




         Notes:    Data compiled from sources listed in Appendix B                      ••           .
                   ND • Not detected
                   •   The wells included in this summary are those of the K.INWT, GEI, (except wells
                       9R and 12WR) and NJDEP (Wells 5 and 6) series.
                   •   Section U.2 describes the procedures used to calculate the geometric means.
                   •   Detected at concentrations less than the detection limit




                                                                               :--sr

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                        Screened in •edrock/Brun»Mick Shale
                                 Upgradlcnt end Doimgredient Ground-Water Analysis
                                                   Sheet 1 of 2

                                    Ubaradlent' Uella                                         B»^^B1P»«| Ml   VI II


                   frequency        Nlnleua        N«lM         Mean           frequency      Mlnlaua                 Naxlu      Keen
                  of Detection       tnort          lend            lam)      of Detection,   ,fCPa>                   (PPH>     ifioL.

BOO                   7/7               1           31                 .0            5/5          1                     35        3.0
COO                   10/10             2.8 .       6S                 .0            6/6          1                    430       224
Chloride              9/9               0.9         14                 .0            S/5       • 7.4                    23       11 J
Cyanide CtoUt)        4/4               0.005       «0.01              .003          «/4 ,       <0.005C                 0.040 0.04
Dissolved Solid       8/8              84          170              136.0            5/5        212                    315      256.9
fluoride              1/1               0.3          0.3               .3            0/0           d                      4
Ml tret*              4/4              0.1           0.27              .1*           3/3          0.08                   0.3S 0.21
Sulfett               4/4              11           28               17.0            3/3         10                    116    . 47.0
IOC                   2/2               1.7          4.7              2.8            1/1          4.4                    4.4      4.4

                     2/2               0.112         0.6SO            0.270          1/1           0.310                 0.310    .310
Ant fanny            2/4              10            «0.20             0.060          1/2          10                    40.200   .060
Arsenic              7/8              NO             0.013            0.008          7/7           0.002                 0.01S   .008
•arliei              3/4              •>             0.15             0.156          3/3           0.190                 0.200    .170
•erylllui            3/4              IB             0.0014           0.004          1/2          •>                    <0.02    .005
Cedalui              7/8              HD             0.01       •     0.006          5/5          «0.01                  0.062     .011
Chroailui            6/8              ID             0.01             0.010          S/7          10                    <0.02    .008
Cobelt               0/2              10                               ••            1/1            0.011                0.011     .011
                                                    •
                     6/8              10             o.oss            0.026          6/7          m                      0.090   .036
Iron                 10/10             0.20         1S.5              1.930          0/4            0.026               86.0        3.1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         .iii-out orouncriiacer Monitoring Uette
                                                           Screened in twirock/irunueM. Shale
                                                       upgrodlont and Doungradimil^B ftnotytl*
                                                                      Shtet 2 of 2 ^^

                                                      uporadltnt UtHi                                             DoHnaredlent Wei la
                                frequency             Nlnieua      NexfM          Mean          frequency    Miniem          ftuieua          Moan
                               of Detection            fcoa)        I an)         <Tl ,     flf    Detection fat •>         ,lpga)           J0JBL

lead     '                          6/6              0.007         0.070        0.01S                5/7       M0        0.210                O.U
HanBaneeo                           6/6              0.1           0.4          0.160                S/S         0.2     2.74               •M        >'
Mercury                             2/4             M0            40.0005        .0002                1/2       •B        0.0017            0.8006°
Hlck.1                              4/4             *0.02          0.170         .054                3/4 •     IIB       0.150              a.o6i
Solent**                            6/8             M0            40.020         .005                6/7       MB         0.0089            0.005
Silver                              4/6             M0             0.025         .014                1/4       HB         0.05              0.019
Inolllui                            2/4             M0            40.20          .010                4/5       HB         0.28              •8.028
fin                                 0/2             M0            HD '           ••                   1/1        1.012   8.012              8.012
VanodiUB                            1/2             H0             0.050         .050                8/1       MB        HD             '
line                                a/a             4O.OS          0.250         .006                7/7       418.04    0.25               8.120



Oeniene                             0/4                          '»              -                 1/S                   40.010*            0.005
CMoroe thane                        0/4                           HD             -                  1/S                  40.010             0.010
 1.1-Olchloroettiano                0/4                           HD                                  2/S                 0.078             8.009
Ethyl benzene                       0/4                        .HO               «•                 1/S                  40.010             0.005
Nethylone chloride                  1/4                            1.1           0.020               1/S                  8.041             8.010
rlMnoU (total}                      a/10                           0.0074        0.004               7/9                  2.4)              0.010
lotrachlorMtlMnt                    0/2                           HD                                  2/S                40.010             O.OOS
                                    0/4                           HD                                  2/S                40.005             8.005
Triehloraettoie                     0/4                           HD           ' -•                   ys                 40.010             •.005




•oteat
             Data compiled fro* tource* lletod In Appendix 8
             HO "Hot detected
             •• • Unable to calculate
             •   Upgrodlant wlU •crooned In bedrock ore Ml-1 and Ml-2                   f'' '
             b   DoHnorodiont Hello ocroened In bedrock are Ml-). MI-4. MI-5, 6£l-9t, and CCI*12M
             c   Detected ot concontroelom ION than the Mthod detection Halt
             d   loot not perforated

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        APPENDIX 3
                                             LOCATION SPECIFIC FECERAL ARARS
                                  AND CRITERIA, ADVISORIES 6 GUIDANCES TO BE CONSIDERED
                                                KIN-BLC FEASIBILITY STUDY


    LOCATION        REQUIREMENT                  Prerequisite(s)   Citation         Potential Applicability
   Within 100-yearr < Facility must be designed, RCRA hazardous    40 CFR 264.18(b) "Relevant and Appropriate"
   floodplain         constructed, operated, and waste; treatment,                  Alternatives, C3,, C4 and
                      maintained to avoid washout storage, or dis-                  and D, as it pertains to
                                                  posal                             portions of the site which
                                                                                    may be within the 100-year
                                                                                    floodplain.
   Within flood-    Action to avoid adverse     Action that will Executive Order   "Applicable" to Alterna-
   plain            effects, minimize potential occur in a flood- 11988, Protec-   tives C3, C4 and D as it
                    harm, restore and preserve plain, i.e., low- tion of Flood-    pertains to portions of
                    natural and beneficial      lands, and rela- plains, (40 CFR   the site which may be
                    values                      tively flat areas 6, Appendix A)   within ELoodplains.
                                                adjoining inland
                                                and coastal
                                                waters and other
                                                flood prone areas
                                                                                   "Applicable" to Alterna-
   Within coastal   Conduct activities in       Activities         Coastal Zone    tives C3, C4 and D.
   zone             manner consistent with      affecting the      Management Act
                    approved State management   coastal zone in-   (16.U.S.C. Sec-
                    programs                    cluding lands      tion 1451 et
                                                thereunder and     seq.)
                                                adjacent shore-
                                                lands




i « rtpr—

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               APPENDIX 3
                                                  ACTION SPECIEgfc'ECERAL ARARSS
                                       AND CRITERIA, ADVISORIEsWiUIDANCES TO BE CONSIDERED
                                                     KIN-BUG FEASIBILTY STUDY


Action                  i cement                        Prerequisite^)         Citation     Potential Applicability
Air Striding            standards for control or       Proposed standard, to 52 FR 3748 Proposed standard, not yet a ARAR
               emmissions of volatile                  be considered         (February 5, but may be "applicable" in the
               organics.                                                      1987)       future to Alternative C3 and C4 as
                     I.*.-                                                                it pertains to possible on-site
                                                                                          aqueous air stripping pretreatment
                                                                                          prior to off-site disposal.
Capping        Placement of a cap over waste (e.g.,    Disturbance of haz- 40 CFR         "iRelevant and Appropriate" to
               closing a landfill, or closing a sur- ardous waste and        264.301(a) Alternatives C3 and C4.
               face impoundment or waste pile as a     movement of it out- (Landfills)
               landfill, or similar action) requires a side the unit or area
               cover designed and constructed to:      of contamination will
               0
                                                       make requirements
                 Provide long-term minimization        applicable; capping
                 migration of liquids through the      without disturbance
                 capped area                           will not make re-
               0
                                                       quirements appli-
                 Function with minimum maintenance     cable, but technical
               0
                                                       requirements are
                 Promote drainage and minimize ero-    likely to be relevant
                 sion or abrasion of the cover         and appropriate.
               0
                   Accommodate settling and subsidence
                   so that the cover's integrity is
                   maintained
               0
                   Have a permeability less than or
                   equal to the permeability of any                          40 CFR
                   bottom liner system or natural                            264.117(c)
                   subsoils present.                                         (Closure and
                                                                             Post-Closure
               Restrict post-closure use of property
               as necessary to prevent damage to the                         40 CFR
               cover.                                                        264.310(b)

               Prevent run-on and run-off from damag-
               ing cover.
               Protect and maintain surveyed bench-
               marks used to locate waste cells (land-
               fills, waste piles).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                ACTION SPECIFIC FEDERAL ARARS
                                 AND CRITERIA, ADVISORIES & GUIDANCES TO BE CONSIDERED
                                                  KIN-BUC FEASIBILITY STUDY
Action         Requirement                         Prerequisite(s)            Citation           Potential Applicability
consolida- Area from which materials are removed Disposal by disturbance of See closure         "Applicable" to Alternative
tion       should be cleaned up.                 hazardous waste (listed or                     D if it is necessary for any
                                                 characteristic) ad moving                      reason to construct waste
                                                 it outside unit or boundary                    piles/storage tanks, etc.
                                                 of contaminated area.                          on-site to contain excavated
                                                                                                wastes prior to off-site dis-
                                                                                                posal;
          Consolidation in storage piles/storage                             See Container
          tanks will trigger storage require-                                Storage, Tank
          ments                                                              Storage, Haste Piles
                                                                             in this Exhibit.
Container Containers of hazardous waste must      RCRA waste (listed or      All citations per- Applicable to Alternative D
Storage   be:                                     characteristic, held for a tain to use and     as it pertains to the used
(On-Site) 0                                       temporary period before    management of con- and management of containers
          0
            Maintained in good condition          treatment, disposal, or    tainers.            used for excavated waste.
            Compatible with hazardous waste       storage elsewhere,         40 CFR 264.172
          0
            to be stored; and                     (40 CFR 264.10) in a con- 40 CFR
            Closed during storage (except to      tainer (i.e., any portable
            add or remove waste).                 device in which a material
                                                  is stored transported,
          Inspect container storage areas         disposed of, or handled    40 CFR 264.174
          weekly for deterioration.               (40 CFR 264.10)
          Place containers on a sloped, crack-                               40 CFR 264.175
          free base, and protect fron contact
          with accumulated liquid. Provide
          containment system with a capacity
          of 10% of the volume of containers
          of free liquids. Remove spilled or
          leaked waste in a timely manner to
          prevent overflow of the containment
          system.
          Keep containers of ignitable or re-                                40 CFR 264.176
          active waste at least 50 feet from
          the facility's property line.
          Keep incompatible materials separate.                              40 CFR 264.177
          Separate incompatible materials
          stored near each other by a dike or
          other barrier.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 ACTION SPECIFIC FEDERAL ARARS
                                  AND CRITERIA, ADVlSORIES/jAuiDANCES TO BE CONSIDERED
                                                   KIN-BUC ^RSIBILITY STUDY
Action        Requirement                               Prerequisite(s)        Citation            Potential Applicability
Clean    General performance standard requires        Disturbance of RCRA    40 CFRA 264.111 "Relevant and Appropriate1 to
Closure minimization of need for further maintenance hazardous waste         (Closure and        Alternative D.
Removal) and control; minimization or elimination of (listed or charac-      Post-Closure
         post-closure escape of hazardous waste,      teristic) placed at    Performance
         hazardous constituents, leachate, contami- site after November      Standard)
         nated runoff, or hazardous waste decomposi- 19, 1980 and movement
         tion products* Disposal or decontamination outside the unit or
         of equipment, structures, and soils.         area of contamination.
                                                      May apply to surface
                                                      impoundment; contam-
                                                      inated soil, including
                                                      soil from dredging or
                                                      soil disturbed in the
                                                      course of drilling, or
                                                      excavation, and
                                                      returned to land.
         Removal or decontamination of all waste re- Not applicable to       40 CFR 264.228 "Applicable" to Alternative D i:
         sidues, contaminated containment system      undisturbed material. ( a ) ( l ) (Surface it is necessary for any reason
         components (e.g. liners, dikes), contaminat-                        impoundments- to construct a surface impound-
         ed subsoils, and structures and equipment                           Closure and         ment or waste pile on-site to
         contaminated with waste and leachate, and                           Post-Closure        contain excavated wastes prior
         management of them as hazardous waste.                              Care), and          to off-site disposal, and
                                                                             40 CFR 264.258 "Applicable" to Alternatives
                                                                             (Waste Piles- C3 and C4 if a surface impound-
                                                                             Closure and         ment is constructed on-site as
                                                                             Post-Closure        part of aqueous pretreatment
                                                                             Care)               prior to off-site disposal.
         Meet health-based levels at unit.            Disposal of RCRA       40 CFR 264.111 "Relevant and Appropriate"
                                                      hazardous waste                            to Alternative D.
                                                      (listed or charac-
                                                      teristic) placed at
                                                      site after November
                                                      19, 1980 af.ter dis-
                                                      turbance and move-
                                                      ment outside the unit
                                                      or area of contami-
                                                      nation.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                ACTION SPECIFIC FECERAL ARARS
                                    AND CRITERIA, ADVISORIES & GUIDANCES TO BE CONSIDERED
                                                      KINH3UC FEASIBILITY STUDY
 Action            Reqiurements                       Prerequisite^)           Citation       Potential Applicability
 Closure Installation of final cover to provide Prerequisite sane as for 40 CFR 267.310      Relevant and Appropriate" to
 with      long-term minimization of infiltration. capping.                (Landfills)      Alternatives and C3 and C4.
 Waste in
 Place     Post-closure care and groundwater
 (Capping) monitoring*
 Closure Removal of majority of contaminated       Proposed rule, to be    52 FR 8712       "Relevant and Appropriate" to
 with      materials. Application of cover and     considered.             (March 19, 1987) Alternative D if for some
 Haste in post-closure monitoring based on                                                  reason a portion fo the contam
 Place     exposure pathway(s) of concern.                                                  inated waste/soils are left in
 {Hybrid                                                                                    place (i.e., not excavated
 Closure)                                                                                   and removed).
 Dike Sta- Design and operate facility to prevent Existing surface im-     40 CFR 264.221 "Applicable*" to Alternatives C3
bilization overtopping due to overfilling; wind    poundment containing    (Surface         and C4 if a surface impound-
           and wave action; rainfall; run-on;      hazardous waste, or     impoundment)     ment is constructed on-site as
           malfunctions of level controllers,      creation of new surface                  part of aqueous pretreatment
           alarms, and other equipment; and human impoundment.                              prior to off-site disposal.
           error. Construct dikes with sufficient                                           Also "Applicable" to Alterna-
           strength to prevent massive failure.                                             tive D if it is necessary for
                                                                                            any reason to construct a sur-
           Inspect liners and cover systems during                         40 CFR 264.226 face impoundment on-site to con-
           and after construction.                                         (Surface         tain excavated wastes prior to
                                                                           impoundment)     off-site disposal.
           Inspect weekly for proper operation and
           integrity of the containment devices.                           40 CFR 264.226
          Remove surface impoundment from                                  40 CFR 264.227
          operation if the dike leaks or there is                          (Surface
          a sudden drop in liquid levels.                                  impoundment)
          At closure, remove or decontaninate all                          40 CFR 264.228
          waste residues and contaminated                                  (Surface
          materials. Otherwise, free liquids                               impoundment)
          must be removed, the remaining wastes
          stabilized, and the facility closed in
          the sane manner as a landfill.
          Manage ignitable or reactive wastes so                           40 CFR 264.227
          that it is protected from materials or
          conditions that may cause it to ignite
          or react.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 ACTION SPECIFIC FEDERAL ARARS
                                     AND CRITERIA, ADVISORIESJ^GUIDANCES TO BE ODSIOEREO
                                                   KIN-BUC F^BBILITY STUDY
                       Requirement                   Prerequisite(s)      Citation      Potential Applicability
Direct dis-   Use of best available technology (BAT)                 40 CFR 122.44U) 'Applicable" to Alternatives C3 and C4
charge of     economically achievable is required to                                 as it pertains to possible on-site
treatment     control toxic and nonconventional                                      treatment with direct surface water
system        pollutants. Use of best conventional                                   discharge.
effluent      pollutants control technology (BCT) is
              required to control conventional
              pollutants. Technology-based limita-
              tions may be determined on a case-by-
              case basis.
              Applicable Federally approved State                  40 CFR 122.44 and
              water quality standards must be comp-                State regulations
              lied with. These standards may be in                 approved under
              addition to or more stringent than                   40 CFR 131
              other Federal standards under the CWA.
              Applicable Federal water quality
              criteria for the protection of aquatic                40 CFR 122.44(d)
              life must be complied with when
              environmental factors are being con-
              sidered.
              The discharge must conform to applic-
              able water quality requirements when
              the discharge affects state other
              than the certifying state.
              The discharge must be consistent with
              the requirements of a Hater Quality
              Management plan approved by EPA water
              (WA S208(6)).
              Discharge limitations must be establi-                40 CFR 122.44(e)
              shed for all toxic pollutants that are
              or may be discharged at levels
              greater than that which can be
              achieved by technology-based standards
              Develop and implement a BMP program                   40 CFR 125.100
              and incorporate in the NPDES permit
              to prevent the release of toxic con-
              stituents to surface waters.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          APPENDIX 3
                                                ACTIONS SPECIFIC FEDERAL ARARS
                                       AND CRITERIA ADVISORIES & GUIDANCE TO CONSIDERED
ion         Requirement                                 Prerequisite(s)       Citation        Potential Applicability
      The BMP Progran must:                                                40 CFR 125.104
      4
          Establish specific procedures for the
          control of toxic and hazardous pollutant
          spills
      0
          Include a prediction of direction, rate of
          flow, and total quantity of toxic
          pollutants there experience indicates a
          reasonable potential for equipment
          failure.
      0
          Assure proper management of solid and
          hazardous waste in accordance with
          regulations promulgated under RCRA.
      Discharge must be monitored bo assure
      compliance. Discharge will monitor:
      0
      0
        The mass of each pollutant
      0
        The volume of effluent                                             40 CFR 122.44(1)
          Frequency of discharge and other
          measurements as appropriate
      Approved test methods for waste consti-
      tuents to be monitored must be followed.
      Detailed requirements for analytical pro-
      cedures and quality controls are provided.
      Sample preservation procedures, container                            40 CFR 136.1 -
      materials, and maximum allowable holding                                136.4
      times are prescribed.
      Permit application information must be           On site discharge   40 CFR 122.21
      submitted including a description of             surface waters must
      activities, listings of environmental            meet substantive
      permits, etc.                                    NPDES permit
                                                       requirements.
      Monitor and report results as required by                            40 CFR 122.44(1)
      permit (minimum of at least annually)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                     APPENDIX 3
                                                         ACTION SPEC]^ FED3RAL ARARS
                                             AND CRITERIA, ADVISORIEJ^GUIDANCES TO BE CONSIDERED
                                                            KIN-BUC FEASIBILITY STUDY
Action               irements
                   a;v**v^«<fc<k^^HW« H»*J        _          Prerequisite^)     Citation              Potential Applicability
          Gcmply with additional permit oondi-                                40 CFR 122.41(1)
          tions such as:
          0
            Duty to mitigate any adverse effects
            of1 any; discharge! and
                -.. -I-
          0
            Proper operation and maintenance of
            treatment systems.
Discharge Pollutants    that pass through the POTW                            40 CFR 403.5 (Part "Applicable" to Alterntive C3 and
to POTW9 without treatment, interfere with POTW                               403-General Pre-     C4 as it pertains to discharge
          operation, or contaminate POTW sludge                               treatment Regula- of aqueous to a POTW treatment
          are prohibited.                                                     tions for Existing facility.
                                                                              and New Sources of
          Specific prohibitions preclude the                                  Pollution. Section
          discharge of pollutants to POTWs that                               5-National Pre-
          0
                                                                              treatment Standards;
              Create a fire or explosion hazard in                            Prohibited Dis-
              the POTW; are corrosive (pH<5.0)                                charges. )
          0
              Obstruct flow resulting in inter-
              ference
          0
              Are dischared at a flow rate and/or
              concentration that will result in
              interference
          0
              Increase the temperature of waste-
              water entering the treatment plant
              that would result in interference,
              but 'in no case raise the POTW influent
              temperature above 104*F).
          0
              Discharge must comply with local POTW                           40 CFR 403.5 and
              pretreatment program, including POTW-                           local POTW
              specific pollutants, spill prevention                           regulations.
              program requirements, and reporting
              and monitoring requirements;

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 ACTION SPECIFIC FED3RAL ARARS
                                     AND CRITERIA, ADVISORIES & GUIDANCES TO BE CONSIDERED
                                                   KIN-BUC FEASIBILITY STUDY
Action       Requirement            Prerequiste(s)           Citation                        Potential Applicability
             RCRA permit-by-rule                       40 CFR 264.71 and 264.72
             requirements must be                      (Manifest System, Record-
             compiled with for dis-                    keeping and Reporting).
             charges of RCRA hazar-
             dous wastes to POTWs
             by truck, rail, or
             dedicated pi
Excava- Area fron whict             Disposal by dis-   See Closure in this Exhibit Not consideredto be "Applicable" (as it
tion      materials are excavated turbance of          (i.e., 40 CFR 264.111         pertains to RCRA hazardous waste placed at
          may require cleanup to hazardous waste       closure performance standard, the site after November 19, 1980), however,
          levels established by     androovingit       and 52 FR 8712. March 19.     is "relevant and appropriate" to Alterna-
          closure requirements.     outside the unit   1987).                        tive D.
                                    or area of con-
                                    tamination.
Operation Post-closure to ensure                       40 CFR 264.1 (Closure and    "Relevant and Appropriate" to Alternatives
and Main- that site is maintained                      Post Closure)                C3 and C4.
tenance and monitored.
Surface Prevent run-on and con-                        40 CFR 264.301(c).(d)        "Relevant and Appropriate" to Alternatives
Water     trol and collect run-off                     40 CFR 264.251(c).(d)        C3 and C4.
Control from a 24-hour, 25-year
          storm (waste piles, land                                                  "Applicable" to Alternative D if it is
          treatment facilities,                                                     necessary for any reason to construct
          landfills).                                                               a waste pile on-site to contain excavated
                                                                                    wastes prior to off-site disposal.
          Prevent overtopping of                       40 CFR 264.221(c)            "Applicable" to Alternatives C3 and C4
          surface impoundment.                                                      if a surface impoundment is constructed
                                                                                    on-site as part of aqueous pretreatment
                                                                                    prior to off-site disposal.
                                                                                     "Applicable" to Alternative D if it is
                                                                                     necessary for any reason to construct
                                                                                     a surface impoundment on-site to con-
                                                                                     tain excavated wastes prior to off-site
                                                                                     disposal.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                               ACTION SPECIFIC FEDERAL ARARS
                                   AND CRITERIA, ADVISORIES & GUIDANCES TO BE CONSIDERED
                                                 KIN-BUC FEASIBILITY STUDY



Action            Requirement                     Prerequisite(a)      Citation     Potential Applicability
Treatment Proposed standards for miscellaneous Proposed standard? to 50 FR 40726 Proposed standard, to be considered
          units (long-term retrievable storage, be considered        (November 7, but may be "applicable" in the future
          thermal treatment other than incinera-                     1986)        to Alternatives C3 and C4 as it pertains
          tors, open burning, open detonation,                       40 CFR 264   to on-site pretreatment of aqueous.
          chemical, physical, and biological                         (Subpart X)
          treatment units using other than
          tanks, surface impoundments, or land
          treatment units) require new miscel-
          laneous units to satisfy environmental
          performance standards by protection
          groundwater, surface water, and air
          quality, and by limiting surface and
          subsurface migration.               __

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    AND CRITERIA, ADVISORIES & GUIDANCES TO BE CONSIDERED
                                                  KIN-BUC FEASIBILITY STUDY

 ACTION           REQUIREMENT                       Perequisite(s)       Citation        Potential Applicability
Consider At closure, remove all hazardous       See Previous Page      40 CFR 264.178   See Previous Page
Storage    waste and residues fran the con-
(On-Site) tairment systen, and decontaninate
cont.      or remove all containers, liners*
Contain- Use two liners, a top liner that       RCRA hazardous waste   40 CFR 264.220    Applicable* to Alternatives C3 and
ment (Con-prevents waste migration into the     (listed or charac-     (Surface         C4 if a surface impoundments is con-
struction liner and a bottom liner that pre- teristic) currently       impoundments)    structed on-site as part of aqueous
of New     vents waste migration through the    being placed in a                       pretreatment prior to off-site dis-
Surface    liner throughout the post-closure    surface impoundment.                    posal, and "applicable" to Alternative
Impound- period.                                                                        D if it is necessary for any reason
ment (On-                                                                               to construct a surface iiupoundissnt
Site) (See Design liners to prevent failure due                        40 CFR 264.221   on site to contain excavated wastes
Closure    to pressure gradients, contact with                         (Surface         prior to off-site disposal.
with Waste the waste, climatic conditions, and                         Impoundments)
in Place the stress of installation and daily
and dean operations.
Closure)
           Provide leachate collection system
           between the two liners.
          Use leak detection system that will
          detect leaks at the earliest possi-
          ble time.
Tank      Tanks must have sufficient shell     RCRA hazardous waste 40 CFR 264.190      "Applicable11 to Alternatives C3 and
Storage   strength (thickness), and for closed listed or charac-                        C4 as it may pertain to on-site
(On-Site) tanks, pressure controls, to assure teristic, held for                        pretreatment of aqueous prior to
          that they do not collapse or rupture temporary period be-                     off-site disposal, and "applicable"
                                               fore treatment, dis-                     to Alternative D if on-site tank
                                               posal, or storage                        storage is used to contain excavated
                                               elsewhere                                wastes prior to off-site disposal.
                                               (40 CFR 264.10) in a
                                               tank.
          Haste must not be incompatible with                       40 CFR 264.191
          the tank material unless the tank is
          protected by a liner or by other
          means.
          Tanks must be provided with controls                         40 CFR 264.194
          to prevent overfilling, and suf-
          ficient freeboard maintained in open
          tanks to .prevent overtopping by wave
          action or precipitation.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    AND LKiifcKlA, ALNibUKifcb 6. OUlLHNUtitt 1U bfc
                                                   KIN-BUC        BILITY STUDY
Action               Requirement                         P]    iisite(s) Citation           Potential Applicabil
Tai          ipect the following: overfilling control, See Previous Page 40 CFR 264.195 See Previous Page
Storage control equipment, monitoring data, waste
(On-Site) level (for uncovered tanks)/ tank condition,
cont.     above ground portions of tanks (to assess
          their structual integrity) and the area
          surrounding the tank (to identify signs of
          leakage).
         Repair corrosion, cracks, or leaks.                                 40 CFR 264.196
         At closure, remove all hazardous waste and                          40 CFR 264.197
         hazardous waste residues fron tanks, dis-
         charge control equipment, and discharge
         confinements structures.
                                                                         40 CFR 264.198
         Stores ignitable and reactive waste so as to
         prevent the waste from igniting or reacting.
         Ignitable or reactive wastes in covered
         tanks must comply with buffer zone require-
         ments in "Flammable" and Combustible Liquids
         Code,". Tables 2-1 through 2-6 (National Fire
         Protection Association, 1976 or 1981).
         Use liner and leachate collection and         RCRA hazardous    40 CFR 264.251 "Applicable" to Alternative D if xt
         removal system                                waste, noncon-                   is necessary for any reason to con-
                                                       tainerized accum-                struct waste pile on site to contain
                                                       ulation of solid,                excavated wastes prior to off-site
                                                       non-flammable                    disposal.
                                                       hazardous waste
                                                       that is used for
                                                       treatment or
                                                       storage.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            APPENDIX 3
                                                 ACTION SPECIFIC STATE APARS
                                    AND CRITERIA, ADVISORIES & GUIDANCES TO BE CONSIDERED
                                                  KIN-BUC FEASIBILITY STUDY
Action           Requirement                      Prerequisite(s)    Citation      Potential Applicability
Air Stripp- An air pollution control permit Action that includes     NJAC Title 7, Although under CERCLA Section 121(e),
ing         is required for any wastewater    water or wastewater    Chapter 27, on-site remedial response actions are
            treatment equipment if the con- treatment equipment      Subchapter 8. exempt fron having to obtain Federal,
            centration of certain delineated which emits air                       State, or local permits, the substan-
            toxic volatile organic substances contaminants includ-                 tive requirements of this citation
            exceed 100 ppb by weight and the ing: air stripping                    may be considered "applicable" to Alerna-
            total concentration of VOS exceed equipment, aeration                  tive C3 and C4 as it pertains to possible
            3,500 ppb by weight. Must demon- basins and lagoons.                   on-site aqueous pretreatment (air stripping)
            strate that controlled emissions                                       prior to off-site aqueous disposal.
            will not violate ambient air
            quality standards as defined in
            NJAC 7:27-13, Title 40 Part 52
            CFR, or other department criteria
           Mist demonstrate that the control
           apparatus incorporates state-of-
           the-art air pollution control
           equipment, and is designed to
           operate without violating laws
           or regulations by presenting such
           information as: description of
           processes, raw materials, operat-
           ing procedures, physical and
           chemical nature of air contami-
           nants, volume of gas discharge,
           etc.
Landfill   An air pollution control permit Action that includes NJAC Title 7, Although under CERCLA Section 121(e), on-
Vents      is required. (See above dis-      equipment used for    Chapter 27, site remedial response actions are exempt
           cussion under air stripping.)     the purpose of vent- Subchapter 8. from having to obtain Federal, State or
                                             ing a closed or                    local permits, this citation may be con-
                                             operating dump or                  sidered "relevant and appropriate" to
                                             solid waste facility               Alternatives C3 and C4 as it pertains to
                                             directly or indirect-              landfill venting.
                                             ly into the outdoor
                                             atmosphere.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            APPENDIX 3
                                                 ACTION SPECIFIC STATE ARARS
                                    AND CRITERIA, ADVISORIES & GUIDANCES TO BE CONSIDERED
                                                  KIN-BUC FEASIBILITY STUDY
Action              Requirement                      Prerequisite^)     Citation           Potential    illegibility
Off-Site    All vehicles containing hazardous waste On-site removal of NJAC Title 7,     Directly "= Licable" to Alternative
Transporta- must meet the placard requirements of    hazardous waste   Chapter 26, Sub- D. Maybe partially applicable to
tion of     USDOT transport of hazardous waste       for off-site      Chapter 7 (Label- Alternatives C3 and C4 as pertains
Hazardous (i.e., 49 CFR 171 through 49 CFR 177). treatment/disposal ing, Records, and to:
Waste                                                                  Transporation     0
            All containers shall be in conformance                     Requirements).       On-site pretreatment of aqueous
            with the construction type and labeling                                         for removal of PCB laden oil for
            requirements (manifest numbers, etc.) of                   NJAC Title 7,        off-site disposal/treatment, and
            USDOT containerization requirements                        Chapter 26, Sub-
            (49 CFR 171 through 49 CFR 179).                           chapter 8 (Hazar- 0
                                                                       dous Waste           Collection of on-site aqueous
            Special Hazardous Waste Manifest Form(s)                   Criteria, Identi- waste stream for off-site treat-
            Requirements (which depends upon State                     fication and         ment/diposal (this would depend
            destination).                                              Listing).            upon contaminant concentrations
                                                                                            in the aqueous waste stream).
            Special recordkeeping requirements and
            prohibitions for the hazardous waste
            generator, hauler, receiving facility,
            etc.
Direct Dis- No person shall build, install, modify,                    NJAC 7:14A        "Applicable" to Alternatives C3 and
charge of or operate any facility for the collec-                                        C4 as it pertains to both: possible
Treatment tion, treatment or discharge of any                                            on-site aqueous pretreatment for
System      pollutant except in conformance with the                                     off-site discharge to a POTW, as
Effluent    New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimina-                                      well as to possible on-site aqueous
            tion System (NJPDBS) Program. The                                            treatment with direct surface water
            NJPDES Program requirements include,                                         discharge.
            where applicable, permits or approvals
            for both on-site treatment with direct
            surface water discharge, as well as dis-
            charge to off-site municipal or
            privately owned treatment works.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            APPENDIX 3
                                                 ACTION SPECIFIC STATE ARABS
                                    AND CRITERIA, ADVISORIES & GUIDANCE TO BE CONSIDERED
                                                  KIN-BUC FEASIBILITY STUDY
Action           Requirements                Prerequisite(s) Citation            Potential Applicability
                                                                                           ADD]
Discharge to No persons shall cause, suffer,                NJAC Title 7,      Directly "applicable"
                                                                                          pplic      to Alternatives CJ and
POTW or Other allow, or permit the discharge                Chapter 26 Sub- C4 as pertains to discharge of aqueous via
Aqueous Treat- of any hazardous waste into a                Chapter 9          sewer line to off-site POTW treatment
ment Works Via sewer system unless:                          (Requirements for facility.          .....
Sewer               i.                                      Hazardous Waste                        - Jl :•   '   ' •

               0
                  Final approval has been                   Facilities)
                  obtained fron all                         Section 2.
                  appropriate State and
                  local authorities; and
              0
                All conditions imposed prior
                to discharge are met
Container     Presents standards for use and On-site re-      NJAC Title 7,     May be directly ^applicable" to Alternative
Storage On-   management of on-site container moval of hazar- Chapter 26, Sub- D and partially "applicable" to Alterative
Site          storage of hazardous waste.     dous waste in Chapter 9 Require- C3 and C4 as pertains to on-site preteat-
              Includes separation of incom- preparation for ments for           ment of aqueous for ranoval of PCB laden
              patible waste materials, safety off-site dis- Hazardous Waste     oil for off-site disposal/treatment.
              considerations, environmental posal/treatment Facilities),
              protectiveness considerations,                  Section 4, and
              recordkeeping, monitoring,                      NJAC Title 7,
              inspection, training, etc.                      Chapter 26, Sub-
                                                              chapter 10 (Add-
                                                              itional Operation
                                                              and Design
                                                              Standards),
                                                              Section 4.
Groundwater   Must; institute groundwater                     NJAC Title 7,     Relevant and appropriate" to Alternatives
Monitoring    monitoring in accordance with                   Chapter 26, Sub- A, C3 and C4.
              NJAC 7:124 A-6 (Rule of the                     Chapter 9
              Division of Water Resources).                   (Requirements for
                                                              Hazardous Waste
                                                              Facilities)
                                                              Section 5.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                 ACTION SPECIFIC STATE ARARS         ^
                                                    AND CRITERIA, AWISORIEa^GUIDANCES TO BE CONSIDERED
                                                                                         STUDY
Action          I
                    Requirement
                    , •..ll^fci-y   . • • —... -,
                                                            Prerequisite(s)[      Citation               Potential Applicability
Safety       Facilities shall be designed,                                     NJAC Title 7, Chapter 'Relevant and appropriate" to
             constructed, operated and main-                                   26, Subchapter 9      Alternatives C3 and C4 and Alternative
             tained to prevent unplanned                                       (Requirements for     D.
             sudden events that threaten                                       Hazardous Waste
             human health or the environment                                   Facilities), Sections
             and contingency plans should be                                   6 and 7
             developed for emergencies*
Closure with Preparation of a closure plan                                     NJAC Title 7, Chapter Relevant and apporiata" to
Waste In-    that minimizes the need for                                       26, Subchapter 9,     Alternative 3 and C4.
Place        further maintenance and                                           Sections 8 and 9
(Capping)    controls, minimizes or eli-                                       (Requirements for
             minates, to the extent                                            Harazardous Waste
             necessary to protect human                                        Facilities General
             health and the environment,                                       Closure and Post
             post-closure escape of hazar-                                     Closure Requirements)
             dous vests, hazardous waste
             constituents, leachate, con-                                      NJAC Title 7,Chapter
             taminated rainfall, or waste                                      26, Subchapter 10,
             decomposition products to the                                     Section 8(Additional
             grcundwater, surface water or                                     Operational and
             atmosphere. Plan should in-                                       Design Standards for
             clude decontamination of                                          Hazardous Waste
             facility equipment, scheduling,                                   Facilities Landfills)
             and closure procedures.
             Design standards for caps
             Post-closure care an ground-
             water monitoring (includes
             maintenance and monitoring and
             montoring of wate containment
             systems, as applicable.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        APPENDIX 3
                                              ACTION SPECIFICS STATE ARARS
                                                KIN-BUG FEASIBLHY STUDY

                                                                                                                       I
     ACTION                     REQUIREMENT             PREREQUISITE (S)           CITATION        POTENTS APPLICABILITY
Closure with Waste        Drainage and erosion                                See previous page     See previous page
In-Place(Capping)cont.    control standanrds.
                          Gas venting and gas
                          montoring requirements.
Chemical, Physical/ and   General operating and                              NJAC Title 1, Chapter "Applicable" to
Biological Treatment      inspection requirements                            Subchapter 9,(Addition Alternatives C3 and
                                                                             -al Requirements for C4 as it pertains
                                                                             Hazaradous Haste       to possible on-site
                                                                             Facilities Operating pretreament of
                                                                             under Exsisting Facil aqueous prior to
                                                                             -ity Status),Section 7 removal for off-
                                                                                                    site treatment.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    .

t
 i
1•*^
  1                                   APPENDIX 4
I                         i


                              COMMUNITY RELATIONS HISTORY

        Operational practices at the landfill in the early to mid-19701s


i       resulted in a large number of citizens complaints/ caused frequent
        on-site fires and a number of serious occupationcil injuries. The
        available information on community concerns indicates that these
        compliants began prior to 1976.
        An article published in the Newark Star-Ledger on May 14, 1976,
        refers to a petition by "angry residents" who complained of air and
        water pollution and several chemical fires caused by the Rin-Buc
        Landfill. According to this article, several citizens have complained
        to Township regarding the local government's inability to stop both the
        noxious smoke that emanated from the site when it burned and the trucks
        that drove through residential areas at 4:00 a.m. on the way to the
        landfill.
        Several articles published in local newpapers in the following year
        presented developments at the site, including the closure plan that
        DEP had accepted from Kin-Buc, the extension to the closure deadline
        that the site was issued by the Superior Court, and the June 1976
        formation of a citizens' group known as "Citizen's Committee to
        Close Kin-Buc". According to these articles, the Citizens Committee
        discovered that Kin-Buc had been issued an extention in March 1977
        allowing it to remain open until June and promptly began a letter-
        writing campaign to high-ranking State officials. The leader of the
        group stated that the Township had not been given sufficient notice
        to fight the extension. The Township appealed the extension and the
        Superior Court Judge deciding the case initially revoked the extension,
        but reinstated it five weeks later.
        Following the eventual closure of the site, public interest sub-
        sided and the citizens began to concentate on getting the site cleaned
        up. In July 1981, a citizens' group called "Coalition to Contain Kin-
        Buc" wrote a letter to Senator Bill Bradley asking his help in forcing
        EPA to name the site as .a priority. Senator Bradley forwarded the
        letter to the Acting Regional Administrator for EPA, Region II. The
        site was added to the National Priorities List of hazardous waste sites
        (NPL) in October 1981. At time of the NPL listing, EPA proposed an
        experimental hazardous waste incinerator as a 'possible remedial measure
        for the site. This proposal met with extension publics-opposition and
        was subsequently dropped.                              •'

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                               Appendix 4
                                                  -2-



The following year, 95 residents of the area surrounding the Kin-
Buc site filed a lawsuit against the Township and 600 businesses that
allegedly disposed of waste at Kin-Buc to collect damages caused by
contamination from the landfill. The Township settled out of court
and in 1985 citizens lobbied for a jury trail for the lawsuit
against the remainder of the defendants. The right to a jury
trial was eventually granted in 1986. The citizens and defendants
reached a 2.7 million dollar settlement in May 1988.
Although the Kin-Buc site received much media and community attention
during its years of operation, the frequency of complaints or spoken
concerns on the part of the public declined dramatically following
closure of the site. Of the few concerns that have arisen in the
recent past, according to those interviewed, the most prevalent is
the danger of adverse human health resulting from direct contact
with the contaminants at the site. Concerned parties cite air,
groundwater, and surface water s primary means for human contact
with the hazardous materials.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          APPENDIX 5
          RATIONALE FOR OPERABLE UNIT II COMPONENTS
                                                   •   •'*;
Mound B
Although it is believed that the majority of hazardous waste
disposal occurred in the Kin-Buc I mound; little is known about
the contents of Mound B. It is believed that municipal trash
extends beneath Mound B. However, Mound B was not a subject
of the remedial investigation or previous investigatory work
dating to the mid-1970's. In addition, Mound B is physically
separated by the Edison Landfill access road. For these reasons,
EPA determined that the need to evaluate the nature and extent
of contamination in Mound B could be conducted as part of
Operable Unit II.
Raritan River/Mill Brook/Martins Creek/Edmonds Creek
Initial attempts to determine the nature and extent of surface
water and sediment contamination date back to 1974 by analyzing
samples from the Raritan River. Sampling and analysis of the
Raritan River conducted to date has been sporadic and does not
take into account potential seasional variations in contaminant
movement. Limited analytic data indicate the potential for
surface water and sediment contamination in the Raritan River
from groundwater discharges and surface run-off from the site.
However, the selected remedy for Operable Unit I would provide
source control measures such that the Raritan River and sediments
would no longer be a receptor of releases from the site. Remedy
selection for source control measures at the site is considered
the critical pathway in the overall site clean-up.
The Mill Brook and Martins Creek surface waters have not been the
focus of any detailed investigatory work. Limited sampling and
analysis of Martin Creek sediments indicate potential PCB
contamination due to leachate from the site entering Martins
Creek. Currently, control measures at the site prevent the release
of leachate into Martins Creek. The selected remedy for
Operable Unit I provides source control measures to prevent
releases to Martins Creek from the site.
Edmonds Creek sediments were the focus of a sampling program
conducted in 1983. Until installation of the Kin-Buc I cap
in 1980 and on-going control measures, leachate was released
into Edmonds Creek from Pool C via a connecting channel.
Sampling and analysis to date indicate PCB contamination in
Edmonds Creek. In additional, several fish and inverterbrate
species from Edmonds Creek were shown to have elevated levels
of contaminants in their tissue. However, the nature and extent
of contamination needs to be evaluated more extensively.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           Appendix 5
                                                              -2-

0
    adjacent wetlands
    The wetlands adjacent to the Kin-Rue Landfill site have never been
    the focus of any previous investigations. Potential environmental
    effects of uncontrolled releases from the site exist. Various
    aquatic and terrestrial species utilize the adjacent wetlands as
    their habitant. Therefore, the need to fully evaluate the nature
    and extent of contamination and any environmental effects of
    such contamination exists.
" groundwater contamination emanating from the site
    The hydrogeology of the site is complex and has not been fully
    characterized. Uncertainties exist, for example about the nature
    and extent of bedrock aquifer contamination and the possibility
    of a connection between the sand and gravel aquifer and the
    Raritan River. The extent of migration of contaminants in the
    groundwater has not been fully evaluated to date.
The evaluation of the components of Operable Unit II were deferred
so as not to delay implementation of source control measures at
the site.
