LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: RECORD OF DECISION, REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVE SELECTION, SYNCON RESINS, KEARNY, NEW JERSEY, (COVER LETTER ATTACHED).
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/100005
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: f916fc0a6fa55607489f2d2df87f08bf87d9429f34d572da885f47db37b5de01
Source PDF pages: 83
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                           SDMS Document
                           UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
                                             REGION II
   DATE:      SEP 29 1996
                                                                             100005

SUBJECT:   Record of Decision for
           Syncon Resins Site
  FROM:    James R. Marshall, Act
           Emergency & Remedial            nse Division (2ERRD)
     TO:
           Christopher J. Daggett
           Regional Administrator (2RA)


           Attached for your approval is the Record of Decision (ROD) for
           the Syncon Resins site in Kearny, New Jersey. We briefed you
           on the results of our remedial investigation and feasibility
           study for this site on September 25, 1986.

           As you will recall, the recommended alternative is considered
           an interim remedy or first operable unit. The major features
           of the remedy include the removal of the contents of storage
           tanks and vessels as well as lagoon liquids and sediments. In
           addition, contaminated soils and groundwater will be remediated
           through natural flushing. Subsequent treatability studies will
           identify the most appropriate methods to increase the effective-
           ness of the flushing program. Any additional remedial actions
           in this regard will be the subject of another ROD. The present
           worth cost of this interim remedy is approximately $7 million.

           We have worked closely with the State and its contractor to
           attempt to determine what possible additional actions may be
           necessary to constitute a permanent or final remedy for the
           Syncon site. Although the goal of these additional actions
           would be to comply with all applicable and relevant State
           requirements (i.e. ECRA, groundwater quality), we can not nov?
           say for certain whether this goal will be fully realized. In
           fact, only a full-scale excavation program with a cost in
           excess of $100 million could assure attainment of all State
           requirements. However, because the recommended alternative
           will remove contaminants from the soils and groundwater, it
           provides the best chance (aside from excavation) that the land
           could be used for some constructive purpose in the future.
           It appears likely that some type of in-situ treatment process
           will be considered to further cleanse the contaminated soils.
           Examples of such processes may include accelerated flushing,
           biodegradation, solvent/detergent washing, etc. Although it is
           not possible to accurately estimate costs at this time, they
           may range from $10 to $20 million depending on the specific
           methods chosen. Of course, any additional treatment action
           would need to be regularly monitored and evaluated relative to
           its effectiveness.




  REGION II FORM 132O-1 (9/85)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -2-

The ROD has been reviewed by the appropriate program offices
within Region II and the State of New Jersey and their input
and comments are reflected in this document. In addition, a
letter from the State confirming its verbal concurrence of the
selected remedy is forthcoming.
Attachment

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         RECORD OF DECISION
                   REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVE SELECTION

                                                         \

Sd_te   Syncon Resins, Kearny, New Jersey
Documents Reviewed
I am basing my decision on the following documents, which
describe the analysis of remedial alternatives considered for
the Syncon Resins site.
- Remedial Investigation Report, prepared by Ebasco Services,
  May 1986 (revised August 1986)
- Risk Assessment Report, prepared by Ebasco Services,
  June 1986 (revised August 1986)
- Identification and Screening of Remedial Alternatives, prepared
  by Ebasco Services, June 1986 (revised August 1986)
- Feasibility Study Report, prepared by Ebasco Services,
  July 1986 (revised August 1986)
- Responsiveness Summary, September 1986
- Staff summaries and recommendations
Description of Selected Remedy

- Remove the contents of storage tanks and vessels for disposal
  in accordance with applicable requirements
- Decontaminate buildings and tank structures as necessary
- Remove lagoon liquids and sediments for disposal in accordance
  with applicable requirements
- Remove grossly contaminated surface soils for disposal in
  accordance with applicable requirements
- Install an appropriate cover over the site to allow natural
  flushing of underlying soil and ground water contaminants
- Collect and treat contaminated waters from the shallow aquifer,
  with discharge to the Passaic River
- Conduct supplemental studies to evaluate methods to enhance
  the effectiveness of flushing and/or treatment and destruction
  of the contaminated soils

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -2-
                               "\

Declarations
Consistent with the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, and the National Oil
and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (40 CFR
Part 300), I have determined that the alternative described
herein is a permanent remedy that will control the source of
contamination and mitigate off-site migration of contaminants.
I have further determined that this remedy is a cost-effective
alternative that is both technologically feasible and reliable.
It effectively mitigates and minimizes threats to and provides
adequate protection of public health and the environment. At
the same time, it meets all applicable and relevant Federal and
State public health and environmental requirements. Further-
more, the selected remedy is appropriate when balanced against
the availability of Trust Fund monies for use at other sites.
The State of New Jersey has been consulted and agrees with the
selected remedy.




                              ( JL   7tf/L^ J. '\<L^,M
                                            g
           '                          '          7/
Date.                         Christopher J. Daggfett
                              Regional Administrator

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

           SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVE SELECTION

             SYNCON RESINS SITE, KEARNY, NEW JERSEY


SITE Li. ATION AND DESCRIPTION

The Sy-jzon Resins site encompasses approximately 15 acres and
is located in a heavily industrialized area of northern New
Jersey. The site is located in Kearny, Hudson County, at
approximately 40° 44' latitude and 74° 06' longitude. The site
is bounded on its western edge by the Passaic River (Figure 1).
Adjacent to the northern and southern boundaries of the site
are two licensed hazardous waste haulers. The site is bounded
on the eastern side by Jacobus Avenue and is across the street
from a lacquer manufacturing facility.
The Syncon Resins site is situated on a narrow peninsula of
land bordered by the Passaic and Hackensack Rivers, whose con-
fluence 1.5 miles south of the site forms the upper reaches of
Newark Bay. The site is relatively flat with minor topographic
variations. The elevation at the site ranges from five to ten
feet above mean sea level (MSL). Both the Passaic and Hackensack   r
Rivers are tidal water bodies with a mean spring tidal range of
approximately six feet. Newark Bay, the Passaic River, and the     I
Hackensack River are major components of the Hudson River-New      '
York Bight estuarine system.
The narrow peninsula on which the Syncon Resins site is located
is heavily industrialized. Various chemical plants, hazardous
waste transporters, manufacturing companies, petroleum facilit-
ies, and storage terminals are situated within the immediate
area. The closest residential areas to the site are located
approximately one mile due west in Newark and one and one-half
miles due southeast in Jersey City. The shallow aquifer in the
area is not utilized for any purpose. Ground water from the
confined or deeper aquifer within the area is utilized solely
for industrial purposes. All potable water for the area's
users is supplied via municipal water purveyors.
The Syncon Resins site and the surrounding area are situated
within the Hudson River drainage basin. The material overlying
the bedrock comprises primarily alluvial sands, silts, clay
and detritus. Immediately beneath the site are four major
stratigraphic units within the alluvial material: 1) a surficial
fine to coarse sand layer approximately 10 feet thick, 2) a
highly plastic clay layer approximately 8-10 feet thick, 3) a
medium sand layer approximately 10 feet thick, and 4) a deep
layer of silty clay and very fine sand approximately 15 feet
thick. All four stratigraphic units are continuous across the
site.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       -2-




                                                        IMltt


1000        1000                                i fin
                    FIGURE 1
       SITE LOCATION MAP. SYNCON RESINS SITE,
             HUDSON COUNTY. NEW JERSEY

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -3-
The two sand layers are separated by tl.    ay layer, which acts
as an aquitard, thereby forming two aqu., 3 beneath the Syncon
Resins site: 1) a shallow, water table a. fer above the clay
layer and 2) a deep, confined aquifer be .^.th the clay layer.
Over most of the site, the water table i    ne to two feet below
ground level and gently slopes to the wet- toward the Passaic
River. The confining layer of clay underlying the site begins
approximately 10 feet below grade. Ground water velocity within
the shallow aquifer was calculated to be 31.2 feet per year. The
deep aquifer has an estimated ground watc-r velocity of 2.1 feet
per year.
SITE HISTORY
The origin of the Syncon Resins site is obscure. The earliest
evidence documenting the existence sof the site consists of 1951
aerial photographs of the area. In November 1981, the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) investigated the
£»ite and ordered its owners to control and contain the hazards
at the site. In May 1977, the owners of Syncon Resins filed
Cor bankruptcy under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Act; in 1982,
the company ceased all operations. In December 1982, the site
V7as listed on the National Priorities List.
The Syncon Resins facility produced alkyd resin carriers for
pigments, paints, and varnish products. The processes that
produced these resins were carried out in closed stainless steel
vessels. Cooling water utilized in the production process was
recycled within the system. In the production process, excess
xylene or toluene was separated from the wastewater and reused
in subsequent reactions. The remaining wastewater was subse-
quently pumped to an unlined leaching pond (lagoon), where it
was allowed to evaporate or percolate into the soil. Apparently,
much of the company's operations consisted of the reprocessing
of off-specification resins purchased from other manufacturers.
The site consisted of at least two reactor buildings containing
stainless steel vessels, various other buildings and structures,
numerous large bulk storage tanks, two unlined lagoons, and an
unknown number of underground tanks and associated piping systems
(Figure 2). A total of 12,824 55-gallon drums of off-specif-
ication resins, raw materials, wastes and solvents stored at
various locations on the site were removed in 1984, under a
Cooperative Agreement between the NJDEP and the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA), at a cost of $2.4 million. Still
remaining on-site are numerous laboratory chemicals and batch
samples of resins which are scheduled to be removed in the
near future.
As stated above, the two unlined lagoons at the site were used
for discharging process wastewater. Lagoon 1 is the larger of
the two lagoons, with approximate dimensions of 40 by 135 feet.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          «!•»••«     \
                     tilt M«M» IK "**'••




S*.- .;/;^.-V^•>! • • f




                                    BUILDINQ AND TANK SAMPLING
                                         LOCATIONS (1985)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

'        '                       -5-

Lagoon 2 is approximately 40 by 15 feet in size.     The depth of
each lagoon has been estimated at 4 feet.
Six main buildings and seven ancillary structures exist on the
Syncon Resins site. Building B-l appeared to be primarily
utilized for maintenance and storage, with the western third of
the building being utilized for some production and/or process
work. Building B-7 was the main production/process building
and electrical service facility. Building B-10, near the front
gate, contained administrative offices on the second floor and
probably utilized the first floor as a storage area. Building
B-ll, near Lagoon 2, may have served as an equipment storage
and/or maintenance area. Building B-RED, with loading docks
adjacent to the railroad tracks and parking areas, most probably
served as a shipping/receiving or short-term storage area. A
laboratory (Building B-8) located near the main entrance and
adjacent to Building B-10 was utilized for in-process formulations
and quality checks of the finished product. The other buildings
on-site were also used in process-related activities.
CURRENT SITE STATUS
A.    Previous Investigations
      In 1982, a limited site investigation was performed by the
      NJDEP and the EPA at the Syncon Resins site. This investi-
      gation focused on a preliminary assessment of the types and
      extent of contaminants at the facility.
        The investigation showed widespread contamination. Within
        the deep aquifer, six contaminants (benzene, methylene
     fcv
          chloride, tetrachloroethylene, chloroform, carbon tetra-
        chloride and PCBs) exceeded adjusted ambient water quality
        criteria (AAWQC). Shallow ground water was grossly contami-
        nated with 24 organic compounds, of which fourteen exceeded
        AAWQC. Thirteen of these contaminants were found at extremely
        high concentrations (greater than 760 parts per million
         (ppm)), with nine of them present in the ground water at
        percent levels (parts per hundred). Seven contaminants
        found in the shallow ground water could not be compared to
        the water quality criteria since no criteria currently
        exist for these compounds.
      Gross chemical contamination was found within the Syncon
      Resins facility's soils. Ten base/neutral compounds in
      excess of 400 ppm and high concentrations of toluene and
      methylene chloride were found in test pit soils. PCBs
      (greater than 33,000 ppm), DDT (in excess of 1400 ppm) and
      high concentrations of arsenic, chromium, lead, mercury,
      and zinc were also present. Nearly all of the compounds
      found in the test pit soils are suspected carcinogens.
      Two localized areas of high concentrations of contaminants
      or "hot spots" were identified during this investigation:

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                           -6-

 1) the southwest corner of the site adjacent to      'assaic
 River, and 2) the northeast corner of the proper;    ear the
 large 600,000-gallon storage tanks. High concen -.=..ions of
 toluene and PCBs were found in the southwest corr     whereas
 elevated concentrations of naphthalene and petro'1 v* hydro-
 carbons occurred in the northeast corner.
 A survey of the 12,824 55-gallon drums stored at vi.ious
 on-site locations revealed three main classes of materials:
 non-PCB containing, PCB containing, and peroxides. Most of
 the drummed material did not contain PCBs and could be
 separated into five categories: bulk solids (2,441 tons),
 flammable solids (1,452 drums), lab packs (10 drums),
 flammable liquids (79,100 gallons) and base/neutral liquids
 (66,911 gallons). PCB containing materials were categorized
 as bulk solids (1 ton), drummed liquids (29 drums) and
 flammable materials (49 drums). Only six drums of peroxide
 were found on-site. All of these drummed materials were
 removed from the site by licensed waste haulers.
 Present Site Investigations
  The sampling performed during the remedial investigation
  indicated extensive on-site contamination in all of the
  matrices sampled (i.e., vessels and tanks, soil, ground water,
  and building dirt/dust), except for ambient air. Four
  general classes of chemical contaminants were found on-site:
  organic compounds (volatiles and base/neutral extractables),
  pesticides, PCBs, and metals. The organic compounds present
  are normal raw materials and/or resin components, and the
:
  metals seen are probably from metallic oxides or organo-
  metallics utilized as pigments or catalysts in the production
  processes.
 A total of 150 tanks and vessels remain on-site including
 three which are underground. Approximately half of the
 on-site tanks are empty. Of those tanks containing material,
 most of the tanks contained either hexaneor water-soluble
 peroxides or hexane-soluble liquids and solids. Table 1
 summarizes the tanks and vessels, their contents, and
 volumes of material.
 Four tanks (approximately 7,000 gallons) contained aqueous
 liquids; whereas two tanks (approximately 900 gallons)
 contained cyanide-positive organics. Two tanks were essen-
 tially empty except for a minimal amount of a solid, hexane-
 soluble material. Fourteen tanks were categorized as special
 cases because it was difficult to assign them to a single
 general category. Most of these fourteen tanks contained
 flammable liquids or solids, crystalline or polymeric
 material, or sludge residues. In addition to their chemical
 content, some tanks and associated piping were encased in
 an asbestos-base material.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      -7-


                                 TABLE 1
                            TANKS AND VESSELS               :



Group   Category             Total          No. of      Comments
                             Volume         Tanks

1.       Empty                               66      2 tanks*; 2 tanks**
2.       Near Empty                           2      Hexane-soluble solids
3.      Cyanides                 900 gal      2
4.       Hexane-Soluble       43,000 gal     16
              Peroxides
5.      Water-soluble         54,000 gal     22
             Peroxides      20 CY solids
6.      Hexane-Soluble        26,000 gal     11      2 tanks**; 1 tank***
             Liquids
7.      Hexane-Soluble             30 CY      6      1 tank**
             Solids
8.      Aqueous Liquids       7,000 gal       4      largely rainwater
9.      Special Cases                        14


PCB concentration ranges:
  * 10-100 ppm
 ** 100-500 ppm
*** >500 ppm

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -8-


Contamination from organic compounds exists throughout the Syncon
Resins site (Tables 2 through 7). Volatile organic contaminant
concentrations were greatest in the lagoon sediments, in saturated
and unsaturated soils near the southwest corner of the site ad-
jacent to Lagoon 2, and around Buildings 1 and 7. Primarily,
the volatile contaminants were common solvents: toluene, xylene,
trichloroethylene, ethylbenzene, benzene, 2-hexanone, methyl
isobutyl ketone, and chlorobenzene. The data suggest that this
contamination may have been caused, in part, by solvent carry-over
into the wastewater and spills.
The shallow aquifer was contaminated primarily with the same
volatile organic solvents as those found in the lagoon sediments
and former process buildings (i.e., toluene, xylene, trichloro-
ethylene). Generally, the greatest concentrations of these
common solvents occurred in the south-central and south-western
portions of the site near the tank farm and in the northeastern
portion of the site near former drum storage areas. This suggests
that tank and drum leakage or spillage may be the primary
source of this contamination.
The confined aquifer beneath the clay layer did not contain any
volatile organic solvents found in other on-site matrices. Thus,
the confining clay layer beneath the site appears to act as a
barrier to vertical migration of chemical contaminants. Two
solvents (1,1-dichloroethane and chlorobenzene) were present in
the deep aquifer, but their absence from on-site water matrices
suggest an off-site source.
Acid/base/neutral organic compounds present? in saturated and
unsaturated soils on-site were principally phthalates, polyaro-
inatic hydrocarbons, dichlorobenzene, N-nitrosodiphenylamine/
diphenylaroine and 4-methylphenol. Surficial phthalate contami-
nation was found throughout the site, with the greatest concen-
trations occurring in the soils adjacent to the buildings at
the southeast corner of the site near Jacobus Avenue. In con-
trast, none of the other acid/base/neutral compounds exhibited
any vertical distributional pattern in the on-site soils.
These compounds were instead concentrated in saturated and
unsaturated soils in or near former storage, processing, or
laboratory areas. This suggests that drums, tanks, or buildings
may be possible point sources for these contaminants.
Base/neutral organic compounds, principally naphthalene and 2-
methyl naphthalene, were present in the ground water near the
south-central tank farm and the large 600,000-gallon storage
tanks at the northeastern corner of the site. These compounds
were found only in the shallow aquifer, above the clay layer.
The close proximity of the base/neutral compounds within the
shallow aquifer to the large storage tanks and tank farm suggests

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         -9-
                                     TABLE 2
                        SUMMARY TABLE OF CONCENTRATION RANGES
                       'FOR EESTICIDES/PCBs AND METALS DETECTED
                  IN UNSATURATED. SATURATED AND CLAY SAM) LAYER SOILS
                      SAMPLED DURING THE 1985 SITE INVESTIGATIONS



                                          Concentration Ranges
Compound                 Unsaturated Soil Saturated Soil day Sand Layer Soil

Pesticides/PCBs:

       DOT               ND-120 ppm        ND-0.015 ppm
       DDD               ND-20    ppm
       DDE               ND-9.1 ppm
       Aldrin            ND-0.168 ppig
       PCB               ND-31    ppm

Metals*:

       Lead             ND-4919 ppa        ND-1233 ppm                  -
   ;   Zinc              ND-994   ppa      25-330  ppm              13-21   Ppn
       Vanadium          ND-851  ppn       ND-60       Ppn             -
       Chromium          12-829 PP»        9-332       ppa          ND-12   PPn
       Arsenic           8.5-256 ppm       ND-37       ppa            '-
       Nickel            ND-83 " PPn       ND-315      PPn             -
       Thallium          ND-69   ppm       ND-44       ppa          ND-13     PPn
       r+Amlttm          ND-17   ppm       ND-9.3      PPn             -
       Silver            ND-8.1 PPn            -                       -
       Mercury           ND-1.5 PPn        ND-1.8      ppa          0.21-1.4 ppm
       Cobalt                 -            ND-18       Ppn          ND-5.5 ppn
       Phenols           ND-51   ppm           ND-18   ppa          ND-5.5 Ppn



Note: Clay Sand Layer Soil ia soil obtained below the clay layer from the
       17-19 foot depth Interval.
   * - Qualified data.


4290b

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                            -10-
                                       TABLE 3
                       SUMMARY TABLE OF CONCENTRATION RANGES
              FOR VOLATILES. ACID/RASE NEUTRAL EXTRACTABLES AND
                           MbTALS DEmjl'KL) IN . UNSATUKATEU
                      AND SATURATED SOTT5 DURING THE 1986 SITE
                                   INVESTIGATIONS

                                                   Concentration Range*
   Compound                             Unaaturated Soil           Saturated Soil

Volatile Organic* .                            •

    Methylene Chloride                 ND -    0.17        ppo   ND - 0.05 ppm •
    Toluene                            ND - 2400           ppa   ND - 150  Ppa
    Xylene (Total)                     ND - 1600           ppo   ND - 30   ppa
    Chlorobenzene                      ND -   24           ppa   ND - 1.2 PP»
    Ethylbentene                       ND - 240            ppa   ND - 8.2 ppa
    2-Hexanone (MBR)                   ND -    2.1         PPB   ND - 0.12 ppa
    4-Methyl-2-pentanone (MIBK)                                  ND - 0.11 Ppn
                                           -
    1 ,1, 2, 2-Tetrachloroethane                                 ND - 0.04 ppa
                                           -

Acid/Base Neutral*

    Naphthalene                        ND -         0.84   ppa   ND -   1.4 Ppn
    2-Me thylnaphthalene               ND -         0.77   Ppa   ND -   2.6 ppa
    Dibeacofuran                       ND -         0.71   ppa   ND - 0".62 ppn
    Dlethylphthalate                   ND-          0.59   ppa   ND - 0.66 Ppn
    Pluorene                           ND -         0.83   ppa   ND - 2.5 Ppa
    Phenanthrene                        ND -       12      ppa   ND - 27    Ppn
    Anthracene                          ND -        5      ppa   ND - 41     ppa
    Di-n-butylphthalat*                 ND - 330           Ppa   ND -    5.8 ppa
    Pluoranthene                        ND -       41      ppa   ND - 190    Ppn
    Pyrene                              ND -       12      ppa   ND - 160    ppa
    BeMo(a)anthrac*ne                   ND -   8.2         Ppa   ND - 79     Ppn
    bit (2-etbylhexyl)phthalate       0.44 - 210           Ppa   ND -   44   ppn .
    Chryaane                            ND - 8.6           Ppa   ND - 74     ppm



3964b

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                          -11-
                               TABLE 3    (Cont'd)
                     SUMMARY TABLE OF CONCENTRATION RANGES
               FOR VOLATILES. ACID/BASE NEUTRAL EXTRACTABLES AND
                                 iJi'KC'l Tq UNSATUPATED
                    AND SATURATED SOILS DURING THE 1986 SIT£
                                 INVESTIGATIONS

                                                Concentration Ranges
   Compound                          Untaturated Soil           Saturated Soil

Acid/Bate Neutrals (Cont'd)
    Di-n-octylphthalate           ND - 210 pptn                ND - 2.3 ppa
    Benzo(a)pyrene                ND - 9.4 ppa                 ND - 87   ppa
    Xndeno(l,2,3-c,d)pyrene       ND - n ppa                   ND - 84   ppa
    Ben*o(g,h(i)perylene          ND - 5.8 ppa                 ND - 53   ppa
    Acenaphthene                  ND - 1.5 ppa                 ND - 1.7 ppa
    N-nitrosodiphenlyaaine                                     ND - 2.8 ppa
    Benzo(b)fluoranthene           ND -     3.6 ppa            ND - 76   ppa
    BenxoQOfluoranthene                                        ND - 58   ppa
    4-Methylphenol                                             ND - 0.67 ppa
    Dlbenz o (a ,h)anthracene      ND - 2.2 ppa                ND - 1.4 ppa
    1,2-Dichlorobencene            ND - 19 ppm

totals

    Araenic                        ND - 87       ppa           ND - 25   Ppa
    Cadaiua                        ND- 31        ppa            3 -   4  Ppa
    LMd                            89 - 855      ppa           7.2- 270  ppa
    Nickel                         ND- 89        ppa           ND - 57 Ppa
    Zinc                           44 - 485      ppa           29 - 274 Ppa
    Silver                                                     ND - 17 ppa
                                      -
    Chroaiua                       15 - 113 ppa                10 - 68 ppa
    Mercury                        ND - 1.4 ppa                0.1-   0.6 ppa




1 - Compound cannot be distinguished froa diphenylaalae.


3964b

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                          -12-
                                   TABLE 4
                       SUMMARY TABLE OF CONCENTRATION RANGES
                       FOR PRIORITY POLLUTANTS PETF/TRD
                         IN MONITORING WELL WATER SAMPLED
                       DURING THE 1985 SITE INVESTIGATIONS




                                             Concentration Range
                                                                Deep Groundwater
Compound                       Shallow Groundwater             (Below Clay Layer)


Toluene                          ND-280,000 ppb                     ND-6 ppb
Xylene                           ND-12,000 ppm
Methylene Chloride               ND-3,000 ppb
Trichloroethylene                ND-2000    ppb                     ND-7 ppb
Chlorobenrene                                                       ND-88 ppb
1,1-Dichloroethane               ND-5            ppb                ND-14 ppb


2-Methlynaphthalene*             ND-1500         ppb
Naphthalene*                     ND-300          ppb

Arsenic                          ND-76           ppb
Barium                           ND-646          ppb                ND-261 ppb
ChiroBluB                                                           ND-12 ppb
Lead                             ND-18           ppb                ND-12 ppb
Nickel                           ND-131          ppb
Vanadium                         ND-94           ppb                57-76 ppb
Zinc                             ND-156          ppb                23-45 ppb




  - Qualified data




3478b

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         -13-
                                       TABLE 5
                         SUMMARY TABLE OF CONCENTRATION RANGES
                            FOR PRIORITY POLLUTANTS DETECTED
                       ABOVE THE DETECTION LIMIT IN LAGOON WATER
                      SAMPLED DURING THE 1983 SITE INVESTIGATIONS




                                                     Concentrations
  Compound                               Lagoon 1                     Lagoon 2


  Toluene*                                   -                        1300 ppb

  Methyl isobutyl ketone (MIBK)*           130 ppb                    1200 ppb

. Xylene*                                    -                         500 ppb

  Zllnc*                                   202 ppb                      62 ppb




 * - Qualified d«t«



 3478b

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         -14-
                                    TABLE 6
                       SUMMARY TABLE OF CONCENTRATION RANGES
                FOR VOLATILES. PESTICIDES/PCBs AND METALS DETECTED
                   ABOVE THE DETECTION LIMIT IN LAGOON SEDIMENTS
                    SAMPLED DURING THE 1985 SITE INVESTIGATIONS




                                              Concentration Range*
                                         Lagoon 1
Compound                       Vest                 East              Lagoon 2


Toluene*                    26000 ppa               470 ppo          7900 ppm
Xylene*                                             270 ppa          3300 ppa
Ethylbenrene*                                        76 ppa           820 ppa

Arochlor 1248                1200 ppa               860 ppa            41 ppm
Arochlor 1254                 410 ppm               270 ppa            13 ppa

Lead*                         372 ppa                75 ppa          1980 ppm
Zinc*                         632 ppa               429 ppa           442 ppa
Barium*                       373 ppm*              393 ppo*          310 ppm*
Chroaiua*                     117 ppa                32 ppa*          160 ppa
Cadmium*                      5.4 ppm                97 ppa           106 ppm
Nickel*                                                                52 ppm




 - Concentration is below normal background levels for this metal in soils
   (Conner and Shacklette, 1975; US EPA, 1982)
 - Qualified data


3478b

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         -15-
                                      TABLE 7
                       SUMMARY TABLE OF CONCENTRATION RANGES
                FOR VOLATILES. PESTICIDES/PCB» AND METALS DETECTED
                  ABOVE THE DETECTION LIMIT IN BUILDINGS SAMPLED
                        DURING THE 1985 SITE INVESTIGATIONS




Co»pound               B-l         B-7          B-10        B-ll

TrJlchloroe thylene   1.5 ppa     1.5 ppa       1.6 ppm     2.6 ppa    1.7 ppa
Toluene               1.2 ppm     1.8 ppa
Xy.'lent              1.0 ppa    15.0 ppm                    0.6 ppm
Ethylbenzene           -           3.8 ppm                             0.9 ppa

Cblordane                                                                80 ppa
DDD                                             1.1 ppm
Arochlorl248                                                  32 ppm
                       -            -            -                       -
Anochlor 1254           17 ppm     2.7 ppm                    24 ppm
                                                 -                       -
Bexium*                4650 ppm 6090 ppm        3820 ppm    5200 ppm    852 ppm
Chromium*               428 ppm' 162 ppm          64 ppm     2BB ppm    313 ppa
lead*                  4379 ppm 3360 ppm        3540 ppm    1540 ppm   1780 ppm
Nickel*                  80 ppm   84 ppm                     201 ppm     62 ppa
                                                  -
Vanadium*                99 ppm   65 ppm
                                                  -           -          -
Ziac*                 10500 ppm 7250 ppm        3140 ppm    1460 ppa   6710 ppn
Cadmium*                 17 ppm   96 ppm         7.3 ppm      14 ppa    146 ppm
Cobalt*                  33 ppm   30 ppm




B-l -   Building B-l; probable former maintenance/pipe shop/storage and
        limited production/proceM area.
B-7 - Building B-7; probable former process/production building and
        electrical itorage facility.
B-ll - Building B-ll; probable former atorage/mechanical maintenance area.
B-RZD - Building B-RED; probable shipping/receiving/short term storage area.
* -     Qualified data
3478b

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -16-


that these vessels may be contaminar, .ources. The two base/
neutral compounds present in the sha; ow aquifer would have
been used in the manufacture of some f the facility's products.
Generally, the pesticides present at ihe Syncon Resins site
were found in soils adjacent to former drum storage areas and
in the building dust and dirt in former storage and shipping-
receiving buildings. Pesticide contamination in the soil
appeared to be a surficial phenomenon with the highest concen-
trations occurring in unsaturated soils. The distribution of
pesticide contamination in soils simply suggests spillage, but
bears no apparent connection with resin plant operations.
PCB contamination at the Syncon Resins site is restricted to
lagoon sediments, dirt and dust samples from former production/
process buildings, and one soil area. It was also found in
eight tanks (Table 1) and over 75 drums during the 1984 removal
action. Again, there is no apparent connection between this
contaminant (PCBs) and alkyd resin manufacturing.
While metal contamination was present in all non-air sample
matrices, elevated individual metal concentrations exhibited
distinct on-site distributional patterns within certain matrices.
In soils, the highest metal concentrations were generally present
within the western one-third of the site near the Passaic River
and adjacent to former drum/tank storage areas. Spillage onto
the soil in the drum/tank storage areas is the most probable
cause of this contamination. In contrast, inorganic contamination
of the shallow aquifer showed no specific distributional pattern
except for arsenic, which also tended to be highest in surficial
soils in the northern half of the site.
In general, inorganic constituents within the deep aquifer were
metals not found within the shallow aquifer. Excluding barium
and zinc, no other metals within the deep aquifer were detected
in the shallow ground water above the clay layer, suggesting
that the clay layer serves as an effective barrier to vertical
migration.
The lagoon sediments and the building dirt/dust contain similar
relative proportions of certain metal concentrations that would
have been utilized at the Syncon Resins site during its operation.
Thus, the bulk of the metal contamination at the Syncon Resins
site may stem from improperly handled raw materials or by-
products, especially with regard to catalysts and pigments.
The Syncon Resins site exhibits extensive chemical contamination
of organic compounds, pesticides, PCBs and metals. Although some
specific contaminants were concentrated in particular on-site

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -17-


areas, all of t'~ i apparent site-related contaminants were re-
stricted to matrices located above the clay layer beneath the
site.
Chemical constituents were present in the confined aquifer
beneath the clay layer. These constituents, however, appee
to stem from an off-site source.
The chemical contamination present at the Syncon Resins site is
apparently restricted from vertical movement due to the clay
layer beneath the site. However, lateral movements of contami-
nants within the shallow aquifer are not restricted. The ground
water flow within the shallow aquifer can transport these con-
taminants to the Passaic River. This ground water movement, in
conjunction with tidal flushing, is one of the principal means
of off-site transport of contaminants.

PUBLIC HEALTH RISKS
Based on the geological, hydrological, and chemical contaminant
characteristics of the Syncon Resins site, eleven potential
exposure pathways have been identified. These pathways include
ingestion, inhalation, and direct contact with various media.
Three on-site matrices (unsaturated soil, lagoon sediment, and
building dirt and dust) exceeded health-based criteria for
organic and metal contaminants and pose a health risk via
direct contact and ingestion.
In addition to the various on-site matrices posing potential health
risks, some of the on-site tanks and vessels contain materials
that could pose potential health risks to exposed populations
if left on-site.
ENFORCEMENT
A claim for cleanup costs incurred at the site has been filed
in the Bankruptcy proceedings of Syncon Resins, Inc. A cost
recovery action for part of these costs has been initiated
against Benjamin A. Farber, former owner of the entire Syncon
Resins site and present owner of a portion of the site.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                -18-


An investigation is in progress to identify additional potentially
responsible parties (PRP's) for purposes of potential cost
recovery and enforcement actions in regard to future costs of
remedial activities. Any such additional parties identified as
PRP's will be included in all actions for recovery of cleanup
costs and will be sent notice letters offering them the opportunity
to perform the design and construction activities recommended
in this document before EPA and NJDEP make a decision to fund
any future work.
DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

The feasibility study process involves, as a first step,
selecting technologies that are appropriate for remedying the
public health and environmental concerns associated with a
particular site. In the case of the Syncon Resins site, the
remedial objective is to control the potential release of
contaminants from the site.
The following remedial objectives were established as a result
of the risk assessment performed for the site:
  0
      Develop mitigative measures to prevent exposure of humans
      to organic and metal contaminants within the unsaturated
      soil, lagoon sediments, and building dirt/dust through
      direct contact and ingestion exposure routes;
  0
    Implement mitigative measures to eliminate the potential
    hazard to exposed populations caused by the asbestos material
    covering the on-site tanks and vessels and the chemical
  ' materials remaining within them.
While the contaminated, on-site shallow ground water poses
little risk of direct contact or ingestion, it eventually flows
into the Passaic River and so constitutes a discharge of a
hazardous substance. Various State statutes require that the
NJDEP implement or require the implementation of corrective
action programs where the waters of the State have been sign-
ificantly degraded by hazardous substances.
The following remedial objectives were established as a result
of NJDEP1s policy on maintaining or improving existing ground
water and receiving water conditions:
  0
      Implement mitigative measures to remediate the contaminated
      ground water within the shallow aquifer to levels identified
      in the following guidance documents:

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               -19-


      - Ground water criteria for Class GW3 aquife.    .-.J.A.C.
        7:9-6);
      - NJPDES effluent limitations for discharge :.    the
        Passaic River (N.J.A.C. 7:9-5); and
      - Best Available Technology (BAT) Limitations Option III
        for Organics and Plastics and Synthetic Fib- • 40 CFR
        Parts 414 and 416, Proposed Rule.
  0
      Develop mitigative measures to remediate the contaminated
      saturated soils above the continuous clay layer.
Considering available technologies and the site's existing
physical conditions, several remedial alternatives were developed
and are listed in Table 8, along with their capital costs,
operation and maintenance costs, and total present worth costs.
A summary of treatment, storage, and disposal methodologies for
these alternatives is shown in Table 9.
Present worth costs for all alternatives were calculated using
a thirty-year life cycle as a basis for comparison.

ALTERNATIVE 1 - NO ACTION
The no action alternative involves installation of a security
fence around the perimeter of the site, removal of structurally
unsafe buildings to an off-site landfill under the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), sealing of other on-site
buildings, and long-term monitoring of the integrity of buildings,
tanks, and air and ground water matrices. This alternative
does not remove or reduce contaminant levels on-site. Hence,
the risk and exposure pathways are not mitigated and the future
reuse of the site would be restricted.
ALTERNATIVE ? - REMOVE BUILDINGS, TANKS, AND SOIL, AND OFF-SITE
                WASTE DISPOSAL
This alternative involves the removal of all buildings, tanks,
tank contents, piping, and other structures, as well as soil and
sediment exceeding the cleanup criteria for off-site treatment
or disposal. Uncontaminated soil would remain on-site. This
remedial alternative would exceed applicable and relevant Federal
public health and environmental standards and would allow for
future reuse of the property.
  a.   Tanks
        The total amount of liquid and solid wastes in the on-site
        tanks is estimated to be 167,000 gallons. A total of 69
        tanks are currently considered to be hazardous based on
        the following criteria:

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                        -20-


                                      TABLE 8

                    CAPITAL, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE (O&M),
                             AND PRESENT WORTH COSTS


                              1986 Dollars (millions)
                                                Annual Present Total Present
     Remedial Alternatives    Capital   Year     O&M Worth O&M   Worth Cost

1. No Action                    0.4      1-30   0.08    0.8           1.2
2. Remove Buildings,          116.4      1-5    0.078   0.4         116.8
   Tanks, and Soil, with                 6-30   0.017
   Off-Site Waste Dis-
   posal
3. Decontaminate Build-        53.9     1-5     0.08    0.4          54.3
   ings and Tanks, On-                  6-30    0.019
   Site Incineration,
   and On-Site Soil
   Washing
4a. Decontaminate Build-        5.2      1-30   0.213   2.0           7.2
    ings and Tanks, Im-
    permeable Cap, and
    Leachate and Ground
    Water Control
4b. Decontaminate Build-        5.6      1-30   0.209   2.0           7.6*
    ings and Tanks, Perm-
    eable Cap, and Passive
    Flushing with Leachate
    and Ground Water
    Treatment**
5. Remove Buildings           20.5       1-30   0.103   1.0          21.5
   and Tanks, and Site
   Encapsulation
6. Remove Buildings           55.2      1-5     0.092   0.5          55.7
   and Tanks, On-Site                   6-30    0.032
   Chemical Fixation
   of Soil, and On-Site
   RCRA Landfill

* Subsequent additional actions to enhance the removal of contaminants from soils
  may increase the overall cleanup cost for the site by $10-20 million.
** This alternative was not included in the RI/FS as such, see pages 35-36 for
   further details.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         -21-


                                                       TABLE 9


           SUMMARY OF TREATMENT, STORAGE AND DISPOSAL METHODOLOGIES
                                                                     ALTERNATIVE
              ITEM
                                   1               a                 S              4       S
                                                                                                   •
DUILOINOS
    SECURE                        •                                                 •
    Dl CONTAMINATE
                                                                     •              •
    DEMOLISH
                                   •
                                                   •                 •                      •      •
                              (OIL SLOG)
TANKS
   SECURE                         •
   DECONTAMINATE
                                                                     •              •       •
   DEMOLISH                                        •                 •                      •      •
UttSATURATED SOILS
   ENCAPSULATE                                                                     •        •
                                                                                (PARTIAL)
   OF F-SITE HAZARDOUS                             •
   OFF-SITE NON-HAZARDOUS                          •
   ON-SITE HAZARDOUS                                                                               •
                                                                                    •       •
   ON-SITE NON-HAZARDOUS
                                                                     •
                                                                   (SOIL
                                                                                                   •
                                                                                                (CHEMICAL
                                                                  WASHING)                      FIXATION)
SATURATED SOILS
   ENCAPSULATE
                                                                                    •       •
                                                                                (PARTIAL)
   Of F-SITE HAZARDOUS                             •
   OFF-SITE NON-HAZARDOUS                          •
   ON-SITE HAZARDOUS                                                                        •      •

   ON-SITE NON-HAZARDOUS                                             •               •              •
                                                                   (SOIL         (NATURAL       (CHEMICAL
                                                                  WASHING)      FLUSHING)       FIXATION)
OROUNOWATER.
DECONTAMINATION WATER
AND WASTEWATER
   ON-SITE                                                                                         _
     \                                                                •            •
                                                                    (SOIL       (GROUND
                                                                 WASHING INCL    WATER
                                                                GROUNDWATER)     DECON
   OFF-SITE                                        •                             WATER)
                                           (GROUNDWATER)
DISPOSAL OF TANK CONTENTS/
DECON MATERIAL/BUILDINGS/                  x
TANKS
   OFF-SITE HAZARDOUS              •               •                                •       •      •
                              (OIL BLOC)                                                        (LIQUIDS)
   OFF-SITE NON-HAZARDOUS                          •                                •       •      •
                                                                      •
   ON-SITE HAZARDOUS                                                                               •
                                                                                                (TANKS *
                                                                                                 •LOGS)
   ON-SITE NON-HAZARDOUS                                               •
                                                                (INCINERATION
                                                                     SOIL
                                                                   WASHING)
   OTHER                                        DE WATER                        CONCRETE         ON-SITE
                                               SATURATED                         •ARRIER          RCRA
                                                  SOIL                            ALONG         LANDFILL
                                                                                   RIVER
MONITORINO-LONG TERM
OROUNDWATER AND AIM               •                •                                        •      •


ALTtMUTIVf HO. DUCftVTOM.
  1. MO ACTION
 S. MMOVt iUILOWO*. TANM AMP »IL WITH O»MfTt WAtTt OMPOtAL
  *. MOONTAMINATI AND dMlHM •UILOIMI AND TANKI. ONUTt MONIMATNM AND ON4ITt (OILS WUMMO
 «. MOOMTAMINAn iUILOINO AND tANM. lUCHATI AND ONOUNOWATIM OOMTMOL
 «. MMOVt •UllDINQl AND TANM. OM4ITI MOMA lANOrtU AND BTl tNCAPtUtATWN
  a MMOVI BUILDINOS AND TAMU WITH ON-WTI OHtMiCAL FIXAtWN OF OIL AND ON«Tt MMA LANDFILL.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                        -22-


  - Flammable contents (flash point below 60°C)
  - PCB contamination
  - pH 2.0 and below or 12.0 and higher
  - Asbestos insulation of the tank
Liquid hazardous wastes would be pumped from the tanks and
transferred for off-site treatment such as incineration.
Non-hazardous waste materials would be transferred off-
site for treatment at an industrial wastewater treatment
plant with the appropriate permits. All tanks would be
demolished. The tanks and rubble which are not contaminated
with hazardous waste would be transferred to a permitted
off-site sanitary landfill. Contaminated tanks and rub-
ble would be removed and transferred to an off-site RCRA
permitted landfill facility.
Buildings
Based upon limited analytical data, all thirteen buildings
on the site are considered contaminated. Seven buildings
were not sampled due to extensive visible signs of resin-
like encrustation on interior and exterior walls, floors
and interior ancillary items. The Oil Building was not
sampled as it was judged structurally unsound. The five
buildings sampled were contaminated at levels exceeding
the maximum acceptable soil concentrations for contaminants
as presented in Table 10. These recommended cleanup
criteria were developed under the Environmental Cleanup
Responsibilities Act (ECRA).
All buildings would be demolished and the resulting rubble
and building contents would be disposed of in an off-site
RCRA landfill.
Soils and Sediments
To distinguish between contaminated and non-contaminated
soils, the cleanup criteria identified in Table 10 were
utilized. It was assumed these criteria would apply to
all soils and lagoon sediments on-site. Based on a
preliminary engineering judgment, approximately 50 per-
cent of the saturated soil, 100 percent of the lagoon
sediment, and 85 percent of the unsaturated soil at the
site above the clay layer is contaminated.
After removal of tanks and buildings, excavation activities
would begin. A sampling program would be implemented
concurrent with the excavation to determine the extent
of contamination. Non-contaminated soil would remain

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 -23-



                              TABLE 10

                 CLEANUP CRITERIA FOR SOILS, BUILDING
                   DIRT/DUST, AND LAGOON SEDIMENTS

Contaminant                         Cleanup Criteria Concentration*
Total Volatile Organics                          1 ppm
Metals
   Chromium                                     15 ppm
   Lead                                        317 ppm
   Mercury                                       1 ppm
   Nickel                                       18 ppm
   Zinc                                        196 ppm
  Arsenic                                       20 ppm
   Cadmium                                       3 ppm
  JBery Ilium                               Not Detected
PCBS                                             5 ppm
Benzo-a-pyrene                                  10 ppm
Base Neutrals (as a class)                     100 ppm




*Criteria based on the State of New Jersey Environmental Cleanup
 Responsibilities Act (ECRA).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               -24-

       on-site. Contaminated soil would be disposed of off-site
       in a RCRA landfill. Contaminated water from saturated
       soil dewatering would be collected and treated off-site
       at an appropriately permitted facility. The site would
       be restored by filling and grading with a storm runoff
       drainage system.
  d. Monitoring
       A long-term monitoring program for ground water would be
       performed quarterly.
ALTERNATIVE 3 - DECONTAMINATE BUILDINGS AND TANKS, ON-SITE
                INCINERATION AND ON-SITE SOIL WASHING
This alternative would provide on-site incineration for inciner-
able contaminated waste and on-site soil washing for uninciner-
able contaminated waste. Incineration uses high temperature
oxidation to degrade organic substances into products that gen-
erally include C02» H20, NOX and HC1 vapors, and ash. The un-
desirable products of the thermal destruction (e.g., particulates,
S02r NOX, HC1, and products of incomplete combustion) will be
removed by air pollution control equipment to prevent their re-
lease to the atmosphere. Contaminated materials containing high
metal concentrations may not be suitable for incineration. If
so, soil washing would be an alternative on-site treatment method.
Soil washing processes would leach both organic and inorganic
contaminants from soils and the recovered wastewater would be
treated by such processes as physical-chemical precipitation,
air stripping and activated carbon adsorption. The combination
of .incineration and soil washing would provide complete on-site
treatment for the hazardous wastes and contaminated matrices
identified at the site. This remedial alternative would provide
direct source control and would attain or exceed the applicable
and relevant Federal public health and environmental standards.
Upon completion of this alternative, the property would likely
be suitable for reuse.
  a.   Tanks
       All waste from the tanks would be removed and segregated
       into hazardous and non-hazardous groups. The hazardous
       waste would be treated by on-site incineration and the
       non-hazardous waste would be treated by the on-site waste-
       water treatment facility. Tanks containing hazardous
       material would be decontaminated, demolished, and disposed
       of in an off-site sanitary landfill or as scrap metal.
       Tanks containing non-hazardous material would not be
       decontaminated but would be disposed of in an off-site
       sanitary landfill or sold as scrap.
       An estimated seven of the 47 insulated tanks utilize an
       asbestos material. The asbestos insulation would be

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               -25-

       vamoved and disposed in an off-site RCRA landfill. In-
       sulation from the remaining forty tanks will be tested,
       removed, and disposed in an off-site sanitary landfill.-.
       It is proposed to decontaminate the tanks through repeated
       hydro-blasting and water-washing. The first application
       would involve the application of high pressure water. The
       second pass, if required, would involve the application
       of a water detergent rinse, while the final pass would
       involve the application of a water rinse. Liquid and
       solid wastes from the decontamination would be handled in
       the wastewater treatment system.
       All above-ground pipes, conduit racks, tank dikes, and
       revetments would be considered contaminated and be trans-
       ferred to an off-site RCRA storage facility.

  b.   Buildings
       Each building, with the exception of the Oil Building,
       would be decontaminated, after which all buildings would
       be demolished. Decontamination would first involve vacu-
       uming and wiping. For those areas requiring additional
       decontamination, grit blasting would be utilized. Con-
       taminated waste generated during building decontamination
       would be treated on-site using incineration and/or the
       wastewater treatment system. Demolition rubble from
       the decontaminated buildings would be disposed of in an
       off-site sanitary landfill. Oil Building rubble and
       building contents would be disposed of separately in an
       off-site RCRA landfill.
  c.   Soils and Sediments
       As described in Alternative 2, contaminated soil would be
       excavated as indicated by the sampling results. Nearly
       all of the contaminated soil would be treated on-site by
       soil washing. Highly contaminated soil and sediments
       would be dewatered and incinerated on-site. After treat-
       ment, the decontaminated soil would be re-deposited on-site
       with additional clean soil.
  d.   Monitoring
       A long-term ground water monitoring program would be
       performed quarterly.
ALTERNATIVE 4a.,- DECONTAMINATE BUILDINGS AND TANKS, IMPERMEABLE
                  CAP, AND LEACHATE AND GROUND WATER CONTROL

This alternative would provide for the decontamination of tanks
and buildings, collection and on-site treatment of leachate and

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               -26-

contaminated ground water, and partial capping of the site. The
leachate/ground water control system is intended to prevent the
discharge of contaminants to the Passaic River. The on-site
ground water treatment system would utilize physical-chemical
precipitation, air stripping and activated carbon adsorption,
and would discharge to the Passaic River. Thirteen of the
fifteen acres affected (excluding structure footprints) would
be provided with a clay/ soil cover to reduce surface runoff
and rainfall infiltration. The cover would consist of one foot
of clay and one foot of topsoil, which would be graded. This
remedial alternative would attain the applicable and relevant
Federal public health and environmental standards. However,
this alternative would not allow future reuse of the property.
  a.   Tanks
       All hazardous waste from the tanks would be removed and
       transferred off-site for appropriate disposal, as discussed
       in Alternative 2. Non-hazardous tank liquids would be
       treated on-site in the ground water treatment system. The
       empty tanks would be decontaminated and would be left on-
       site. Wastewater from tank decontamination would also be
       treated on-site in the leachate/ground water treatment
       system. All above-ground pipes, conduit racks, and insula-
       tion would be classified as hazardous or non-hazardous and
       disposed of accordingly.
 b. Buildings
       All buildings, except the Oil Building, would be decontami-
       nated as described in Alternative 3. The Oil Building
 r     would be demolished and disposed of in an off-site RCRA
       landfill along with the contaminated contents from the
       other buildings.
 c.    Soils and Sediments
       A downgradient subsurface drain system (Figure 3) would
       be installed along the edge of the Passaic River and along
       portions of the northern and southern property line.
       This drain system would be approximately 1,000 feet in
       length including a subsurface concrete barrier. The
       purpose of this drain system would be to collect leachate
       and contaminated ground water for treatment. The purpose
       of the concrete wall is to prevent tidal intrusion of
       river water onto the site. The collected wastewater
       would be treated on-site.
 d.    Monitoring
       A long-term ground water monitoring program would be
       implemented and would include quarterly sampling.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                           -27-

              ALTERNATIVE AA
SUBSURFACE AND SURFACE DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
             AND SURFACE COVER




                                             -W TOPSOIL




                                                              •2%


           ^ w w . ^SS-j ».., . ,        1 r CLAY                       .. f:v/;>:•
           M
           iyi
                                 -* r *-

                               GRAVEL                         EXISTING
EXISTING                                            10"     CONTAMINATED
  SOIL                           (OR
                              CRUSHED                           SOIL
                           in
                           fr- STONE)
                           iii
                           oe                              __ r # PVC PERFORATE
                           u                           -"""^          PIPE
                                               •*"'--•
                           8
                                 >•'•:.! •'*                           **-:••'/?
                                 ;.;.r   y     EXISTING CLAY LAYER          *•:•:

                          ^^•^




                           FIGURE 3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                -28-

ALTERNATIVE 4b. - DECONTAMINATE BUILDINGS AND TANKS, PERMEABLE CAP,
                  PASSIVE FLUSHING, AND LEACHATE AND GROUNDWATER
                  TREATMENT
Alternative 4b was developed to evaluate enhanced flushing to
cleanse the saturated and unsaturated soils, and to remove the
more significant soil contamination from the site. The goal of
Alternative 4b is to result in a site that could be considered
for future reuse and that would attain all applicable and
relevant State requirements for that reuse (i.e. ECRA, ground
water quality). The major differences between Alternative 4a
and Alternative 4b consist of substituting a crushed stone
cover over the open areas of the site instead of the soil/clay
cap, and excavation of approximately 700 cubic yards (cy) of
sediment and soils beneath the two lagoons. To better prepare
the site for future application of in-situ technologies, approxi-
mately 2,000 cy of highly contaminated soils around the site
will be excavated. This alternative is an operable unit.
Future studies will be undertaken to evaluate further enhancement
of the site cleanup to attain this alternative's goal.
  0
      Tanks, Vessels, and Buildings
      The existing above-ground structures, including buildings,
      tanks, and storage vessels, would be decontaminated as
      appropriate. The Oil Building would be demolished and
      disposed of in an off-site RCRA landfill. Hazardous wastes
      will be removed and transferred off-site for appropriate
      disposal, as discussed in Alternative 2. All non-hazardous
      aqueous wastes will be treated in an on-site treatment .
      system. Non-hazardous solids will be disposed of at a
      sanitary landfill.
  0
      Soils and Lagoon Sediments
      Lagoon sediments and highly contaminated surface soils will
      be removed and transferred off-site for disposal or treatment
      at an approved hazardous waste treatment, storage, or
      disposal (TSD) facility. The surface of the site will then
      be covered with gravel or crushed stone to enhance natural
      flushing of underlying contaminants. The contaminated
      ground water would be collected and treated on-site.
  0
      Ground Water
      A containment system consisting of a cut-off wall and a con-
      crete retaining wall will be constructed partially around
      the site and adjacent to the river. Both walls will be keyed
      into the underlying clay layer to prevent river water from
      entering the site and contaminants from migrating off-site.
      A trench drain system will collect contaminated ground water.
      An on-site wastewater treatment system will treat collected
      surface and ground water and discharge the treated effluent
      to the Passaic River.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                -29-

  0
       New Technologies
      After installation of the on-site systems described above,
      a variety of technologies will be investigated to further
      enhance the natural flushing action, so as to attain the
      goal of potential future reuse of the site. The technologies
      to be evaluated include active flushing with or without
      additives, in-situ biological treatment, and in-situ vitri-
      fication.
  0
      Monitoring
      A long-term monitoring program will be implemented after the
      completion of remedial action to protect public health and
      the environment. The effectiveness of the site remedy will
      be evaluated throughout the planned action and potential
      future modifications.

ALTERNATIVE 5 - REMOVE BUILDINGS AND TANKS, AND SITE ENCAPSULATION
This alternative would remove all tanks and buildings to appro-
priate off-site hazardous and sanitary waste disposal facilities
and encapsulate the entire site. Encapsulation would separate
the contaminants from the surrounding hydrogeologic regime and
would prevent further migration of contaminants off-site. The
lateral barrier wall would be keyed into the clay layer beneath
the site to provide an effective bottom barrier. Lateral bar-
rier walls may consist of a slurry wall, grout curtains, or
steel sheet piling. The materials selected for use in barrier
construction should withstand any chemical attack by the contained
contaminants. This remedial alternative would attain the applicable
and relevant Federal public health and environmental standards.
However, the site would be restricted from any potential future
reuse.
  a.    Tanks
        All waste from tanks would be removed and transferred for
        appropriate off-site disposal as discussed in Alternative
        2. Tanks having hazardous residues would be decontaminated
        and demolished as described in Alternative 3. The decon-
        taminated, demolished tanks would be disposed of in an
        off-site sanitary landfill or sold as scrap. Tanks con-
        taining non-hazardous wastes would not be decontaminated
        but would be demolished and disposed of in an off-site
        sanitary landfill or sold as scrap.

  b.    Buildings
        All thirteen buildings located on the site would be
        considered contaminated and would be demolished. Service

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               -30-

       facilities, including ductwork, process piping, and unit
       heaters, would also be considered contaminated and would
       be demolished. The resulting rubble and debris would be
       disposed of in an off-site RCRA landfill.
  c.   Soil and Sediments
       To contain the remaining contaminated soils and ground
       water, the entire site would be enclosed with an imperme-
       able perimeter barrier wall keyed into the underlying
       impermeable clay layer. A parallel concrete barrier would
       be installed adjacent to the impermeable barrier along
       the Passaic River to furnish protection from tidal action.
       The site would then be covered with a RCRA cap (Figure
       4). These measures would effectively encapsulate the
       contaminated soil and ground water remaining on the site.
  d.   Monitoring
       A long-term ground water monitoring program would be
       performed quarterly.

ALTERNATIVE 6 - REMOVE BUILDING AND TANKS, ON-SITE CHEMICAL
               . FIXATION OF SOIL, AND ON-SITE RCRA LANDFILL
This alternative would remove hazardous tanks and contaminated
buildings and transfer them to an on-site RCRA landfill facility.
Liquid hazardous waste from the tanks would be transferred off-
site for treatment. In addition, contaminated soil would be
removed, mixed with chemical additives for waste fixation, and
used as part of the containment system. Since the contaminated
soils on-site contain an average of less than one-tenth of a
percent of organic contaminants, chemical fixation which limits
the mobility of chemical constituents is feasible.
As shown in Figure 5, the on-site RCRA landfill will be isolated
by the solidified soil above and around its perimeter, and by a
double 40 mil synthetic liner and the existing clay layer below.
A leachate collection system and leak detection system will be
installed during construction of the landfill. This remedial
alternative would attain the applicable and relevant Federal
public health and environmental standards. However, future site
use would be restricted.
  a.   Tanks
       The wastes removed from the tanks would be disposed of in
       an off-site treatment facility as described in Alternative 2.
       The empty hazardous tanks would be demolished and disposed

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  -31-



          ALTERNATIVE 5
        RCRA CAPPING SYSTEM




   .rtorsoiL

   . V SAND DRAINAGE LAYER


       40 MIL
   SYNTHETIC LINER




      T CLAY LAYER
'{PERMEABILITY 10T7 CM/SECI




               FIGURE A

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

             -32-



       ALTERNATIVE 6
    RCRA LANDFILL PROFILE




       EXISTING CLAY LAYER    6" FVC LEACHATE COLLECTION FIFE
>
                             V FVC LEAK DETECTION FIFE




           FIGURE 5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               -33-


       of in the on-site RCRA landfill. The empty non-hazardous
       tanks would be demolished and disposed of off-site in a
       sanitary landfill.
  b. Buildings
       The buildings would not be decontaminated but demolished
       and disposed of in the on-site RCRA landfill. It is
       estimated that approximately two acres would be required
       for the disposal of the demolished buildings and tanks.
  c.   Soil and Sediments
       All soil above the clay layer, including the lagoon sed-
       iments, would be excavated and treated on-site by chemical
       fixation. The soil would be blended with a chemical
       binder such as lime or sodium silicate, and Portland
       cement. The blended soil would be deposited and cured in
       place. Chemical fixation is expected to minimize leachate
       generation. The site would then be restored by regrading
       to accommodate storm water runoff.
  d.   Monitoring
       A long-terra ground water monitoring program would be
       performed quarterly.

EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES

Toiensure that the remedial objectives for the protection of
public health and the environment are fulfilled, the alternatives
developed were evaluated in terms of technical, environmental,
public health, and cost-effectiveness, as well as for their
institutional requirements which include the appropriate and
relevant State and Federal environmental regulations.
The no action alternative does not remove or reduce contaminant
levels on-site. Therefore, the risks and exposure pathways,
which include direct contact, ingestion, and inhalation, are
not mitigated. In the absence of contaminant removal from the
unsaturated and saturated zones, the potential remains for
further contamination of the shallow aquifer and the Passaic
River. Tank leakage may also contaminate the soil and ground
water. This alternative, while minimizing access, maintains
the negative environmental and public health impacts and so is
unacceptable. In addition, this alternative requires that the
site is restricted from any future use because of its associated
health risk. .

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               -34-

Alternative 2 involves the removal of all =.-:.: ve-ground structures
and contents and contaminated soils for off site disposal. While
eliminating the long-term health risks, the construction activi-
ties may result in a short-term exposure to contamination through
direct contact and airborne particulate dispersion. Construction-
related impacts may be minimized by implementing an effective
health and safety plan, a dust control and traffic control plan,
and a soil erosion and sediment control plan. This alternative
eliminates any site-related contaminant contributions to the
shallow aquifer or to the river. Restoration of the site by
replacing the contaminated soil with clean soil increases the
potential for future reuse.
Alternative 3 results in the removal of contaminated materials
from the site via on-site treatment of major waste streams and
off-site disposal of some contaminated materials at a RCRA
landfill. The benefits include eventual elimination of exposure
pathways and reduction of contamination of the ground water and
the Passaic River. The potential negative impacts of this
alternative involve: air emissions from the incineration oper-
ation; direct contact, inhalation, and ingestion of contaminated
materials during handling and treatment; and spillage of contam-
inated soil into the river via erosion or mishandling. Measures
can be taken to minimize these negative impacts, including
implementation of an air emissions control plan, an effective
health and safety plan, and an soil erosion and sediment control
plan. Overall, this alternative produces positive environmental
and public health impacts and increases the potential for
future site reuse.
Alternative 4a involves off-site disposal of hazardous materials,
decontamination of tanks and buildings, installation of a clay/
soil surface cover and concrete barrier, natural flushing of
the saturated soils, and ground water/leachate collection and
on-site treatment. The benefits of this alternative include
minimizing the direct contact exposure pathway of the unsaturated
soils via capping, removal of contamination from buildings and
tanks, minimizing construction-related impacts by reducing on-
site activities, and a gradual reduction in ground water contam-
ination over the long term. The negative environmental and
public health impacts of this alternative include an incomplete
sealing of the surface due to the presence of tanks and buildings,
and the long-term operation of the ground water/leachate collection
and treatment system. Contaminated, unsaturated soils will
remain on-site essentially untreated, minimizing the potential
for reuse of the site.
Alternative 4b includes off-site disposal of hazardous materials,
decontamination of tanks and buildings, removal and off-site
disposal of the contaminated sediments and soils beneath and

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -35-

adjacent to the two lagoons and other "hot spots", a containment
system, a permeable cover, passive flushing, and on-site treatment
of the leachate/ground water. The benefits of this alternative
include minimizing the direct contact exposure pathway of the
unsaturated soils, removal of the contamination from buildings and
tanks, and minimizing construction-related impacts. The major
advantages of this alternative over Alternative 4a is the removal
of the more grossly contaminated soils and the promotion of natural
flushing, which would result in a more significant reduction of
contamination in the ground water and both the saturated and
unsaturated soils. The negative environmental and public health
impacts of this alternative include the long-term operation of the
natural flushing and ground water treatment processes. Future
studies will be undertaken to further enhance and accelerate the
the cleansing of the site. The implementation of the remedial
actions under this alternative and any subsequent remedial action
will increase the potential for future reuse of the site.
Alternative 5 involves total site encapsulation after buildings,
tanks, dikes, revetments, tank contents, conduits, ductwork, etc.
have been disposed of off-site. Under this alternative, the
exposure pathways of ingestion, direct contact and inhalation are
eliminated, along with site-related contamination of the river.
Encapsulation of the site reduces the amount of excavation re-
quired, thereby reducing construction-related exposure. This
alternative, however, only contains the contaminated soil and
ground water and does not treat them. Under this alternative,
the potential for site reuse is minimal. In addition, encapsul-
ating the site will affect the ground water flow pattern, which
would have a positive health impact and a negative environmental
impact.
Alternative 6 involves off-site disposal or treatment of hazardous
tank contents, chemical fixation of the unsaturated and saturated
soil, and disposal of building rubble, tanks, pipes, ductwork,
conduits, and other related materials in an on-site RCRA landfill.
While this alternative reduces the exposure pathways of direct
contact, ingestion, and inhalation, it does not eliminate them.
Securing contaminated materials in the on-site RCRA landfill
reduces the potential for site reuse. Chemical fixation reduces
the permeability of the soils and hence reduces contaminant
migration and leachate generation. Construction activities
would temporarily increase exposure by direct contact, ingestion,
and inhalation. These impacts, however, can be minimized by
the implementation of an effective health and safety plan. In
addition, hydrogeologic patterns would change due to the reduced
permeability, thus producing a positive health impact and a
negative environmental impact.
COMMUNITY RELATIONS
A public meeting was held on September 4, 1986 to present the
results of the remedial investigation and feasibility study
(RI/FS) and the recommended alternative. Copies of the FS

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -36-

report were distributed to the public on August 21 but it did
not include Alternative 4b per se. However, most of the com-
ponents which make up this alternative are discussed in the
description of Alternative 4a. The modifications to Alternative
4a which produced Alternative 4b, as well as Alternative 4b in
toto, were fully explained at the public meeting. In addition, a
handout describing Alternative 4b was distributed at that time.
No objections to it were raised at the meeting. The public
comment period was open until September 11. Responses to all
comments raised at the public meeting and in a subsequent
letter are included in the Responsiveness Summary (Attachment
1).
RECOMMENDED ALTERNATIVE
In the RI/FS, the six alternatives were evaluated in terms of
technical, environmental, and public health effectiveness and
institutional requirements, and a matrix was developed to compare
the environmental advantages against costs (Table 11). Alterna-
tive 4 (or Alternative 4a, as now designated) was determined to
be the most cost-effective. In further evaluating this alternative,
it was felt that the modifications which eventually led to the
development of Alternative 4b may achieve an even more cost-
effective, environmentally sound alternative.
The most important of these modifications is the substitution of
a crushed stone cover over the open areas of the site instead of
the soil/clay cap. This permeable cap would have numerous
benefits. It effectively eliminates the public health risk due
to direct contact or ingestion of surface soils, yet allows
rainwater to flush through the unsaturated and saturated soils
to hasten the remediation of the contaminated soils and ground
water. It also provides flexibility by providing a good working
surface for trucks or heavy equipment, while allowing easy
access to the surface, if needed, for subsequent monitoring or
the application of new technologies*
Another significant modification involves the excavation and
removal of approximately 700 cubic yards of sediment and highly
contaminated soils that lie beneath or adjacent to the two
lagoons. Finally, approximately 2,000 cubic yards of highly
contaminated surface soils will be removed for off-site disposal.
The removal of these soils are cost-effective in that they
reduce the volume of contaminants to be handled under in-situ
treatment methods.
If the design is optimized to its full potential and properly
implemented, the passive flushing technique may in itself
restore the site to the appropriate cleanup levels. However,
innovative technologies will be evaluated to further enhance
the ability of flushing to cleanse the soil of contaminants.
Although the costs of any future remedial actions cannot now be
accurately estimated, it is believed that the added costs

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    TABLE 11


        OVERALL COST-EFFECTIVENESS RATING OF ALTERNATIVES
                  COST                                                                               TOTAL COST-  OVERALL COST-
  REMEDIAL   EFFECTIVENESS    TECHNICAL   ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC HEALTH INSTITUTIONAL    TOTAL        EFFECTIVENESS EFFECTIVENESS
ALTERNATIVE (PRESENT WORTH) EFFECTIVENESS EFFECTIVENESS EFFECTIVENESS REQUIREMENTS EFFECTIVENESS       RATING        RANKING
                  ID            U)             0)            U)           (5)             (I)           ro
                                                                                     (ZHJWHSMfl        mi w
    1             5              4             1               1           1               7                35             4

    2             1              3             5             5             5              18                18             5

    3             3              2             4             3             5              14            42                 3

    4             5              4             3             2             3              12            60                 1
                                                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                                                  u>
                                                                                                                                  -J
                                                                                                                                  1
    5             4              4             3             3             4              14            56                 2

    6             3              3             4             4             5              14            42                 3



                       REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

ALT. 1 - HO ACTION
ALT. 2 - REMOVE BUILDINGS. TANKS AND SOIL AND OFF-SITE DISPOSAL
ALT. 3 - DECONTAMINATE BUILDINGS AND TANKS, ON-SITE INCINERATION.
         AND ON-SITE SOIL WASHING
                                                                                                   LEGEND
ALT. 4 - DECONTAMINATE BUILDINGS AND TANKS. AND LEACHATE AND
         GROUND WATER CONTROL
                                                                                  EFFECTIVENESS                  (UNKING
ALT. 5 - REMOVE BUILDINGS AND TANKS, AND SITE ENCAPSULATION
                                                                               1 - LOWEST RATING       1 - HIGHEST RANKING
ALT. 6 - REMOVE BUILDINGS AND TANKS, ON SITE CHEMICAL
         FIXATION OF SOIL. AND ON-SITE RCRA LANDFILL.                       5 - HIGHEST RATING         5 - LOWEST RANKING

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   -38-


(see footnote on Table 8) would still make this remedial alter-
native cost-effective in comparison to the others. Should none
of the methods evaluated under Alternative 4b be successful in
attaining the applicable cleanup levels, the site would still
be nearer to these levels than under any other alternative,
except total excavation and removal of contaminated material
which is prohibitively expensive.
Therefore, Alternative 4b was selected as the recommended alterna-
tive and includes the following components:
     0
          Tanks, Vessels, and Buildings
         The existing above-ground structures, including buildings,
         tanks, and process vessels, will be decontaminated, as
         appropriate. The Oil Building would be demolished and
         disposed of in an off-site RCRA landfill. Hazardous wastes
         will be removed off-site to an approved hazardous waste
         treatment, storage, or disposal (TSD) facility. All non-
         hazardous aqueous wastes will be treated in an on-site
         wasteater treatment system. Non-hazardous solids will be
         disposed of at a sanitary landfill.
     0
          Soils and Lagoon Sediments
         Lagoon sediments and highly contaminated soils will be
         removed and transported to an approved hazardous waste TSD
         facility. The surface of the site will then be covered
         with gravel or crushed stone to enhance natural flushing of
         underlying contaminants in the soil and ground water,
         before collection and treatment.
 *° Ground Water
         A containment system consisting of a cut-off wall and a con-
         crete retaining wall will be constructed partially around the
         site and adjacent to the river. Both walls will be keyed
         into the underlying clay layer to prevent river water from
         entering the site and contaminants from migrating off-site.
         A down-gradient drain system will collect contaminated
         ground water. An on-site wastewater treatment system will
         treat collected surface and ground water and discharge the
         treated effluent to the Passaic River.
 0
         New Technologies
         After installation of the on-site systems described above,
         a variety of technologies will be investigated to further
         enhance the natural flushing action. The technologies
         which would be evaluated include active flushing with or
         without additives, in-situ biological treatment, in-situ
         vitrification, etc.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                -39-

  0
      Monitoring
      A long-term monitoring program will be implemented after the
      completion of remedial action to protect public health and
      the environment. The effectiveness of the site remedy will
      be evaluated throughout the planned action and any potential
      future modifications.
OPERABLE UNITS

The recommended alternative will be the first operable unit for
this site* Depending on the results of the study to enhance
the natural flushing process, a future operable unit may implement
the study findings.
COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS AND REQUIREMENTS
The recommended alternative, as envisioned, would be in full
compliance with all applicable existing environmental statutes,
save the exceptions discussed below.

Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) Cap, 40 CFR PART 264
While the implementation of the recommended alternative will
not meet the RCRA closure requirements for a RCRA Subtitle C
cap, this alternative is the first operable unit and not the
final remedy.

The recommended alternative includes a permeable layer at the
surface. This permeable layer would be installed to enhance
natural flushing, which will cleanse the site of contaminants.
Meanwhile, this type of protective cover will prevent direct
contact exposure.
Future studies will evaluate technologies to further enhance and
ciccelerate natural flushing under Alternative 4b. The goal of
Alternative 4b and future actions will be to attain cleanup
criteria so as to result in a site that could be considered for
reuse. Should these criteria not be met, the need to close the
site under RCRA will be re-evaluated.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
All the remedial components of the recommended alternative re-
quire operation and maintenance (O&M) to varying degrees. The
wastewater treatment facility, the surface cover, and the
collection system must be operated and maintained. The buildings
and tanks must be periodically inspected. O&M will also include
long-term monitoring. The monitoring program will include sampl-
ing of ground water, air, and treated effluent prior to discharge
to the Passaic River. The total annual O&M cost for this
program is estimated to be $209,000.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -40-


SCHEDULE

As this ROD deals with the first operable unit for the site, a
subsequent study is anticipated which will explore methods to
enhance the remedy and/or shorten the time period to attain
full remediation.

 Project Milestones                            Date
 - Approve Remedial Action                     September 1986
 - Complete Enforcement Negotiations           June 1987
 - Amend Cooperative Agreement for Design             *
 - Initiate Design                                    *
 - Complete Design                                    *



* Pending CERCLA Reauthorization or State Funding,

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                Responsiveness Summary
                                        for the
              Completion of the Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
                   • •                  at the
                                  Syncon Resins site
                                        Kearny
                                     Hudson County
                                      New Jersey
This Community Relations Responsiveness Summary* prepared as part of the Record
of Decision (ROD), is divided into the following sections:
I.   Background on Community Involvement and Concerns
     This is a brief history of community interest concerning the Syncon Resins
     site and a summary of community relations activities conducted by the New
     Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) and the United States
     Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) prior to and during the Remedial
     Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS).
II. Summary of Major Questions and Comments Received During the Public Comment
    Period and NJDEP's Responses
    This is a summary of major questions and comments directed to NJDEP during
    the September 4, 1986 public meeting regarding the results of the
    Feasibility Study and sent to NJDEP during the public comment period*.
    NJDEP's responses are included in this section.
III. Remaining Concerns
     This is a discussion of remaining community concerns of which NJDEP and
     USEPA should be aware in conducting the remedial design and remedial actions
     at the Syncon Resins site.
Attachments
Attachment A
Attendance sheet and Information Package distributed at the February 21, 1984
Public Meeting.
Attachment B
Attendance sheet and Information Package distributed at the April 25, 1985 Public
Meeting.
Attachment C
Attendance sheet and Information Package distributed at the September 4, 1986
Public Meeting.
Attachment D
Copy of the letter received by NJDEP during the public comment period.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       -2-


I.   Background on Community Involvement and Concerns
     Concern focusing on the Syncon Resins site prior to the RI/FS began in 1976
     after the NJDEP uncovered violations of the Clean Water Act at this
     facility. -Media attention was generated and a group called the Kearny
     Environmental Committee of Concerned Citizens was established. At this
     time, this group focused attention on the presence and hazards of chemical
     wastes in Kearny. They were concerned that their community might serve as a
     waste storage center for the entire region. On September 30, 1981 the NJDEP
     provided Kearny citizens an opportunity to comment on the development of a
     new site for a hazardous waste storage and transportation operation. After
     reviewing public comment, the NJDEP did not approve plans for development of
     this operation.
     On December 20, 1982 the USEPA issued a press release noting that funds had
     been allocated for cleanup work at two New Jersey hazardous waste sites.
     One of those was the Syncon Resins site and a brief description of the
     problems at the site was included. In particular, it was stated that $2
     •million would be spent to remove approximately 10,000 drums on site.
     'On September 9, 1983 a Community Relations Plan (CRP) was completed for this
     site. In January 1984 the NJDEP attempted to locate additional citizens and
     citizen groups interested in the Syncon Resins site. Mayor Henry Hill
     responded and completed our Community Relations Response Form, supplying
     •numerous names to compliment our CRP contact list.                         „
                                                                                j

     Prior to the initiation of the Initial Remedial Measure (IRM) for the drum
     removal at this site, a series of meetings and briefing sessions were held.
     (On February 10, 1984 a briefing to keep Kearny officials informed as to the
     status of the Syncon Resins cleanup was held. The project was outlined and
     town officials inquired and were Informed about contingency plans, waste
     transportation routes and material handling. All questions were answered
     directly or commitments were made by NJDEP to provide answers. A short
     discussion followed concerning the upcoming public meeting scheduled for
     iFebruary 21, 1984.
     The public meeting on the .removal of waste storage drums from the Syncon
     Resins Hazardous Waste site was held on February 21, 1984. Notification of
     the meeting was accomplished through press releases and a direct mailing of
     notices to municipal, county, state and federal officials, as well as to all
     concerned citizens and citizen groups. Approximately 20 people attended the
     meeting and agendas and information packages were distributed.          (See
     Attachment A.) Major issues and concerns raised during the meeting and
     responses given included:
Question: Who will remove waste and do the soil tests?
Response: The drum disposal will be handled by three contractors:   Applied
          Technology, AETC, Inc. and S & W Waste.  Soil conditions will be
          addressed in a subsequent RI/FS.
Question: Will sites neighboring [Syncon] be regulated?
Response: The Hazardous Site Mitigation Administration does not regulate these
          facilities but other units within the NJDEP do.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       -3-


Question: \   •; will happen to the Syncon property after the cleanup?
Response: A/ this time we cannot answer specifically       since the site is in
          litigation as to ownership.
On February 24, 1984 the NJDEP held a press briefing at the Syncon site to
explain procedures that will be used during the cleanup project. The Kearny
Health officer was quoted in a Star Ledger article of February 25, 1984 saying,
"We're pleased with the setup of the safety feature of the whole project."
A press release was issued by the NJDEP on September 12, 1984 announcing
completion of the IBM. A total of 12,824 drums were removed at a cost of $2
million dollars with federal Superfund paying 90% and the state Spill Fund paying
10Z. (Actual cleanup cost amounted to $2.4 million dollars.)
Throughout the IRM, the NJDEP received numerous requests for information
concerning progress of the clean-up. Responses were given both verbally over the
telephone or in writing . by the NJDEP, Bureau of Community Relations.         In
addition, the NJDEP sent out an early meeting notice in May 1984 to advise
concerned citizens that we were planning to schedule a public meeting to discuss
the initiation of the RI/PS; the specific date and location to be announced in a
subsequent notice. This correspondence also emphasized stages in the remedial
process in which NJDEP solicits the benefit of public comment before site
decisions are made.
On April 25," 1985 the NJDEP held a public meeting to discuss the initiation of
the KI/FS at this site. Notification of the meeting was accomplished through
press releases and direct mailing of notices to municipal, county, state and
federal officials as well as concerned citizens and citizen groups.
Approximately 11 people attended the meeting and each received an agenda, fact
sheet and an overview of the community relations program. (See Attachment B.)
Issues and concerns raised during the meeting and responses given included:
Question: What do you plan to do with the tanks?
Response: It is premature to say at this time but there are several possible
          options. 1) If tanks can be sufficiently decontaminated then they may
          remain on-site. 2) If the tanks can't be sufficiently decontaminated
          then they may have to be cut up and disposed of as hazardous waste. 3)
          As an additional but very expensive alternative, it may be possible to
          remove whole tanks.
Question: Do you know the depth of soil contamination?
Response: That will be determined in the RI/FS.
Comment:   It seems like you should dike and put an impervious cover over the
           site.
Response: That may be an option. It would be premature to make that decision
          before completing the study. There will be another public meeting at
          the end of the RI/FS when decisions begin to be made. That is really
          the most important meeting in this process. Meanwhile, If you have

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       -4-


         questions after this meeting you can contact the Bureau of Community
         Relations (NJDEP).
Question: Do you have any idea how far the plume has gone through the aquifer?
          Kearny 'has six square miles of contaminated aquifer (the largest in the
          world!).
Response: That will be determined in the Rl/FS.
Question: Do you see any evidence of low grade toxiclty in your workers?
Response: No. We do have a stringent medical surveillance program to monitor our
          workers' health.
II. Summary of Major Questions and Comments Received During the Public Comment
    Period and. NJDEP's Responses
    On August 21,1986 the RI/FS was placed in the following repositories for
    public review: Kearny Town Hall, Kearny Public Library, Hudson County Law
    Library in Jersey City and the NJDEP, Division of Hazardous Site Mitigation
    :Ln Trenton. The NJDEP issued a press release and contacted local officials,
    as well as Interested citizen groups regarding the availability of the RI/FS
    at these repositories.
    On September 4, 1986 the NJDEP held a public meeting to present the result?
    of and to receive comments/questions regarding the RI/FS. Notification of
    this meeting was also accomplished through press releases and direct mailing
    of notices to municipal, county, state and federal officials, as well as to
    concerned citizens and citizen groups. Approximately 25 people attended
    this meeting and each received an agenda, fact sheet, an overview of the
    community relations program and steps in a major hazardous waste site
    cleanup. (See Attachment C.) Responses to questions and comments, for the
    most part, were stated at the meeting. The public comment period was held
    from August 21, 1986 through September 11, 1986.        In addition to the
    comments made during the' public meeting, one letter was received by the
    NJDEP during this period. (See Attachment D.) This written comment is
    included in this section. >
    During the public meeting, Mr. Thomas Granger, Manager of Projects of Ebasco
    Services, Inc. presented six remedial alternatives for long-term site
    remediation. These are:
          0
            Minimal action.
          0
            Removal of buildings, tanks and soil for off-site disposal.
          0
            Removal of buildings* and tanks, on-site incineration and on-site
            soil washing.
          0
            Decontamination of buildings and tanks and leachate and ground water
            control.
          0
            Removal of buildings* and tanks and site encapsulation.
          0
            Removal of buildings and tanks, on-site chemical fixation of soil and
            construction of an on-site RCRA Landfill.
         *6uildings and/or tanks are decontaminated prior to removal as solid
          non-hazardous waste to a sanitary landfill.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       -5-


Mr. Richard Salkie, P.E., Acting Director of NJDEP Division of Hazardous Site
Mitigation, then discussed NJDEP's recommended alta-.native which is primarily a
composite of various components of the alternative (modified alternative //4)
previously mentioned.     This includes decontamination of tanks, vessels and
buildings, excavation plus off-site disposal of lagoon sediments, site covering
with crushed stone, installation of a downgradient collection trench to collect
water to be treated on-site and discharged to the Passaic River, a continuous
30-year monitoring program, improvement of site access and fence conditions and
additional studies to evaluate a variety of technologies to enhance natural
flushing/treatment/destruction of contaminants. Comments and questions were then
received from the audience. In addition to Director Salkie, and Mr. Granger,
other representatives of NJDEP were present and responded to questions relevant
to areas of their expertise.
In general, the tone of the comments at the public meeting and of those received
during the public comment period was very positive.         Several individuals,
including Kearoy Mayor Henry J. Hill and New Jersey Assemblyman Charles Catrillo,
expressed appreciation for NJDEP's presentation. Margaret Halloway, President of
the Kearny Environmental Committee of Concerned Citizens, expressed support with
some reservation for a remedy to the contamination. There were, however, some
areas of concern. These are summarized by subject as follows:
            Movement and Extent of Contamination.
            Costs of Alternatives.                                     .;•?
            Siting of an Incinerator in Kearny for this Site or Other Uses.
            Site Security-Past, Present, and Future.
            Future Use of the Site.
            Other Issues
Movement and Extent of Contamination
Question: What is the amount of contamination (poison) allowed into the water?
          Is the contamination still discharging into the Passaic River?
Response: The surface water criteria is set forth in the NJDEP Effluent
          Limitations for Discharge into the Passaic River (NJAC 7:9-5) and the
          ground water criteria is based on the GW3 class aquifer (NJAC 7:9-6).
          Presently, the contaminated ground water is discharging into the
          surface water (Passaic River) through normal aquifer movement. NJDEP
          proposes to construct a concrete wall to contain the movement of the
          contaminated water and control river tide. Then the contaminated water
          will be treated on-site to meet the required standards prior to release
          Into the Passaic River.
Question: What do the measurements in the RI/FS regarding mercury and other
          contaminants mean?    What measurement is used to evaluate each
          contaminant? What does the measurement ND-1400 mean?
Response: The levels of contaminants indicate the amounts that existed on the
          site at the time of the sampling. The measurements of each contaminant
          are in parts per billion (ppb) within the saturated soil. The ND-1400
          means that levels of the contaminants were found within the range of
          not detectable to 1400 ppb.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      -6-


Question: I am curious how such highly toxic poisons as mercury, cyanide, lead
          and arsenic were used in a paint factory? Are these materials normally
          associated with paint production?
Response: It was found that the contamination on site, in fact, did relate very
          well with the processes conducted at Syncon Resins. Mercury, cyanide,
          lead and arsenic are part of the catalysts utilized in the resins
          manufacturing   process,    reprocessing   of    resins, or    varnish
          manufacturing. The other contaminants (i.e., pesticides) were probably
          brought on site for a specific use (pest control).
Question: To what location were the 12,000-plus drums removed?   Were any of the
          drums disposed of in Kearny?
Response: The drums were removed to licensed hazardous waste facilities within
          New Jersey and out of state. None of the drums were disposed of in
          Kearny.
Question: How many feet below the surface is there evidence of definite
          contamination?
Response: The contamination is found mainly in the first ten feet. A clay layer
          is found at that point under the surface, providing a barrier to
          prevent further migration of the contaminants.       In this area, the
          groundwater Is found about two feet below the ground's surface.
Question: Can you give an Idea of how long it will take to remove the
          contaminants found below the surface?
Response: The proposed alternative will take the water that passes through the
          site and prevent it from leaving the site. The water will be collected
          and treated on-site to meet relevant standards prior to discharge Into
          the Passaic River. The length of time required, by this method, to
          remove the contaminants will be determined by treatability tests and
          further identification and evaluation of various technologies.
Question: From the soil data in the report, it appears there are areas of heavy
          contamination   (hot spots).     Do you plan to do additional
          characterization of those sites to see if it Is necessary to remove
          contaminated soil removal?
Response: We will do additional characterization.         Then we will make a
          determination as to whether there will be some removal In specific hot
          spots or whether all the highly contaminated areas will be removed.
          That will be evaluated during the conceptual design in terms of cost
          effectiveness.    Also, we will consider whether It is most cost
          effective in achieving the objectives to run the treatment system with
          natural flushing for a long period of time or just to remove the
          contaminated soil at the beginning of the project.
Question: Will the characterization of contaminants be done prior to any work on
          this site?

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       -7-


Response: Following the signing of the ROD (Record of Decision) with EPA, we will
          begin the development of the conceptual design. At that stage, further
          characterization and the full evaluation of that area will be made.
          There 'was a strong feeling among NJDEP staff that part of the
          contaminated soil (hot spots) should be removed.
Question: Is the general intent to flush the contaminated soil rather than remove
          it?                                    '
Response: The expectation is that some contaminated material will be removed.
          Prior to full evaluation by the engineers, I cannot tell you how much
          soil, what area of soil will be removed, or even guarantee that the
          soil will be removed.
Question: A newspaper article mentioned that after the removal of the 12,000-plus
          barrels that two barrels remained. We would like to know why you
          forgot the two, since they were visible from the street and only ten
          feet from the fence?
Response: As far as I can tell from the picture (with the article) and your
          description, those barrels are full of the cuttings taken from the
          ground during the soil borings. During the drilling of a well, a
          certain amount of material is extracted. This material was placed In
          the two drums to secure them on site until they would be removed, when
          additional clean up work is completed.
'Comment: The newspaper article also alleged that the laboratory was filled with
          many harmful chemicals and the natural gas jets were still burning.
          They could have been easily turned off when the 12,000-plus barrels
          were removed.
Response: A contract is being developed through the procurement process to remove
          all the lab bottles and materials. We thought that all the utilities
          (gas and electric) were shut off prior to the removal of the 12,000
          drums. 1 understand that all the utilities are shut off now.
Question: Has there been any testing on the adjacent property (to the south) for
          possible contamination?
Response: There was a trench that separated the two properties of Syncon Resins
          and Modern Transportation.     The trench seemed to be a catch basin
          collecting the contaminated run off from Syncon and directing it into
          the Passaic River. The trench has since been filled in. To date,
          there has not been any off-site testing.
Costs of Alternatives
Question: Can you tell me how much money has been spent, to date, on the Syncon
          cleanup and in what year did this cleanup process begin?
Response: As mentioned in the opening presentation, $2 million was spent in the
          barrel removal (actual cost is $2.4 million) and approximately $550,000
          was spent on the Rl/FS. The clean up work to remove the barrels began
          in February 1984.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       -8-


Question: What will you spend to clean up the contamination caused b. iegligence?
Response: The expected capital cost of the recommended alternate- . is $8.3*
          million. • The total present worth cost, which inclu :s all the
          operating and maintenance costs for a 30 year period, w?.ll be $10.3*
          million.
Question: Is the cost of the soil removal from the hot spots in-".tided in the
          $8.3* million?
Response: Extensive soil removal costs are not part of the $8.3* million.
Question: Is the $2.6 million spent already on Syncon Resins part of the $8*
          million clean up cost? (Actual total is $3.0 million already spent.)
Response: The $8 million Is in addition to the $2.6 million already spent.
          (Actual total is $3.0 million already spent.)
*Subsequent to the public meeting, cost estimates were recalculated and an error
 was discovered. The correct capital cost is $5.6 million and the total present
 worth cost Including operations and maintenance for the 30-year period is $7.6
 million.
Siting of an Incinerator In Kearny for This Site or Other Uses
Question: Your report mentions that you prefer to incinerate some of the
          contaminated material. Will the incinerator be located in Kearny?
Response: One of the considered alternatives did Include on-site incineration,
          but that was not selected. The contaminated materials will be removed
          and sent to an existing, licensed incinerator, probably out of state.
          There are no plans to construct an incinerator anywhere for this waste.
          The amount of material would not justify constructing an incinerator to
          be used only for this site.
Comment: The Town of Kearny is concerned that an Incinerator site will be
         constructed In South Kearny to burn the contaminated materials from the
         Syncon site.
Response: An incinerator field would fall within the jurisdiction of the
          Hazardous Waste Siting Commission. A petition would have to be made to
          the commission for a permit to site any hazardous waste incinerator or
          facility. There are no known plans of such considerations for Kearny.
          It is not the NJDEP or the USEPA preferred alternative to construct an
          incinerator, and, presumably, it is not Kearny's preferred alternative.
Comment: I think our town should demand, in writing, that the NJDEP or USEPA
         (whoever is in charge of the site) provide a legal guarantee that an
         incinerator will not be placed in South Kearny under any circumstances.
Response: When the Record of Decision (ROD) is made with the final selected
          alternative, it will be in writing. It will serve as a basis for the
          grant that EPA would provide for the design and construction phases for
          mitigation of the Syncon site. There are no plans, at this point in
          time, to construct an incinerator to burn the waste materials.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       -9-


Site Security - Past, Present, and Future
Comment: Mr. Dewling in a written response to our letter stated that the Syncon
         site was'secure. Several individuals, including a reporter, went to
         the Syncon site and were able to go between sections of the fence onto
         the site. Children are riding their bicycles and walking around the
         site due to a lack of security or proper fencing. You must have a
         security guard.
Response: That will be taken back to Trenton and considered.
Comment: The newspaper article (mentioned earlier) about the site indicates the
         failure of the fencing to secure the site.        Due to the overall
         inexpensiveness of new fencing compared to the total project, I would
         think at least the fencing problem could be immediately resolved.
Response: We can look into that right away.
Question: Are you going to extend the fence into the water to prevent entry to
          the site?
Response: The fence will go across the river bank at the site.
            -                                  •                            '. ~ '^
Future Use of the Site
Comment*: We agree that the proposed alternative is the most feasible, but
          strongly recommend alternative 12, which is the removal of buildings,
          tanks and soil to an off-site waste disposal unit. Alternative #2,
          while more expensive, would provide the most protection for health,
          environment and the use of the land as a ratable for the Town of
          Kearny.
       * This Is the only written comment received.   (See Attachment D.)
Response: As you indicate, alternative 12 would provide the most complete health
          and environmental protection by eliminating exposure pathways through
          complete excavation and off-site disposal.     This would lead to an
          enhanced potential for site re-use in the shortest period of time.
         Unfortunately, this option does not represent the most feasible and
         cost-effective alternative for remediating conditions at this site.
         Alternative #2 accounts for a massive expenditure of over $115,000,000
         and the transportation to and from the site of over 300,000 cubic yards
         of material. It would be an ideal solution if we had the resources and
         off-site facilities to dispose of large amounts of contaminated
         material In an environmentally acceptable manner. It is a common
         situation at hazardous waste sites statewide that off-site cleanup
         costs and the scarcity of off-site disposal facilities prohibit
         selection of this type of alternative.
Question: How many years will it take before the site will be usable as a
          development area for other companies?

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      -10-


Respcmse: Monitoring will continue for 30 years on this site. We will return
          after five years to reassess and evaluate the progress of the system in
          operation. Following completion of the reassessment and evaluation, a
          determination will be made regarding specific actions necessary for a
          permanent solution.
Question: What influence will the pollution from the Syncon Resins site have on
          the surrounding area regarding the future development of that area?
Response: The flow of the ground water within the Syncon site is from the NE to
          SW towards the Passaic River. The contamination tends to move from
          various locations on the site directly towards the river.          The
          operation included in the recommended alternative would be within the
          boundaries of the 15 acres of the site. As part of the alternative, a
          barrier wall will be constructed from the ground surface into the clay
          layer along part of the southern boundary, the entire river boundary,
          and along part of the northern boundary to prevent ground water from
          leaving the site or coming in. French drains will be constructed to
          collect the water from the site for on-site treatment.       Following
          treatment of the water to acceptable standards, it will de discharged
          into the Passaic River.
Question: How much of the site will be restricted from future development for the
          30-year period?                                                      v"
Response: Development will be prohibited for the entire site for 30 years.
Question: What is the purpose of keeping 50 year old buildings? If you want to
          develop the land, I do not see retaining the buildings as a feasible
          alternative. Would it not cost more to decontaminate the buildings
          than to destroy them?
Response: It will cost a great deal more to destroy the buildings than it would
          to decontaminate them. If they were destroyed, they would have to be
          removed and disposed of in a hazardous waste facility. The buildings
          that are structurally sound will be left in place. The buildings that
          are not structurally sound will be demolished and removed to a
          hazardous waste facility.      (The study determined that one small
          building will be removed.)
Other Issues
Question: During the RI/FS presentation I counted four different Alternative #3*6
          shown. Each one was different than the one explained in the hand out
          (fact sheet). The third alternative on the fact sheet is the only
          reasonable one. If I wish to write a letter to the Commissioner of
          DEP, how will he know which Alternative #3 I am referring to?
Response: All the Alternative #3's are the same.         In the fact sheet the
          description is more detailed than the descriptions used on the over
          head transparencies. The transparencies are for highlighting purposes.
          The real purpose of these meetings is to hear from you, the public. As
          a result, we have directed our consultants to shorten their
          presentations to allow more time for public comments. The original

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                     -11-

          presentation was about three times as long as tonight's.          The
          shortening of the presentation may have led to a little confusion
          because every step was not presented in detail. Maybe we are learning
          from the experience that the presentation should not be too brief.
Comment: The people that owned the Syncon Resins company should be brought
         forward and made to pay for the destruction that they caused in South
         Kearny.
Response: The company is in bankruptcy. The NJDEP is the same as any other party
          seeking restitution. The NJDEP is already pursuing that issue.
Question: How soon will the clean up begin at Syncon Resins?
Response: The process begins with a comment period to receive additional
          suggestions in writing regarding NJDEP's recommended alternative. .At
          the close of the comment period, all suggestions (written and those
          made during this meeting) will be evaluated. Then the NJDEP will
          develop a Responsiveness Summary to be incorporated in the Record of
          Decision (ROD).     These comments are submitted to the USEPA and
          evaluated by them. If the NJDEP and USEPA agree, the ROD is signed.
          This is followed by: NJDEP's request to USEPA for funding; the signing
          by. both agencies of a cooperative agreement; the receipt of the grant
          for funding by DEP; the procurement process to hire an engineering
          firm; completion of the design by the engineering firm; reapplication
          to EPA for construction funds; the procurement process again to hire a
          contractor for construction; and then the construction on site. This
          process will probably take a total of two and one-half to three years.
Question: May we have a copy of all the materials from the presentation mailed to
          us?
Response: A copy of the summary presentation of the Rl/FS will be sent to you.
          You are welcome to that.
                               V.

Comment: We would like members of the NJDEP to take interested parties (local
         and state officials and concerned citizens) on a tour of the Syncon
         site. We also would like tours of the site at various stages of the
         clean up.
Response: The NJDEP does not provide routine tours of hazardous waste sites for
          the public. Hazardous waste sites are hazardous and only properly
          equipped and trained individuals can enter these locations. If anyone
          calls the NJDEP, Bureau of Community Relations (609-984-3081), we would
          gladly provide status updates regarding on-site conditions, schedules,
          etc.
Question: If I come to the NJDEP in Trenton, can someone sit down with me to
          explain the proposed alternative from A to Z? Then I will be able to
          provide an explanation of the plan to the citizens of Kearny at
          meetings and by flyers.
          We are here tonight to do just that; to provide explanations of the
          plan and to solicit your comments. If you have additional questions,

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                        -12-


            please call the NJDEP, Bureau of Community Relations at (609) 984-3081
            and arrangements can then be made to provide answers via the telephone
            or by meeting with you directly.
III. Remaining Concerns
      Basically, the community seemed pleased with the recommended alternative for
      the Syncon Resins site.     There are primarily three remaining concerns:
        0
            The Security of the Site,
            NJDEP will Immediately look into securing the site with the necessary
            fencing.
        8
            The effect of the site on redevelopment under the Master Plan of South
            Kearny.
            NJDEP stated that the cleanup of Syncon Resins will be conducted within
            the boundaries of that site.
        0
            The length of time until the Syncon Resins site could again be a
            productive ratable.
            NJDEP explained that all development will be prohibited for the entire
            site for 30 years.

Note;       September 4, 1986 Public Meeting Fact Sheet corrections:             -
p.l         Replace "147 bulk storage tanks" with "150 bulk storage tanks and
            vessels".
p.l         Replace "ranging in capacity from 200 to 1,323,000 gallons" with
            "ranging in capacity from 200 to 610,000 gallons".
p.l         (For clarification, please note) Although a Cooperative Agreement was
            signed for the IRM for $2,000,000., the final cleanup cost for the IRM
            was actually $2,400,000.
p.3         Replace "a total of 147 tanks" with "a total of 150 tanks".

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                           ATTACHMENT A




                     N.J. Department of Environmental Protection
                            Division of Waste Management
                      Hazardous Site Mitigation Administration
            Public Meeting to Discuss the Removal of Waste Storage Drums
                        from the Syncon Resins Superfund Site
                          Kearny, Hudson County, New Jersey
                             Tuesday, February 21, 1984
                                     7:00 p.m.
                                 Kearny Town Hall
                                 400 Kearny Avenue
                                Kearny, New Jersey


     NAME                    AFFILIATION




3.




).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      NAME           AFFILIATION             ADDRESS




                              l-f.JL   L.J




                                                0
"'
16.
                                             \. /




             N
18.
                 V
19.


20.


21.


22.


23.




25.



26.



27.


28.


29.


30.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

               N.J. Department of Environmental Protection
                       Division of Waste Management
                 Hazardous Site Mitigation Administration

                      Removal of Waste Storage Drums
                                 from the
                    Syncon Resins Hazardous Waste Site

                        Tuesday, February 21, 1984
                                7:00 p.m.
                             Kearny Town Hall
                               Kearny, N.J.



                                  Agenda


1.. Opening Remarks on Community imput in Superfund          Grace Singer
    Program and introduction of DEP members


    Overview of situaticn and introduction of contractor,    Jorge berkowitz
   O.H. Materials Company of Findlay, Ohio


3.. Presentation:   O.H. Materials Company, contractors      Robert Panning/
                                                             John Hitchings


A. Questions and Answers

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  FfCT SrCET

           RBCCVAL CF WASTE STCRACE CRAB FRCM TrC SY*EN RESINS
                    SUPERFUSD SITE IN KEARNY, NEW JERSEY
 SITE DESCRIPTION
 fiyncon Resins, Inc. is an inactive paint, varnish, and resin manufacturing
 facility located on a 15 acre tract in South Kearny. The carpany which
 formerly operated the plant has filed for bankruptcy.
 The site is situated within a coastal wetlands management area and is bordered
 on the west by the Passaic River, a tidal waterway.
There are now approximately 9,000 to 11,000 55-gallon drums on site, most
of which are in poor condition and leaking. Analysis indicated that many
drums contain hazardous substances, sane of which are volatile and flarnnable
posing the threat of fire and air polltion. Several bulk liquid storage
tanks suspected of containing hazardous substances are also on the site.
Two unlined ponds used for subsurface disposal of process waste were sampled
and found to contain hazardous organic chemicals.
Tests have indicated the presence of Priority Pollutants and PCBs in soil
and groundwater samples.

PROJECT DESCR1PTICN                                                          . .>
Runedial response for this site is divided into four segments:
     Part I       Project initiation for Part I is scheduled for early February,
                     1984 and is expected to take six months to carplete.
                  Phase I includes staging, testing, and removal of the 55-gallon
                     drums presently on site as well as inspection of the
                     bulk liquid storage tcnks.
                  Phase 11 is disposal of the drums.
     Part 11      Work on Part II activities is scheduled to begin in the
                     4th quarter of 1984 and is expected to take nine months
                     to carplete.
                  This part of the project will include a Remedial Investigation
                     to assess site contamination and a Feasibility Study
                     to investigate remedial action alternatives.
     Part 111     Work on the engineering Design is scheduled to begin in
                     the 1st quarter of 1986 and is expected to take three
                     months to carplete.
     Part IV      Scheduling of the implementation of the design is dependent
                     on the work detailed in that document.

PROJECT FUNDING
Two million dollars to carplete Part I of the remedial action project, 90%
of which is provided by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
as part of the Superfund Program. The remaining 10% will be provided by
the State of New Jersey fran its Spill Compensation Fund.
N.;i. Department of Environmental Protection
2/84

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

             NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

                        DIVISION OF WASTE MANAGEMENT

                  HAZARDOUS SITE MITIGATION ADMINISTRATION



     A Community Relations Program at Superfund Hazardous Waste Sites


     As part of the federal/state program of cleanup of hazardous waste
sites, a Community Relations Program is conducted to receive local input
and to advise local residents and officials about the planned remedial actions
at the three major stages of the cleanup: 1) feasibility study 2) engineer-
ing design and 3) removal/treatment/construction. Local briefings and public
meetings are conducted with elected officials and residents and generally
take place at:
     1) The commencement of a feasibility study so that local concerns
        can be addressed early in the process.
     2) The completion of a feasibility study to discuss the alternative
        courses of remedial action. There is a 30-day comment period after
        public presentation of the alternatives.
     3) The engineering design stage to carry out the mandates of the selected
        remedial alternative.
     M    The commencement of the removal/treatment/construction stage to
          advise of the expected physical remedial action.
     5) The completion of the remedial action.
                            x


     In addition to the more formal activities outlined above, there is
generally informal communication with local officials and residents.
Depending upon whether the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP) or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has the lead in
remedial action at a site, community relations activity is conducted by
the relevant state or federal agency.
   . In New Jersey at DEP, the Community Relations Program is conducted
by Grace Singer, Community Relations Program Manager (609) 984-3C81. At
Region II, EPA, the contact person is Lillian Johnson (212) 264-2515-




HS45:ms

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

               9TEPS INVOLVED JN_^V MAJOR HAZARDOUS WASTE SITE CLEANUP INVOLVING EPA AND SUPERFUND MONIES



Site Identified                  Initial Site Investigation               Secure Site             Site Analysis Evaluation

and Referred                                                                                      and Assessment

   (1)                                   (2)                                  (3)                               (4)



Prioritization                   Remedial Action Master Plan              Community Relations     Signing of Contract of

                                 and Determination of Lead                Plan Activated          Cooperative Agreement

   (5)                                    (6)                                 (7)                               (8)


Hiring of Contractor             Prepar.it ion of Feasibility             Selection of Remedial   Hiring of Contractor

Cor Feasibility Study            Study                                     Action Alternative      for Design

   (9)                                    (10)                                (11)                              (12)


Hiring of Construction or        Cleanup Evaluation                       Contractor Audit and          (


Removal Conti.tctnr and                                                   Close out

Cleanup

   (13)                                   (14)                                (15)




N.1OEP
J/54

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                     ATTACHMENT B
              NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                        DIVISION OF WASTE MANAGEMENT
                  HAZARDOUS SITE MITIGATION ADMINISTRATION
                  Public Meeting to Discuss Commencement of
                  Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
                                     at
                             Syncon Resins Site
                          Thursday, April 25, 1985
                                  7:00 p.m.
                              Kearny Town Hall
                             Kearny, New Jersey




NAME               AFFILIATION                       ADDRESS




                                              it
                     - h/ -b -
                  J\. // 7>




$*leu* ^fJL       fc^\
       Z      "         I

                                                      A /p/*t» fl*

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               State of iX*ru<
                  DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                            DIVISION OF WASTE MANAGEMENT
                         HAZARDOUS SITE MITIGATION ADMINISTRATION
                                  CN 28 Trenton> NJ 6625                jORGE
                                     °-            °                        ^rsKTsPH °
                                        SSSISS.            3 APR 1985

                             Public Meeting To Discuss
                                  Commencement of
                     Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
                                        at
                                   Syncon Resins
                                  Town of Kearny
                                   Hudson County


. A public meeting will be held by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
 Protection to discuss the initiation of the Remedial Investigation/Feasibility
  Study at-the Syncon Resins site. This meeting has been scheduled to replace- the
 January 31, 1985 public meeting which was cancelled due to a weather emergency.

The meeting will be held on:

                             Thursday, April 25, 1985
                                      7:00 p.m.
                                 Kearny Town Hall
                                 400 Kearny Avenue
                                     Kearny, NJ
                                  (201) 991-2700

For further information, please contact Grace Singer at (609) 984-3081.


HS85:js




                        AVu Jersey Is An Equal Opportunity Employer

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

               NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

                         DIVISION OF WASTE MANAGEMENT

                    HAZARDOUS SITE MITIGATION ADMINISTRATION


                                 Public Meeting
                                       on
                                Commencement of
                    Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
                                    at the
                               Syncon Resins Site

                             Thursday, January 31, 1985
                                      7:00 p.m.
                                  Kearny Town Hall
                                  400 Kearny Avenue
                                     Kearny, NJ

                                       AGENDA

1)   Opening Remarks*                           Ms. Grace L. Singer, Chief
     Introduction of NJDEP personnel            Office of Community Relations
                                                NJDEP

2)   Overview of Past History and               Mr. Russell Trice, Site Manager
     Current Situation;                         Bureau of Site Management
     Introduction of Contractor:                NJDEP
     Ebasco Services, Inc.

3)   Presentation: Remedial                     Mr. Garry Cusack, Project Director
     Investigation/Feasibility Study            Ebasco Services, Inc.

4)   Questions and Answers

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  STATE OF NEW JERSEY
                                            DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

                                   FACT SHEET

                                 Public Meeting
                                       on
                                 Commencement of
                    Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
                                       at
                                Syncon Resins Site
                                  Town of Kearny
                                   Hudson County
                                  April 25, 1985
Site Description;   Syncon Resins is an inactive paint, varnish, and resin
                    manufacturing facility situated within an industrialized
                    section of a coastal wetlands management area. This 15-acre
                    site is bordered on the west by the Fassaic River, a tidal
                    waterway, and on the east by Jacobus Avenue. There were
                    12,824 55-gallon drums on site, most of which were in poor
                    condition and leaking. Analyses indicated that many con-
                    tained hazardous substances including volatile and flammable
                    materials which posed an immediate fire and air pollution
                    threat. Presently remaining on site are: 144 bulk storage
                    tanks, ranging in capacity from 375 gallons to 600,000
                    gallons and containing various hazardous materials; two
                    unlined lagoons used for subsurface disposal of process
                    waste which were sampled and found to contain hazardous
                    organic chemicals; and five suspected underground storage
                    tanks with their associated piping systems. Among the
                    diverse contaminants found at this site are: solvents,
                    waste oils, corrosives, organic liquids, solids, acids,
                    alkalies, ketones, and inorganic liquids and solids. Soil,
                    shallow ground water and surface water samples indicate the
                    presence of various pollutants including toluene, xylene,
                    PCBs, heavy metals, pesticides and cyanide.
Background;         In November 1981, an Administrative Order was issued by the
                    New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP)
                    requiring Syncon Resins to control and contain the hazards
                    at the site. However, the company has since filed for
                    bankruptcy.   A Remedial Action Master Plan (RAMP) was
                    prepared by the United States Environmental Protection
                    Agency (USEPA) in November, 1982. A Cooperative Agreement
                    was signed in December 1982 committing $2,000,000 for the
                    Initial Remedial Measure (IRM) and $350,000 for a subsequent
                    Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS).

                    Cleanup work in the Initial Remedial Measure began in
                    February, 1984 and was completed in August, 1984. This
                    included:
                    0
                        the inspection, sampling, and disposal of all 12,824
                        drums. (Prior to the disposal, the contents were grouped
                        into categories of compatibility.);

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

           0
               the completion of a Tank and Vessel Report which de-
               termined the capacity and integrity of each tank and
               vessel, the quantity and phase (liquid, solid or gas)
               of the contained material with a number assigned to
               each;

           0
                transportation, treatment and/or disposal of the vaste.
Stratus;   In November, 1984 NJDEP awarded the contract for a Remedial
           Investigation/Feasibility Study to Ebasco Services, Inc. of
           New York City. The scope-of-work involves the following
           activities:
           0
               Evaluation of all background information, confirmation
               of the level of protective equipment to be provided to
               personnel during site investigations and preparation of
               a Health and Safety Plan, a Field Sampling Plan and a
               Quality Assurance/Quality Control Plan for the Syncon
               Resins site.
           0
               Identification, to the extent possible, of the type,
               source, location and quantity of hazardous wastes
               present at the site.
           0
               Determination of the nature, extent and severity of
               ground water contaniration beneath the site and its
               impact on the surrounding areas.
           0
               Determination of the nature, extent and severity of
               soil contamination at the site.
           0
               Determination of the nature, extent and severity of
               surface water contamination at the site and its impact
               on related surface streams and water bodies.
           0
               Air monitoring to determine the nature and extent of
               gaseous emissions.
           0
               Selection of remedial response objectives and
               identification of alternatives.
           0
               Evaluation of alternatives and selection of an environ-
               mentally sound, cost-effective remedial action.
           0
               Development of the conceptual design of the selected
               remedial action and preparation of the final report.



NJDEP
4/85

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

                            DIVISION OF WASTE MANAGEMENT

                     HAZARDOUS SITE MITIGATION ADMINISTRATION


         A Community Relations Program at Superfund Hazardous Waste Sites

     As part of the federal/state program of cleanup at hazardous waste
sites, a Community Relations Program is conducted to receive local input and
to advise local residents and officials about the planned remedial actions at
the three major stages of the cleanup: 1) remedial investigation/feasibility
study 2) engineering design and 3) removal/treatment/construction. Local
briefings and meetings are conducted with elected officials and residents and
generally take place at:
     1)     The commencement of a remedial investigation/feasibility study so
            that local concerns can be addressed early in the process.
                                                                            > * v^
     "                  .                                                     " i

     2)     The completion of a feasibility study to discuss the alternative
            courses of remedial action. There is a 30-day comment period after
            public presentation of the alternatives during which the feasibility
            study is available in local repositories.
     3)     The engineering design stage to carry out the mandates of the
            selected remedial alternative.
     4)     The commencement of the removal/treatment/construction stage to
            advise of the expected physical remedial action.
     5)     The completion of the remedial action.

     In addition to the activities outlined above, there is generally
ongoing communication with local officials and residents as required.
Depending upon whether the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP) or the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has the lead
in remedial action at a site, community relations activities are conducted by
the relevant State or Federal agency.
     In New Jersey, the DEP Community Relations Program is directed by Grace
Singer, Chief, Office of Community Relations (609) 984-3081. At Region II,
EPA, the contact person is Lillian Johnson, Community Relations Coordinator
(212) 264-2515.



HS45:js
4/85

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             STEPS INVOLVED IN A MAJOR HAZARDOUS WASTE SITE CLEANUP



     (1)                            (2)                           (3)                      (4)
Site Identified           Initial Site Investigation         Secure Site         Site Analysis Evaluation
 and Referred                                                                         and Assessment

     (5)                            (6)                           (7)                      (8)
Prioritization            Determination of Lead          Community Relations     Signing of Contract or
                                                            Plan Activated        Cooperative Agreement

     (9)                            (10)                          (11)                     (12)
Hiring of Contractor           Preparation of           Selection of Remedial     Hiring of Contractor
for Remedial Investi-          Feasibility                Action Alternative     for Engineering Design
 gation/Feasibility              Study
    Study

     (13)                           (14)                          (15)
Hiring of Construction/      Cleanup Evaluation          Contractor Audit and
 Removal Cleanup                                                Close out
  Contractor




New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
5/84

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                       ATTACHMENT C




             NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                   DIVISION OF HAZARDOUS SITE MITIGATION

               Public Meeting to Discuss Completion of the
              . Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
                                   at
                           Syncon Resins site
                       Thursday, September 4, 1986
                                7:00 P.M.
                            Kearny Town Hall
                            400 Kearny Avenue
                               Kearny, NJ
                              PLEASE PRINT

      NAME                     AFFILIATION                   ADDRESS

i.




7.                                           (T&.

                                  PEP




                                                                 (o


13.                -r-^>
                  /Ac - /?                   /)rs /rp-,

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      NAME         AFFILIATION         ADDRESS

U.

          to/
15
      '%J0A                  //
                                  ^              *
                         n A v    /°
                     ULJd^QjLt*&* fcLdA^^^yX.
                                         7* V'
                    /^ A
      r
       ^?r   ^^L        #t
                       ft
                                       [ 4«o^-




25.

26.


27.


28.


29.


30.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                NEW JERSEY-DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

                      DIVISION OF HAZARDOUS SITE MITIGATION


                                 Public Meeting
                                       on
                                  Completion of
                    Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
                                       at
                               Syncon Resins Site
                                 Town of Kearny
                                  Hudson County
                           Thursday, September 4, 1986
                                    7:00 P.M.
                                Kearny Town Hall
                                400 Kearny Avenue
                                   Kearny, NJ




                                     AGENDA

1.   Opening Remarks and                Mr. Richard C. Salkie, P.E., Acting Director
      Introductions                     Division of Hazardous Site Mitigation


2.   Overview of Past History           Dr. Adi Aleti, P.E., Site Manager
     and Current Situation              Division of Hazardous Site Mitigation

3.   Presentation:                      Mr. Thomas Granger,     Project   Manager
      Remedial Investigation/           Ebasco Services, Inc.
      Feasibility Study
4.   NJDEP Recommended                  Mr. Richard C. Salkie, P.E.
      Alternative

5.   Comments and Questions             The floor will be open for comments and
                                        questions at this time.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   FACT SHEET

                                   Results of
                    Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
                                       at
                               Syncon Resins Site
                                 Town of Kearny
                                  Hudson County
                                September 4, 1986


Site Description

Syncon Resins is an inactive paint, varnish, and resin manufacturing facility
situated within an industrialized section of a coastal wetlands management area.
This 15-acre site is bordered on the west by the Passaic River, and on the east
by Jacobus Avenue. There were 12,824 55-gallon drums on site, most of which were
in poor condition and leaking prior to their disposal in 1984.          Analyses
indicated that many of these drums contained hazardous substances Including
volatile and flammable materials which posed an immediate fire and air pollution
threat.

Presently remaining on site are:     thirteen structures and buildings; 147 bulk
storage tanks (ranging in capacity from 200 to 1,323,000 gallons and containing
various hazardous materials); two unlined lagoons (used for subsurface disposal
of process waste) containing hazardous organic chemicals; and five suspected
underground storage tanks with their associated piping systems.        Among the
diverse contaminants found at this site are: solvents, waste oils, corrosives,
organic liquids, solids, acids, alkalies, ketones, and inorganic liquids and
solids.    Soil, shallow ground water and surface water samples indicate the
presence of various pollutants including toluene, xylene, polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs), heavy metals, pesticides and cyanide.
Background
                              v

In November 1981, an Administrative Order was Issued by the.New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection Agency (NJDEP) requiring Syncon Resins to control and
contain the hazards at the site. However, the company ceased operation in 1982
and filed for bankruptcy. The Syncon Resins site was included on the National
Priorities List (NPL) In September 1983. Of the 97 New Jersey Sites on NPL, the
Syncon Resins site Is ranked 48th. A Remedial Action Master Plan (RAMP) was
prepared by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) in November
1982. A Cooperative Agreement was signed by the USEPA and NJDEP in December
1982, committing $2,000,000 in federal funds for the Initial Remedial Measure
(IRM). Cleanup work under the IRM began in February 1984 and was completed in
August 1984.    This included: disposal of all 12,824 drums; treatment and/or
removal of the wastes that were contained in the 12,824 drums; and an inventory
and content evaluation ol the tanks and vessels.
In December 1982, the NJDEP and the USEPA signed a Cooperative Agreement for a
Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) at this site. In November 1984,
NJDEP awarded the contract for the Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Ebasco Services, Inc. of New York City.   The cost of this study is approximately
$550,000.
Status
The Draft Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study was completed in August 1986
and has been available since August 21, 1986 at the following repositories:
Kearny Public Library in Kearny, Hudson County Law Library in Jersey City, Kearny
Town Hall in Kearny, and the NJDEP, Division of Hazardous Site Mitigation in
Trenton. The public comment period will extend until September 11, 1986. Any
comments on the study should be submitted to Kevin Kratina at NJDEP, Bureau of
Community Relations, CN028 - 432 East State Street, Trenton, NJ 08625. After
considering all public comments, NJDEP and USEPA will determine the selected
remedial alternative for the site and sign a Record of Decision which will
specify the details of the long-term site cleanup.
Summary of Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
The following remedial objectives were established for the site as a result of
the «ite investigations and risk assessment:
  0
      Mitigative measures should be developed to prevent human exposure to organic
      and metal contaminants found within unsaturated soil, lagoon sediments, and
      dirt/dust In on-site buildings.
                                                                               .^
  * Mitigative measures should be taken to eliminate the potential hazard to
    'nearby populations caused by the chemical materials remaining in the on-site
     tanks and vessels and their asbestos coverings.
  0
      Mitigative measures should be taken to remediate the contaminated ground
      water within the shallow aquifer and saturated soils above the continuous
      clay layer.
Based on the above listed objectives, the Remedial Investigation included the
following activities:
  0
      Identification of the type, source, location and quantity of hazardous
      wastes at the site.
 0
      Determination of the nature, extent and severity of ground water
      contamination beneath the site and Its impact on the surrounding areas.
  0
      Determination of the nature, extent and severity of soil contamination at
      the site.
  0
      Determination of the nature, extent and severity of surface water
      contamination at the site and its impact on related surface streams and
      water bodies.
  0
      Air monitoring to Jeterrine the nature and extent of gaseous emissions.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Results of the Remedial Investigation
  0
      A total of 147 tanks and vessels are present on site. Seventy-three tanks
      contain less than three inches of licuid material or contain residual scale
      material.    Thirty-eight tanks contain either hexane or water soluble
      peroxides.    Nineteen tanks contain hexane soluble liquids and solids.
      Fourteen tanks contain flammable liquids or solids, crystalline and
      polymeric material, or sludge residuas. Four tanks contain aqueous liquids
      and two tanks contain cyanide positive organic liquids. Eight tanks contain
      PCBs at concentrations greater than 50 parts per million (ppm).
  e   Contamination with organic compounds is widespread throughout the site. The
      greatest concentrations of volatile organics were found in lagoon sediments,
      soil at the southwest corner of the site, and in two buildings. These
      primarily include toluene, xylene, irichloroethylene (TCE), ethylbenzene,
      2-hexanone (MBK), methyl isobutyl ketone (MIBK), and chlorobenzene. The
      shallow ground water beneath the site is also contaminated with primarily
      the same volatile organic solvents, but only at certain locations. Two
      other organic compound solvents (i.e. 1,1-dichloroethane and chlorobenzene)
      are present in the deep aquifer at very low levels.
  0
      Contamination with acid/base neutral organic compounds is widespread
      throughout the site.     The on-site soils above the clay layer contain
      principally phthalates (diethy1, dibutyl, dioctyl, and bis (2-ethylh«cyl
      phthalate), polyaromatic hydrocarbons (17 compounds), dichlorobenzene, N-
      nitrosodiphenylamine, and 4-methylphenol.    The shallow water table (above
      the clay layer) contains principally naphthalene and 2-methyl naphthalene in
      two general areas. No base neutral compounds were detected in the deep
      aquifer beneath the clay layer.
  0
      Pesticide contamination (aldrin, DDT and its associated breakdown products)
      was found in the soils in several areas, including the dust/dirt inside
      several buildings.
  0
      PCB contamination is restricted to lagoon sediments, tank contents, certain
      buildings, and soil in specific locations of the site.
  0
      Metal contamination is present in the soil, shallow ground water, lagoon
      sediment, and buildings. The major contaminants in the shallow ground water
      are arsenic, cadmium, chromium, lead and zinc. The lagoon sediments and the
      buildings' dirt/dust contain chromium, cadmium, nickel and barium.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Summary of Remedial Alternatives for Long-Term Site Remediation

  0
      Alternative 1 - Minimal Action
      This entails securing the structures and improving fencing conditions around
      the perimeter of the site.
 0
      Alternative 2 - Removal of Buildings, Tanks, and Soil for Off-Site
                      Disposal
      Removal and off-site disposal of all buildings, tanks, tank contents,
      and soils exceeding the established cleanup criteria.
 * Alternative 3 - Removal of Buildings and Tanks, On-Site Incineration
                   and On-Site Soil Washing
      Removal and on-site incineration of hazardous tank contents and off-site
      disposal of non-hazardous tank contents; decontamination and off-site
      disposal of all buildings and tanks; on-site soil washing of hazardous
      soils.
 * Alternative A - Decontamination of Buildings and Tanks, and
                   Leachate and Ground Water Control
      Removal and off-site disposal of tank contents; decontamination and
      securing of buildings and tanks; placement of a hazardous waste cap in open
      areas; extraction and on-site treatment of ground wster and leachate.
 0
      Alternative 5 - Removal of Buildings and Tanks, and Site Encapsulation
      Removal and off-site disposal of all buildings, tanks, tank contents and
      waste materials; and site encapsulation with a perimeter slurry wall and a
      hazardous waste cap.
 0
      Alternative 6 - Removal of Buildings and Tanks, On-Site Chemical Fixation
                      Soil, and On-Site RCRA Landfill
      Removal and disposal of hazardous buildings, tanks and solid tank contents
      to an on-site hazardous waste landfill; off-site disposal of liquid tank
      contents and soil dewatered wastewater; and chemical fixation of soils.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   Syncon Resins
                         September 4, 1986 Public Meeting
                           NJDEP Recommended Alternative
Based on the results of the RI/FS, the NJDEP recommends the following alternative
for site remediation.      This recommendation includes various components of
alternatives described previously in this fact sheet.
  e
      Tanks, Vessels, and Buildings
      The existing above-ground structures including all buildings, tanks, and
      storage vessels will be decontaminated. Hazardous             contents and
      decontamination wastes will be removed for either incineration (preferred
      option) or landfilling at an approved hazardous waste facility.          All
      non-hazardous aqueous wastes will be treated in an on-site treatment system.
      Non-hazardous solids will be disposed of at a sanitary landfill.
  0
      Soil (Unsaturated, Saturated, and Lagoon Sediments)
      Sediments from the two lagoons will be excavated and disposed of off site by
      incineration (preferred) or landfilling at an approved hazardous waste
      facility. Soils will be covered with a layer of crushed stone to prevent
      contact with the soil and to allow natural flushing of the contaminants by
      rain water. A downgradient collection trench will be installed to collect
      the contaminated water which will be treated on site and discharged to the
      Passaic River.
                                                                          .   ;J» .
  0
      Monitoring
      A continuous 30-year monitoring program will be implemented after the
      completion of remedial action to ensure the safety of public health and the
      environment.
  0
      Site Access
      The site will be secured by Improving fence conditions, including a locked
      gate. Access roads will be constructed.
  c
      Additional Studies
      This will include the evaluation of a variety of technologies that will
      enhance the natural flushing and/or treatment/destruction of contaminants.
      These technologies are meant to achieve a more permanent solution for the
      contaminated soil. After these studies are complete, the site will be
      reassessed to determine specific actions for a more permanant remedy.
      Additional soil samples will be collected/analyzed to ensure public and
      environmental safety. If soil analyses indicate a potential environmental
      problem, excavation and off-site disposal will be considered.
For further information contact Kevin Kratina of NJDEP's Bureau of Community
Relations at (609) 984-3081.


HS224:fb

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

             FIGURE M
SITE LOCATION MAP, SYNCON RESINS SITE,
      HUDSON COUNTY, NEW JERSEY

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                Glossary of Terms

Administrative Consent Order (AGO); A binding legal document between a govern-
ment agency and a responsible party. It is issued by the government in the form
of an order that specifies site mitigation activities to be undertaken by the
responsible party.
Contract;    The legal agreement that outlines federal and state government
responsibilities at USEPA-lead sites on the National Priorities List (Superfund
sites) as authorized by the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation
and Liability Act (CERCLA).
Cooperative Agreement; An agreement whereby USEPA transfers funds and other
resources to a state for the accomplishment of certain remedial activities at
situs on the National Priorities List (Superfund sites) as authorized by the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA).
Engineering Design (Remedial Design);    Following a feasibility study, an
engineering design is executed to translate the selected remedy In accordance
with engineering criteria In a bid package, enabling Implementation of the site
remedy.
Focused Feasibility Study (FFS); A limited feasibility study which is performed
on a certain aspect of site remediation and/or when more than one remedial
meaiiure is considered technically viable for the immediate control of a threat.
Immediate Removal Actions (IRAs); Actions taken to prevent or mitigate immediate
and significant risk to human life, health or to the environment.
Initial Remedial Measures (IRMs); Actions that can be taken quickly to limit
exposure or threat of exposure to a significant health or environmental hazard at
sites where planning for remedial actions is underway.
Monitoring Well; A well installed under strict design specifications that, when
sampled, will reveal hydrogeologic data at its point of installation. Monitoring
wells are installed at predetermined locations, usually in groups, to gain
knowledge of site conditions including: extent and type of ground water con-
tamination, soil types, depth to ground water and direction of ground water flow.
National Contingency Plan (NCP); The basic policy directive for federal response
actions under the Comprehensive Environmental Respcnse, Compensation and
Liability Act (CERCLA). It sets forth the Hazard Ranking System and procedures
and standards for responding to releases of hazardous substances, pollutants, and
contaminants. The NCP is a regulation subject to regular revision.
National Priorities List (KPL);   A list of the highest priority releases or
potential releases of hazardous substances, based upon State and U.S.
Environmental Protectioi. Agency (USEPA) Regional submissions of candidate sites
and the criteria and methodology contained in the Hazard Ranking System (HRS),
for the purpose of allocating funds for remedial response under the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA). Published by
the USEPA, the NFL is updated periodically. Sites on the NPL are commonly called
Superfund sites.


                                                                      over...

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

NJDEP: New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
NJDEP*s Management Plan for Hazardous Waste Site Cleanups; The New Jersey plan
used to develop a work schedule and a systematic approach to remedial action at
hazardous waste sites and discharges of hazardous materials which pose a threat
to public health or the environment.
Remedial Action: (e.g., Removal/Treatment/Construction) The physical action
consistent with the selected remedy for a release or threatened release of a
hazardous substance into the environment. The term includes, but is not limited
to such actions as removal, storage, confinement, protection using dikes,
trenches, ditches, slurry walls, clay cover, neutralization, cleanup of released
hazardous substances or contaminated materials, recycling or reuse, diversion,
destruction, segregation of reactive wastes, dredging or excavations, repair or
replacement of leaking containers, collection of leachate and runoff, on-site or
off-site treatment or incineration, provision of alternate water supplies, and
monitoring required to assure that such actions protect public health and the
environment.
Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS); The Remedial Investigation (RI)
portion of a RI/FS in remedial planning involves a physical and other inves-
tigation to gather the data necessary to determine the nature and extent of
problems at the site; establish remedial response criteria for the site; and
identify technical and cost analyses of the alternatives. The Feasibility Study
(FS) portion of a RI/FS in remedial planning Involves a study to evaluate
alternative - remedial actions from a technical, environmental, and cost per-
spective; recommend the most effective remedy for adequate protection of human
health and the environment; and prepare a conceptual design, cost estimates for
budgetary purposes, and a preliminary implementation schedule for that action.
Responsible Party; Any person who has discharged a hazardous substance or is in
any way responsible for any hazardous substance which the NJDEP has removed or is
removing pursuant to the New Jersey Spill Compensation and Control Act and/or the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA).
Spill Compensation Fund; The Spill Compensation Fund was created in 1976 with
enactment of the Spill Compensation and Control Act and became effective on April
1, 1977. It provides compensation to qualified individuals and businesses that
have suffered damages as a result of a discharge of hazardous substances.
Superfund;    The common name for the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA) enacted by Congress in December 1980.
The Act authorized the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) to
provide long-term remedies at hazardous waste sites. The Act established a fund
from special taxes and general revenues, to accomplish the cleanup of these
sites.
USEPA; United States Environmental Protection Agency.

NJDEP
7/86                                                              :

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                         DIVISION OF HAZARDOUS SITE MITIGATION




            A Community Relations Program at Superfund Hazardous Waste Sites


As part of the federal/state program of cleanup at hazardous waste sites, a
Community Relations Program is conducted to receive local input and to advise
local residents and officials about the planned remedial actions at major stages
of the cleanup.     Local briefings and meetings are conducted with elected
officials and residents and generally take place at:

       1)    The commencement of a remedial investigation/feasibility study so that
             local concerns can be addressed early in the process.
       2)    The completion of a feasibility study to discuss the alternative
             courses of remedial action. There is a 21-day comment period on the
             alternatives during which the feasibility study is available in local
             repositories.
       3)    The commencement of the removal/treatment/construction    stage to advise
             of the expected physical remedial action.
       4)    The completion of the remedial action.

In addition to the activities outlined above, there is generally ongoing
communication with local officials and residents as required. Depending upon
whether the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or the United
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Is the lead agency in remedial
action at a site, community relations activities are conducted by the relevant
State or Federal agency.
In New Jersey, the DEP Community Relations Program is directed by Grace Singer,
Chief, Bureau of Community Relations (609) 984-3081. At Region II, EPA, the
Community Relations Coordinator is Lillian Johnson, (212) 264-2515.




7/86

                                                                       over.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               STEPS INVOLVED IH A MAJOR HAZARDOUS WASTE SITE CLEANUP




      (1)                              (2)                         (3)                              (4)
Site Identified          Initial Site Investigation          Site Secured               Site Analysis Evaluation
 and Referred                                                                                 and Assessment


      (5)                              (6)                         (7)                              (8)

Prioritization              Determination of Agency Lead    Community Relations          Signing of Contract or
                                 (NJDEP or USEPA)              Plan Activated            Cooperative Agreement


      (9)                              (10)                        (ID                              (12)

Hiring of Contractor              Preparation of              Selection of Remedial       Hiring of Contractor
.for Remedial Investi-            Feasibility                   Action Alternative       for Engineering Design
  gation/Feasibility                 Study
     Study


      (13)                             (14)                         (15)

 Hiring of Construction/          Cleanup Evaluation          Contractor Audit and
Treatment/Removal Cleanup                                           Close out
     Contractor

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                          ATTACHMENT D

                                          Brpartmmt of -public
                                          anb fcurinmmrntal JfrntrrltDtt
                                                        BOARD MEETS
                                              THIRD WEDNESDAY OF EACH MONTH
                                                      AT HEALTH CENTER
                                                     645 KEARNY AVENUE
                                                     KEARNY, N.J. 07032
    COMMISSIONERS                                                                         EDWARD GROSVENOR
KEARNY BOARD OF HEALTH                                  997-O6OO                             HEALTH OFFICER

LILLIAN CARDOZA. President                                    II
VICTOR RUDOMANSKI. M.O.. Vice President
JO-ANN CARRATURA
PETER CICCHINO
CHESTER KOZLIK
GORDON FOWLIE                                                                             September 8, 1986
ROBERT R. KERWIN. SR.




Mr. Kevin Kratina
N.J. Dept. of Environmental Protection
Bureau of Community Relations
CN-208
432 East State Street
Trenton, New Jersey 08625
                             HE'.    SYNCCN RESINS SITE, KEARNY, NEW JERSEY

Dear Mr. Kratina:
Being present at the Public Hearing on September 4, 1986, we were delighted that the
Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study was completed and that decisions will be made as to
what alternative to initiate at the site in the near future.
We agree that the presented alternative is the roost feasible, but, strongly recommend alter-
native #2, which is removal of buildings, tanks, and soil to an off-site waste disposal unit.
Alternative #2, while more expensive, would provide the most protection against health
environment and the use of the land as a ratable to the Town of Kearny. we can ill afford to
have industrial sites sitting idle while other clean-up studies are conducted. We could
conceivably have hundreds of acres of prime industrial land under long range maintenance
programs providing no tax ratable at all.
Thanking you in advance for your consideration, I am
                                                                      Sincerely,

                                                                      Edward"Grosvenor,
                                                                      Health Officer
EG.-el
