LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: RECORD OF DECISION, OPERABLE UNIT 3 (OFF-SITE AREAS), LIPARI LANDFILL, MANTUA TOWNSHIP, GLOUCESTER COUNTY, NJ. (WITH APPENDICES)
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/102029
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 184b169805b6e27dfcf367e576c024d80b7623be43cd2a9dd079649c4bc607cc
Source PDF pages: 146
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

United States              Office of           EPA/ROD/R02-88/074
Environmental Protection   Emergency and       July 1988
Agency                     Remedial Response




Superfund
Record of Decision                                         102029




Lipari Landfill, NJ

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     J0277-IOI
       REPORT DOCUMENTATION                    1. REPORT NO.                                                       3. Recipient's Accession No.
              PAGE                                       EPA/RQD/RQ2-88/074
      4. Titl« »nd Subtitle                                                                                        5. Report Date
        SUPERFUND RECORD OF DECISION                                                                                                      07/11/88
         ipari Landfill, NJ
              Remedial Action - Final
                                                                                                                   8. Performing Organization Rept. No.


>    I 5. Performing Organization Name and Address                                                                 10. Project/Task/Work Unit No.


                                                                                                                   11. Contract(C) or Gr»nt(G) No.
                                                                                                                   (C)

                                                                                                                   (Q)

      12. Sponsoring Organization Name and Address                                                                 13. Type of Report & Period Covered
       U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
       401 M Street, S.W.                                                                                                800/000
       Washington, D.C. 20460                                                                                      14.


      15. Supplementary Note*




      IS. Abstract (Limit: 200 words)
          The Lipari Landfill site is a municipal and industrial waste landfill in Mantua
       Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey. The landfill ,consists of an "onsite" and an
       "offsite"'portion. The onsite portion is a formerly active landfilling area that
       consists of a slurry wall/synthetic membrane containment system. This portion was
       addressed in a previous remedial, action. A separate previous remedial action focused on
         lushing water-; transportable contaminants from within the containment system. This
       Remedial action addresses the offsite portion of the site-which is the area outside of
       the encapsulation system consisting of agricultural and residential areas that include
       several lakes, streams, and parks. The site is bordered by the Zee Orchard on the north
       and west, and a housing development on the northeast. The site property was purchased
       by Mr. Nicholas Lipari in 1958 and was used until 1971 for excavation of sand and gravel
       and landfilling of municipal and household wastes, liquid and semi-solid chemical
       wastes, and other industrial wastes. Offsite investigations indicate that lakes,
       streams, and marshland in the area surrounding the site have been impacted by
       contaminant migration from the landfill. The primary contaminants of concern affecting
       the ground water, surface water, sediments, soil and air are VOCs including benzene,
       toluene, and xylene, and metals including arsenic, chromium, and lead.
        (See Attached Sheet)

     17. Document Analysis        a. Descriptors
        Record of Decision
        Lipari Landfill, NJ
        Third Remedial Action - Fina.l
        Contaminated Media: gw, sw, soil, sediments    . .
        Key Contaminants: metals (arsenic, chromium, lead), VOCs (benzene, toluene, xylenes)
         b. Identifiers/Open-Ended Terms                            .                            .




         c. COSATI Reid/Group

         Availability Statement                                                           19. Security Class (This Report)           21. No. of Pages

                                                                                                None                                      164
                                                                                          20. Security Class (This Page)             22. Price
                                                                                                None
    (See ANSI-Z39.18)                                            See Instructions on Reverie                                        OPTIONAL FORM 272 (4-77)
                                                                                                                                    (Formerly NTIS-35)
                                                                                                                                    Department of Commerce

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

J3PA/ROD/R02-88/074
  ipari Landfill, NJ
 hird Remedial Action - Final
Li^




16. ABSTRACT (continued)

*~ The selected remedial action for the offsite areas includes: collection of the
contaminated ground water/leachate, followed by onsite treatment and discharge to POTW;
excavation of contaminated marsh soil, and dredging and dewatering contaminated
sediments, followed by thermal treatment and offsite disposal as .nonhazardous material;
integration of offsite sampling with the onsite monitoring plan being developed to
monitor the effectiveness of the onsite flushing action; and temporary remedial measures
in the surrounding marshland, if necessary, to mitigate volatile emissions from leachate
seepage areas. The estimated present worth cost for this remedial action is
$21,000,000. O&M costs were not provided.      .

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     LIPARI LANDFILL SUPERFUND SITE




RECORD OF DECISION FOR THE OFF-SITE AREAS




              JULY 11, 1988

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    TABLE OF CONTENTS



Section                                                                      Page
*' I;.     DECLARATION' STATEMENT
 II.       DECISION SUMMARY

            - Site Description                                                1
            - Lipari Landfill Site History                                    3
            - Contaminant Pathways/Risks                                      10
            - Enforcement Activities       .                                  12
            - Community Relations Activities              •                   13
            - Scope and Role of Remedial Activities                           13
            - Description of Remedial Alternatives                            14
            - ARARs                                                           14
            - Disposal Options                                                23
            - Summary of the Comparative Analysis of Alternatives             26
            - Selected Remedy                                                 33
            - Statutory Findings / Summary                                    34
III.      TABLES

           1. History of Investigations for Lipari Landfill Off-site Areas.
           2. Chronological Summary of .Disposal and Remedial History.
           3. Lipari Landfill Chemicals Elevated Above Background.
           4. Representative-Lipari Contaminants in Groundwater, Marsh,
               and Air   Post Containment Construction.
           15. Risk Assessment.
           (>. Chemical-Specific ARARs.
           7. Remedial Technologies Screening Summary.
           8. Metals in Soils and Sediments.
           9. Summary of Evaluations and Cost Summary for Each Alternative.
          10. Costs Associated with Selected Alternatives.

 IV.      FIGURES

           1. General Area Plan                               -
           2. Lipari Landfill Site
           3. Area for Volume Estimates in Chestnut Branch Marsh
           4. Plan View, Approximate Locations for Alternatives l,.2,and 3
  V.      ATTACHMENTS

          A. Groundwater Characteristics of Lipari Landfill Samples
          B. Summary Tables for Off-Site Lipari Sampling Programs
          C. Qualitative Summary of Compounds Detected in the On-Site
             Lipari Landfill and in Off-Site Areas
          D. Geologic Profiles
          E. Proposed Remedial Action Plan

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   TABLE OF CONTENTS

Section

 VI.      RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY
          Final Responsiveness Summary for the Off-Site Lipari Landfill
          -The community relations summary of the presentation of citizens
           comments and concerns, and EPA's response to those concerns.
           Appendix A
             Section 1. Letters Received from the Community
             Section 2. Technical Comments
             Section 3. Technical Reply - EPA Declaration
             Section 4. Technical Reply - EPA/ERT
             Section 5. Technical Reply - U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
             Section 6. Technical Reply - Camp Dresser & McKee


VII.   EPA/ERT SAMPLING -PROGRAM

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       DECLARATION STATEMENT
                         RECORD OF DECISION
                Lipari Landfill (Off-Site ArCas)

SITE NAME AND LOCATION
Lipari Landfill, Mantua Township, Gloucester County, New
STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
This decision document presents the selected remedial actions
for the off-site areas impacted by contaminant migration from
the Lipari Landfill. These actions have been developed in
accordance with the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Comp-
ensation and Liability Act of 1980, as amended by the Superfund
Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, and to the extent
applicable, the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution
Contingency Plan, 40 CFR part 300.
STATEMENT OF BASIS
I am basing my decision primarily on the following documents,
which are contained in the administrative record, and that
characterize the nature and extent of contamination and evaluate
the relative merits of remedial alternatives for the Lipari
Landfill off-site areas:
- On-Site Hydrogeological Remedial Investigation of Lipari
  Landfill, prepared by Camp Dresser & McKee, July 1985;
- On-Site Feasibility Study for Lipari Landfill, prepared by
  Camp Dresser & McKee, August 1985;
- Off-Site Remedial Investigation (Phase 1) for Lipari Landfill,
  prepared by Camp Dresser & McKee, June 1987;
- Off-Site Remedial Investigation (Phase 2) for Lipari Landfill,
  prepared by Camp Dresser & McKee, February 1988;
- Public Health Evaluation for Off-Site Remedial Investigation,
  Lipari Landfill, prepared by ICF/Clement Associates, June 1987;
- Off-Site Feasibility Study for Lipari Landfill, prepared by
  Camp Dresser & McKee, February 1988;
- 7dr Quality Investigation, Second Season Monitoring Results,
  Lipari Landfill, prepared by NUS Corporation, April 1988;
           •                                           •
- Air Analyses for Lipari Landfill, May 27-June 5, 1986, prepared
  by Enviresponse, February 1987;

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

- Air Analyses for Lipari Landfill, September 11-30, 1986,
  prepared by Enviresponse, August 1987;
- TAGA Analyses of Spring Leachate, Air Vent and Surface Water
  Samples from Lipari Landfill, prepared by Enviresponse,
  August 1987;
- TAGA Analyses of Summer Leachate, Air Vent and Surface Water
  Samples from Lipari Landfillr prepared by Enviresponse, " ^
  August 1987;
- Fall Air and Leachate Analyses for Lipari Landfill, October 17-
  November 14, 1987, prepared by Roy F. Weston, January 1988;
- Lipari Landfill Leachate Area Reconnaissance, prepared by
  NUS Corporation, March 1986;
- Air Sample Analyses for Lipari Landfill, prepared by Roy F.
  Weston, November 1985;
- Evaluation of Analytical Data from Park and Recreation Areas
  in Proximity to Lipari Landfill, prepared by NUS Corporation,
  September 1986;
- Review of Draft Final Off-Site Remedial Investigation Report
  for Lipari Landfill and Draft Final Public Health Evaluation
  for Off-Site Remedial Investigation, prepared by Environmental
  and Energy Consultants, February 1988;
- Health Assessment, Lipari Landfill, prepared by Agency for
  Toxic Substances and Disease Registry -(ATSDR), October 1985;
- Health Assessment, Lipari Landfill, prepared by ATSDR,
  October 1986;
- Park and Recreational Area Health Assessment, prepared by
  ATSDR, October 1986;
- Health Consultation on July 1986 Private Well Analytical Data,
  Lipari Landfill, prepared by ATSDR, August 1987;
- Arsenic and Lead Health Consultation, Lipari Landfill, prepared
  by ATSDR, February 1988;
- Air Monitoring Data Analysis; Health Consultation, Lipari
  Landfill, prepared by ATSDR, March 1988;
- ERT Analytical Report for Lipari Landfill Sampling Effort of
  March 15 and 16, 1988, prepared by ERT, May 1988;

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

- Proposed Remedial Action Plan for Off-Site Lipari Landfill
  Areas, March 1988;
k-   The attached Decision Summary for the Lipari Landfill Off-Site
     Areas;
'- The attached Responsiveness Summary, which addresses public
   comments received; and
"- Staff summaries and recommendations;
DESCRIPTION OF SELECTED REMEDY
The remedial actions identified in this document represent a
final solution for the Lipari Landfill site. The actions
address those areas outside of the existing containment system
which have been impacted by contaminant migration from the
landfill. Previous Records of Decision, signed in 1982 and
1985, provided for the installation of a containment system
around Lipari Landfill to mitigate the off-site migration of
landfill contaminants, and the flushing of water-transportable
contaminants from within the containment system.
Contamination attributable to the Lipari Landfill has been
detected in the ground water, surface water, soils, lake and
stream sediments, and the air in the vicinity of the landfill.
The remedial actions to address this off-site contamination
include the following components:
                  •                            »
     Collection of ground water/leachate in the Cohansey and
     Kir)cwood aquifers, followed by on-site treatment and discharge
     to a publicly owned treatment works;
     Excavation of contaminated soils in the Chestnut Branch marsh,
     followed by thermal treatment to remove organic contaminants
     and placement as a non-hazardous material;
     Dredging and dewatering of contaminated sediments in Alcyon
     Lake, followed by thermal treatment to remove organic contam-
     inants and placement as a non-hazardous material;
     Dredging and dewatering of contaminated sediments in Rabbit
     Run and Chestnut Branch stream, followed by thermal treatment
     to remove organic contaminants and placement as an non-hazard-
     ous material;
     Temporary measures, if necessary, to reduce volatile emissions
     from leachate seepage areas in the Chestnut Branch marsh; and
     Integration of sampling in the off-site areas with the on-site
     monitoring plan being developed to monitor the effectiveness
     of the on-site flushing action.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   -4-


DECLARATIONS

Consistent with the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Comp-
ensation and Liability Act, as amended, and the National Oil
and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan, 40 CFR Part
300, I have determined that the selected remedy is protective
of human health and the environment, attains federal and state
requirements that are applicable or relevant and appropriate, -J
and is cost-effective. Futhermore, this remedy satisfies the
preference for treatment that reduces toxicity, mobility or
volume as a principal element. Finally, I have determined that
this remedy utilizes permanent solutions and alternate treatment
technologies to the maximum extent practicable.
The State of New Jersey has been consulted and agrees with the
selected remedy.



         tl.tfff
    I Date                                   Chistopher J./Daggett
                                             Regional Administrator



I concur with the selected remedy for the Lipari Landfill site,




     D    a    f   t   e   W   i   n     s     t o n J . Porter
                                             Assistant Administrator

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                        DECISION SUMMARY

                 Lipari Landfill (Off-Site Areas)

SITE DESCRIPTION
The "off-site" Lipari Landfill areas are defined as those geo-
graphical areas outside of the landfill's existing slurry wall/
synthetic membrane encapsulation system. This system, referred
to as the "on-site" portion of the Lipari Landfill, was con-
structed in 1983-84 to segregate those areas of formerly active
landfilling from the surrounding environment. The off-site
areas encompass a mix of agricultural and residential properties
located in Mantua Township and the Borough of Pitman in Gloucester
County, New Jersey (Figure 1). The off-site areas include the
drainage basin east-northeast of the landfill consisting of
Alcyon Lake, the Chestnut Branch marsh and Chestnut Branch
stream, Rabbit Run, Girl Scout Branch, Lost Lake Run and three
public parks — Alcyon Park, Betty Park and Hollywood Dell Park.
The landfill borders the off-site area and is approximately 1500
feet north of U.S. Route 322 and 1.5 miles west of Glassboro
State College. Northeast of the site and immediately east of
Chestnut Branch stream is a housing development of single family
homes. The Zee Orchard comprises most of the area north and
west of the landfill.
It should be noted that both the "on-site" portion of the Lipari
Landfill and the "off-site" areas impacted by contamination from
the landfill are considered part of the site as defined by the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act of"1980 (CERCLA), as amended by the Superfund Amendments and
Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA).
Surface Waters
Several drainage systems occur in the area as shown in Figure 1,
General Area Plan. The main drainage system is Chestnut Branch,
with headwaters south of the landfill area. After flowing past
the northeastern border of the site, Chestnut Branch discharges
into Alcyon Lake approximately 1,500 feet north of the landfill.
Rabbit Run, a small tributary of Chestnut Branch, derives its
headwater flow from a small spring located adjacent to the
landfill. This stream flows for approximately 1200 feet along
the full length of the northwestern edge of the landfill before
it discharges into Chestnut Branch just north of the site. Two
other small streams of interest in the study area are Lost Lake
Run and Girl Scout Branch. Lost Lake Run originates northeast
of the Ligari Landfill within the residential area and discharges
into Chestnut Branch directly east of the landfill. Girl Scout
Branch originates northwest of the landfill and discharges into
Alcyon Lake north of the Lipari site. These streams are import-
ant because they serve as a basis of comparison involving areas
not impacted by the landfill.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -2-

Alycon Lake is a man-made lake fed by Chestnut Branch and Girl
Scout Branch. It is estimated that the lake has a surface area
of 18.5 acres, a maximum depth of 6.4 feet, an average depth of
3.4 feet, a volume of 2,740,000 cubic feet, and about 4,800 feet
of shoreline.
It has been reported that the lake's natural recharge, (in
addition to Chestnut Branch and Girl Scout Branch), originates
from artesian springs in the lake bottom. The springs have been
gradually impeded because of deposition of silt and organic
overburden resulting in the reduction of the lake's depth. The
geological origin of these springs is the Kirkwood aquifer.
Alcyon Lake has been closely associated with the history of the
Borough of Pitman since its development in the 1890s. The lake
was a public resource used for recreational activities until
1958 when recreational usage was first restricted because of
bacterial contamination.
Chestnut Branch Marsh
The marsh area located adjacent to the Lipari Landfill has been
impacted by contaminant migration from the landfill. It is
bordered on the north by Rabbit Run, and to the east by Chestnut
Branch stream. The marsh itself is a typical riparian environ-
ment characterized by a seasonally high water table close to the
soil surface, standing water, and dense vegetation. Occasional
flooding by Chestnut Branch stream, as well as yearly decay of
vegetation have resulted in a layer of organic material on top
of the.native sandy soils. Several areas adjacent to leachate
seeps in the marsh are characterized by large dead trees and
sparse vegetation, leading to the conclusion that vegetation in
these areas has been stressed because of contaminants in the
soil and ground water. It has been estimated that at least
30,000 cubic yards of marsh soils have been impacted by contami-
nant migration. A description of the affected areas is contained
on page 8 under the section titled "Phase III Off-Site Remedial
Investigation". Access to the marsh has been restricted by
fences installed, in August 1983.
Public Parks
Three public parks border Chestnut Branch and Alcyon Lake —
Betty Park, Alcyon Park, and Hollywood Dell Park. Betty Park
on the east bank and Alcyon Park on the vest bank border on
about 2,400 feet of Alcyon Lake shoreline. Hollywood Dell Park
is at the northern most end of the lake, and is directly
separated*from the lake shoreline by a spillway (flood control
dam) and West Holly Avenue. Alcyon Park contains picnic areas
and a small recreation area for children. Hollywood Dell Park
contains picnic areas, a soccer field, a baseball diamond, and
a small recreation area for children. Historically, these
parks have been extensively used.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               -3-

Residential Conununity
The residential community of Pitman — particularly the homes
along Howard Avenue, Lake Avenue,. Lakeside Avenue, and Lakeview
Avenue — lies within a few hundred feet east of the Lipari
Landfill and Alcyon Lake. Complaints from local residents
concerning irritating odors and nausea led to the closing of
the landfill in 1971. Since the construction of the containment
system in 1983-84, odors have been greatly reduced but not
eliminated. Public access to Chestnut Branch, the marsh area,
and Alcyon Lake is restricted by fencing and/or warning signs.
LIPARI LANDFILL SITE HISTORY
The property was purchased by Nicholas Lipari in 1958 for use
as a sand and gravel pit. This type of land use also made the
property profitable for landfilling subsequent to excavation of
the sand and gravel. As sand and gravel were removed, Mr. Lipari
accepted solid and liquid wastes for disposal. Approximately
six acres of the site were used for these operations. It is
documented that these excavations were in the western portion
of the 15-acre parcel as shown in Figure 2, Lipari Landfill
Site. The disposal history to be discussed below is summarized
in Table 2, Chronological Summary of Disposal and Remediation
History.
The two -business operations (excavation and landfilling) were
integrated by backfilling the excavated portions of the land
with municipal and household wastes, liquid and semi-solid
chemical wastes, and other industrial wastes. Between 1958 and
1W1, liquid as well as semi-solid chemical wastes, and other
Industrial waste materials were accepted and dumped at the
landfill. Solid wastes were disposed of until May 1971 when
the site was closed by the New Jersey Solid Waste Administration
(NJSWA). On Mr. Lipari's own initiative, liquid wastes were
no longer landfilled after 1969 because of the concern .about
continued fire and explosion hazards. At least one explosion
and two fires had occurred up to that time.
                •
The exact nature and quantity of wastes received at the landfill
are not known since detailed records were not maintained. The
estimates based on parties known to have used the landfill in-
dicate that 12,000 cubic yards of industrial solid wastes and
more than 3 million gallons of liquid wastes were buried. It
is reported that liquids were emptied from salvageable containers
eind that only unsalvageable drums were buried without first
draining .their contents. The wastes that were reported to have
been dumped at the landfill included cleaning solvents, phenol
or amine wastes and residues, and resins and ester press cakes.
Generally, household refuse was disposed into trenches, 'followed
by disposal of the liquid chemical waste. Other chemical wastes
in 55-gallon drums were buried in trenches in the landfill.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               -4-


In 1970, the New Jersey Department of Health (NJDOH) observed
leachate seeping out of the landfill along the escarpment east
of the site and discharging into Chestnut Branch and the adjoin-
ing marsh area. Leachate seeps were visible along the east and
northeast slopes. They were brown and viscous in appearance
and had a pungent irritating odor that was noticeable to area
residents, particularly those residing along Howard Avenue. The
landfill was closed in May 1971 by the NJSWA with the impetus
of an affidavit, signed by local residents, that complained of
intolerable odors, headaches, nausea, and the residents' inabil-
ity to breathe.
In-July 1971 , the New Jersey Department of Environmental Pro-
tection (NJDEP) notified Mr. Lipari to correct the situation.
Based on Mr. Lipari f s consultation with engineers, he construct-
ed surface water runoff diversions, regraded areas, and spread
fresh dirt and lime to mitigate the problem; however, the
effort was not effective. The NJDEP filed suit in 1972 against
Nicholas Lipari for violation of the New Jersey Water Quality
Act (NJSA 58:1023.1 et seq).
Numerous investigators subsequently collected samples of the
contaminated ground water beneath the Lipari Landfill site.
Attachment A, Leachate Characteristics of Lipari Landfill
Samples, shows the contaminants and maximum concentrations
measured in samples of ground water collected from within the
landfill's encapsulation system up to 1985. The data provided
in the attachment were used in the development of the On-site
Feasibility Study (CDM, 1985). To date, a total of 74 organic
contaminants and 13 inorganic contaminants have been found in
the ground /"ater and soils of the landfill.
History of Off-Site Areas
The off-site areas have been the subject of investigations by
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and others. These
studies have documented sources of environmental degration.
A discussion of such sources in addition to the Lipari Landfill
is presented below. This section is then followed by a detailed
discussion (Phase III Off-site Remedial Investigation) of the
impacts of the Lipari Landfill on ground water, surface water,
soils, sediment and air in the vicinity of the site.
In the mid-1950s, prior to operation of the Lipari Landfill,
Alcyon LaXe began to show physical signs of an existing public
health problem and a deteriorating biotic environment. The
Gloucester County Planning Department (GCPD, 1980) cited four
primary reasons for the deterioration of Alcyon Lake during its
early history.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -5-

' An increasing number of septic tank systems were installed
within the lake's drainage area.
1
  increased urban development and associated increases in storm
water urban runoff discharges into Alcyon Lake and tributary
streams by way of direct drainage inlets.
cl
  Marginally effective sewerage collection and treatment
facilities in the Boroughs of Pitman and Glassboro increasingly
contributed fecal matter and bacteria into Alcyon Lake.
" Sedimentation resulting from urban and agricultural develop-
ment activities sealed the natural springs in the bottom of the
lake decreasing the turnover rate of fresh water.
Storm sewer outfalls that discharge directly into Alcyon Lake
cind its tributaries have contributed to the observed deteriora-
tion of the lake. The incorporation of the Borough of Pitman's
sewage flow into the Gloucester County Utilities Authority
(GCUA) wastewater treatment plant in the 1970s and subsequent
construction of the Gloucester County sanitary sewer trunkline
east of Chestnut Branch has helped to alleviate pollution from
septic tanks. However, the extent of the present problem
attributable to .the abandoned septic tanks is unknown. The
remedial investigation findings supported previous findings
indicating that water quality in Alcyon Lake has deteriorated,
in part, due to bacterial input. 'Current bacterial concentra-
tions in the lake exceed water quality standards.
The existing bacterial contamination led Gloucester County to
close Alcyon Lake to swimming in 1958.
The first documented point source of pollution to Alcyon Lake
was due to the Borough of Glassboro sewerage treatment plant. A
series of malfunctions between 1958 and 1972 caused the discharge
of raw effluent that flowed down Chestnut Branch and into Alcyon
Lake. The Gloucester County Sewerage Authority (now known as
the Gloucester County Utilities Authority) incorporated the
Glassboro systera in 1972 and effectively eliminated these dis-
charges (GCPD, 1980). The Borough of Pitman sewerage system
lift station also experienced mechanical malfunctions and
storm-related overloadings, causing the facility to activate
the overflow mechanism and discharge raw effluent directly into
Alcyon Lake. These problems were corrected by the Borough of
Pitman in 1977, although 50-year storm events have occasionally
resulted in incidental overflow from the lift station (GCPD,
1980). Further land development in the area brought additional
sources of degradation.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -6-

In 1980, Gloucester County identified three major sources of
pollutants contributing to the water quality deterioration of
Alcyon Lake: urban storm water runoff, agricultural runoff, and
the Lipari Landfill. The County recognized that increased
development increased the pollutant burden of storm water run-
off. Storm water runoff is a significant source of pollutants,
including oil and grease, hydrocarbons, trace heavy metals, and
micro-organisms. Storm water runoff from several hundred acres
of the Boroughs of Pitman and Glassboro, including Collegetown
Shopping Plaza and Glassboro State College, continues to discharge
directly into Alcyon Lake and its tributaries through several
drainage pipes.
          »

The 1980 Gloucester County report also suggests that adverse
water quality impacts on Alcyon Lake were further caused by the
continued discharge of agricultural runoff from approximately
1,000 acres of active agricultural land treated with pesticides
herbicides, and fungicides. However, specific studies to ident-
ify the mass loading of specific contaminants have not been
undertaken. Consequently, the overall contribution and signif-
icance of these contaminants cannot be quantified.
History of Investigations
Various State, local, and municipal investigations and studies
have taken place over the years, some of which have proved
valuable in providing background information. The investiga-
tions performed prior to the studies to determine the extent
and nature of the contamination in the Lipari Landfill off-site
areas are summarized in Table 1, History of Investigations. A
detailed discussion on these investigations is given in the
Off-Site Lipari Landfill Remedial Investigation (Phase 1)
Report (CDM, 1987).
History of Remedial Actions
Remedial actions have taken place both on-site at the Lipari
Landfill, as well as off-site in the immediate vicinity of the
landfill. On-sj,te actions involved the construction of the
containment system as previously described. Off-site actions
have included temporary measures, such as fence installation
and posted signs to restrict public access to the marsh and
Alcyon Lake. A summary of the remedial history is given in
Table 2, Chronological Summary of Disposal and Remediation
History. A discussion of the history is presented below.
Public Access Restricted
          •
Previous- and ongoing investigations confirmed that there was a
potential risk to the public health and environment associated
with the Lipari Landfill. Action was taken under the authority
of Section 104(c) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                -7-

Compensation and Liability Act. In July 1982, an 8-foot high,
chain-link-plus-barbed-wire fence was constructed around the
main landfill site to restrict public access. In August 1983,
a second chain link fence was installed along Chestnut Branch
between the houses on Howard Avenue and the area east of Chestnut.
Branch to restrict public access to the marsh area.
Phase I Remedial Investigations
R.E. Wright (1981) evaluated several remedial alternatives in-
tended as interim action until a comprehensive long-term solution
could be developed. Radian Corporation (1982), at the request
of EPA Region II, reviewed the environmental impacts associated
with nine proposed Phase I remedial action alternatives for the
on-site portion of the Lipari Landfill study area. The preferred
alternative consisted of a fully encompassing 360-degree slurry
vail with an impervious cap over a 16-acre area, with final
treatment of the contaminated ground water within the encapsula-
tion system at a pubicly owned treatment plant. EPA approved
this preferred alternative for the on-site Lipari Landfill in a
Record of Decision (ROD), signe.d on August 3, 1982, and commenced
construction in the Fall of 1983. This remedial measure, present-
ly referred to as Phase I, was designed to diminish the flow of
leachate and contaminated ground water from the landfill. An
estimated reduction of 95 percent in the rate of ground water
flow has been achieved as a result of the installation of the
containment system.
Phase .II On-Site Remediation
The Final Draft Remedial Investigation .ind Feasibility (RI/FS)
for the On-Site Lipari Landfill became the basis for the select-
ion of a permanent remedial alternative as discussed in the EPA
ROD, dated September 30, 1985. The remedial alternative which
was selected is commonly referred to as the "batch-flushing"
alternative. The effectiveness of the on-site remedial action
to be implemented directly affects the long-term success of
any remedial action taken in the off-site areas. The on-site
action involves .the installation of extraction and injection
wells within the encapsulation system to dewater and flush
water-borne contaminants for treatment at an on-site facility.
A formal agreement to discharge to the GCUA treatment facility
for final treatment is under negotiation. A remedial design
study is currently being performed to determine the design
parameters, particularly those that will allow the batch-flushing
effort to be completed within the desired time frame and to
meet GCUA pretreatment standards. While there is the potential
for contaminants to seep through the slurry wall during flushing,
the September 30, 1985 ROD specified that this problem would be
mitigated by the off-site remedial action (such as an off-site
collection system) developed under the off-site RI/FS and that

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                -8-


implementation of the batch-flushing alternative would not
begin until such an off-site collection system was in place. -
The remedial actions being selected at this time include an
off-site collection system as identified in the 1985 ROD.
Phase III Off-Site Remedial Investigation
In accordance with the National Oil and Hazardous Substances
Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), EPA conducted a remedial
investigation and feasibility study for the "off-site" areas
affected by contaminant migration from the Lipari Landfill
site. Field work for the RI began in February 1985 and was
completed in February 1987. Contaminants, found in the ground
water, surface water, soils, lake and stream sediments, and in
the air in the off-site Lipari areas are listed in Attachment
B, which includes data from the sampling performed by EPA's
Field Investigation Team (FIT) and Environmental Response Team
(ERT).
The off-site RI report documents the presence of organic and
inorganic contaminants attributable to the Lipari Landfill in
the following off-site areas:
« Ground water in the Cohansey and Kirkwood aquifers;
* Soils in the Chestnut Branch marsh;
'• Leachate seeps in the Chestnut Branch marsh;
' Air in the vicinity the Chestnut Branch marsh -.bove the
  leachate seeps and in nearby residential areas;
4
    Surface water and sediments of Chestnut Branch stream;
4
    Surface water and sediments of Rabbit Run; and
* Surface water and sediments of Alcyon Lake.
Contamination attributable to the Lipari Landfill in the off-
site areas is due to migration through all media: soil, water
and air. A total of 63 of the 74 organic contaminants, and all
13 of the inorganic contaminants detected on-site have been
detected in the off-site areas. Due to the large number of
Lipari-associated contaminants in the off-site areas, 13
indicator chemicals were selected for detailed review during
the remedial investigation to evaluate contaminant migration
from the Lipari Landfill. Table 3 compares concentrations of
the indicator chemicals found in the off-site soils, sediments
and surface waters in areas impacted by contaminant migration
from the site, to background areas not impacted by the site.
This table demonstrates that elevated levels of indicator
chemicals exist in the soils of Chestnut Branch marsh, the

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -9-


sediments and surface waters of Rabbit Run, Chestnut Branch
stream, and Alcyon Lake. In addition, Lipari-related contami-
nants including bis(Z-chloroethyl)ether, 1,2-dichloroethane,
and benzene have been detected during residential air monitoring
iperformed with EPA's Trace Atmospheric Gas Analyzer (TAGA) unit.
A listing .of representative Lipari-related contaminants found
in the Cohansey and Kirkwood aquifers, the leachate seeps in
Chestnut Branch marsh, and in the ambient air above the marsh
and in residential areas since the construction of the on-site
containment system, is shown in Table 4. Attachments A and B
contain more complete listings of on-site and off-site sampling
results. Attachment C presents a qualitative analysis of the
presence of Lipari-related contaminants in all of the on-site
and off-site media.
More recent sampling utilizing lower detection limits than were
available during the RI has shown the presence of bis(2-chloro-
ethyl)ether in the sediments of Chestnut Branch stream (41 to
47 milligrams per killigram (ug/kg)), and in the sediments of
Alcyon Lake (42 to 400 ug/kg). This sampling was undertaken
by EPA's Environmental Response Team (EPA/ERT), to address
concerns raised by the U.S. Department of the Interior's
Fish and Wildlife Service involving the presence of Lipari
related contaminants in aquatic habitats for which it is the
natural resource trustee. The concerns were related to high
detection limits associated with sediment sampling during the
off-site RI field activities, especially with regard to BCEE
and mercury. It is notable that, during the off-site RI sampling
when lower detection limits were achieved (Rabbit Run SE-08),
BCEE was detected in the sediments. The detection of the
presence of BCEE in the sediments of Alcyon Lake and Chestnut
Branch by EPA/ERT has provided natural resource trustees with
additional information to assess the impacts to habitats under
their responsibility. It has also further demonstrated the
presence of Lipari contaminants in the off-site environment.
A 21-day comment period was announced to receive comments from
interested parties on the EPA/ERT sampling effort. No comments
were received during that period, however, comments regarding
the sampling procedures and the reasons for the sampling event
were received the following week. A reply was provided to
these comments.
The Cohansey aquifer to the east and northeast of the.landfill
in the Chestnut Branch marsh is directly in the path of local
and regional ground water flow, it is likely that the presence
of contaminants in this aquifer is largely attributable to seep-
age prior »to construction of the containment system. A portion
of this formation in the marsh was not encapsulated because of
the limits of slurry wall construction relative to local-.geology,
geography and water conditions. As a result, a reservoir of
contaminants persists in the ground water and soils of Chestnut
Branch marsh. The leachate seep areas show seasonal variation
corresponding to fluctuations in the water table of the Cohansey

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -10-


aquifer. This seasonal activity leads to intermittent periods
of leachate flow into Chestnut Branch stream. The variability
in leachate flow, coupled with variations in meteorological
conditions (temperature, wind, rain fall, solar radiation,
atmospheric inversions), affect the rate of hazardous organic
air-borne emissions from the Chestnut Branch marsh. The area
refered to as "Zone 3" (Figure 3) is characterized as the area
of highest air-borne emissions. Zone 3 also encompasses the
portions of the marsh containing the majority of the leachate
seeps. A complete listing of compounds detected in the soils
of Chestnut Branch marsh, the leachate seeps, and in the air
above the seeps, is shown in Attachment B.
The Kirkwood aquifer underlies the Kirkwood clay, a confining
unit that separates it from the surficial Cohansey aquifer. The
Kirkwood is characterized as a low-yield formation containing
fine to very fine dark grey silty micaceous sand. The contamin-
ation that is present in the Kirkwood may be due to improperly
sealed wells placed in the landfill during the late 1970s that
acted as a conduit for contaminant migration, or from vertical
migration from contaminants present in the overlying Cohansey
formation through the Kirkwood clay. The Kirkwood clay is a
continuous formation under the site which ranges in thickness
from 9 to 16 feet. In the area of the Chestnut Branch marsh
adjacent to the site, the Chestnut Branch stream has eroded the
Cohansey sands and the upper portions of the Kirkwood clay.
Alluvial material deposited by the stream is hydraulically
connected with the Cohansey sands, and the Kirkwood sands. The
Kirkwood clay thins out because of erosion along the south-to-
north meander of the stream. Near the confluence of Rabbit Run
and Chestnut Branch, the Kirkwood clay appears to be completely
eroded. Geologic profiles of the local area are contained in
Attachment D.
CONTAMINANTS PATHWAYS/RISKS
Due to local environmental conditions, including geography,
geology, hydrology and meteorology, and the results of off-site
studies, EPA has concluded that several contaminant migration
pathways exist from the Lipari Landfill to various off-site
areas.
The detection of indicator chemicals in the surface waters -and
sediments of Rabbit Run, Chestnut Branch stream, and Alcyon Lake
indicates that overland transport of indicator chemicals from
the marsh has occurred. Erosion and/or leaching of marsh soils,
followed by surface water transport is a likely migration path-
way. Direct flow of contaminated seepage from the bank adjacent
to the landfill, followed by flow across the ground surface to
Chestnut Branch stream has been observed. Rainstorms and
flooding could accelerate both processes. Contaminants can
also leach vertically and reach the ground water. Analysis of
organic chemical volatilization from marsh soils, leachate seeps,
and ambient air demonstrates that air transport of organic con-
taminants is another contaminant migration pathway.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                -11-
The presence of indicator chemicals in the dpwngradient ground
water of the Cohansey and Kirkwood aquifers indicates horizontal
migration of contaminants in the ground water. The presence of
a hydraulic gradient towards Chestnut Branch stream on either
side of the stream indicates that the potential for contaminant
migration beyond the stream is unlikely. The Cohansey and
Kirkwood aquifers both discharge into Chestnut Branch stream
eind can transport contaminants into the stream.
RISKS
As described in the off-site RI report, 13 indicator chemicals
were selected in accordance with the Superfund Public Health
Evaluation Manual on the basis of toxicity, persistence, mobility
a,nd concentration. The list of indicator chemicals includes:
benzene, bis(2-chloroethyl)ether, 1,2-dichloroethane, ethyl-
benzene, 4-methyl-2-pentanone, toluene, xylenes (total), arsenic,
chromium, lead, mercury, nickel, and zinc.
For risk assessment purposes, individual contaminants were
separated into two categories of chemical toxicity depending on
whether they cause carcinogenic or non-carcinogenic effects.
In the case of chemicals exhibiting carcinogenic effects
exposures and associated risks are expressed in an exponential
nomenclature; 1x10-4 (one in ten thousand), 10x10-7 (one in ten
million) etc. EPA has used the range of 1x10-4 to 1x10-7 in .
evaluating risk assessment decisions. The level of lxl-0-6,
one in a million, has often been used by regulatory agencies as
a benchmark.
The Public Health Evaluation (PHE) characterized the risk
associated with exposure to off-site Lipari Landfill indicator
chemicals. A summary of the exposure pathways and associated
risks is shown in^Table 5. A lifetime excess cancer risk
greater than 1x10-6 (one in a million) was characterized for
the following exposure pathways:
1
    Direct contact with soils in the leachate seep areas;
4
    Consumption oi fish from Alcyon Lake; and
'Inhalation of ambient air in the Howard Avenue residential
  area.
The PHE concluded that long-term exposure to volatile organic
emissions originating in the Chestnut Branch marsh would result
in a potential human health threat. Increased lifetime cancer
incidences associated with exposure to BCEE, benzene, and 1,2-
dichloroethane were quantified and are presented in Table 5.
Although these compounds were detected during residential air
monitoring with the TAGA unit, the Agency for Toxic Substances
and Disease Registry (ATSDR) evaluation of the TAGA data concluded
that the levels detected do not pose a current health threat.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -12-

As described in the RI report, contaminant migration persists
in the leachate seeps that in turn migrate into the Chestnut
Branch marsh, as well as into the air above the marsh and nearby
residential areas, to Chestnut Branch stream, and to downstream
receiving waters including Alcyon Lake. Studies have shown that
that bis(2-chloroethyl)ether and mercury are present in the tissue
of fish from the lake. The landfill and the marsh areas are fenced
to restrict access. Alcyon Lake is closed to fishing, 'swimming,
boating and other recreational activties. The lake and streams
are not used as sources of potable water.
The Pitman municipal wells, as^well as 11 non-potable resident-
ial wells, have been sampled for priority pollutants, and most
recently for Target Compound List (TCL) contaminants. The water
samples have demonstrated that contaminants from the Lipari Land-
fill have not migrated into any local wells. These findings are
consistent with local geological and hydrogeological conditions
which indicate that contamination is limited to the Cohansey
and upper portions of the Kirkwood aquifer. Futhermore, the
Kirkwood aquifer flows upwards into the Chestnut Branch stream
in the vicinity of the Lipari Landfill, while the Cohansey drains
directly into the stream. Therefore, ground water contaminant
migration is intercepted at the stream. This factor, coupled
with the depth and location of the residential wells (Mount
Laurel, approximately 150 feet deep) and the Pitman municipal
wells (Potomac-Raritan-Magothy, approximately 550 feet deep) and
the presence of several confining layers makes the possibility
of the introduction of Lipari contaminants to either well
system extremely remote.

ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES
On September 10, 1985, the United States filed a complaint in
the District Court for the District of New Jersey against the
Rohm and Haas Company, Inc., Marvin Jonas, Inc., CBS Records,
Inc., Owens-Illinois, Inc., CENCO, Inc., Almo, Inc., and Manor
Health Care Corporation pursuant to Section 107(a) of CERCLA,
42 U.S.C. }9607 (a), seeking recovery of costs incurred and to
be incurred in Remediating the Lipari Landfill, as well as
declaratory relief pursuant to 2 U.S.C. }2201.
On January 29, 1986, the State of New Jersey filed a Complaint
in Intervention in the suit seeking to recover State costs
incurred and to be incurred in remediating the site.
In October 1986, negotiations for a partial settlement commenced
with thirteen additional parties considered to be de minimis
generators of waste disposed at the Lipari Landfill. Ten of the
original thirteen de minimis parties remain at the conclusion of
the negotiation process.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -13-

COMMUNITY RELATIONS ACTIVITIES
Numerous community relations activities have been on-going
during the course of the off-site RI/FS for the Lipari site.
A detailed 10-page Proposed Remedial Action Plan (PRAP) (Attachment
E) was developed and distributed to over 300 interested citizens
cind potentially responsible parties. The PRAP was distributed
on March 1, 1988 along with a notice for a Public Meeting to be
held on March 29, 1988. The public comment period extended an
additional 17 days beyond the public meeting to April 15, 1988.
At the request of the Mayor of the Borough of Pitman, EPA held
a public information meeting at Pitman Borough Hall on March 15,
1988. As discussed on page 9, a 21-day comment period was held
to receive comments on the 1988 EPA/ERT off-site sampling program.
While no comments were received during that period, later comments
were received and a reply was sent.
The community has been actively involved in the issues related
to the Lipari Landfill site for several years. The borough was
the recipient of a Technical Assistance Grant (TAG) in January
1987 and hired a technical consultant in the Summer of 1987.
The TAG program has facilitated communications between EPA and
the community. Concerned citizens, local citizens, environmental
groups and elected officials have all expressed the sentiment
that they have felt involved in the decision making process for
off-site remediation.
SCOPE AND ROLE OF REMEDIAL ACTIONS .
The overall remediation of threats to public health and the
environment posed by the Lipari Landfill has been undertaken by
EPA in a three-phased approach. As discussed previously, the
7mgust 3, 1982 ROD (Phase I) selected a 360 degree slurry wall
and impermeable cap to restrict contaminant migration from the
s;ite. This action provided substantial relief from noxious
volatile emissions and.the migration of contaminants into the
marsh area, nearby streams and Alcyon Lake. The September 30,
1985 ROD (Phase.II) addressed the permanent removal of contami-
nants from within the containment system through batch-flushing
and on-site treatment of the flushwater. In addition, that ROD
called for the collection of leachate outside of the containment
.•system.
This ROD addresses Phase III, or those areas outside of the
containment system where Lipari-related contaminants persist in
the environment. The principal threats associated with these
contaminants in the off-site areas include potential human
health threats from long-term exposure to contaminants, and
contaminants that are present in quantities that exceed environ-
mental standards and guidelines. These are illustrated in
Table 5, Risk Assessment and in Table 6, Chemical Specific ARARs.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -14-


Remedial actions to remove persistent contaminants from Chestnut
Branch marsh, Rabbit Run, Chestnut Branch stream, and Alcyon
Lake will eliminate these threats. The installation of a collect-
ion system in the marsh outside of the slurry wall will ensure
that no existing contaminants or potential future contaminant
migration during on-site flushing impacts the off-site areas.
Similarly, the active pumping and treatment of contaminants from
the Kirkwood aquifer wiil remove existing contaminants, and any
potential future contaminants. This action will restore the
aquifer to ensure that environmental standards are met at
discharge points of the Kirkwood ground water in Chestnut Branch
stream and Alcyon Lake. Actions aimed at the collection of
contaminated ground water/leachate will meet the intent of the
Phase II ROD to coordinate off-site remedial actions with
on-site remedial actions, "especially with regard to leachate
treatment".
In summary, the remedial actions set forth in this Record of
Decision represent the third phase of a coordinated effort to
remove contaminants from the environment that are associated
with the Lipari Landfill.
DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

This section describes the remedial alternatives that were
developed, using suitable technologies, to meet the objectives
of .the NCP. These alternatives were developed by screening a
wide range of technologies for their applicability to site-
specific conditions including applicable or relevant and appro-
priate requirements (ARARs) and evaluating them for effective-
ness, implementability, and cost.
ARARs
Section 121(d) of CERCLA, as amended by SARA, requires that
remedial actions comply with all applicable or relevant and
appropriate Federal and State requirements for the hazardous
substances, pollutants, or contaminants that are present and
attributable to a site. In general, ARARs are promulgated to
address chemical contaminants, specific locations (such as a
marsh), or actions (such as thermal desorption). Chemical-
specific ARARs can be applied to the RI results before any
remedial alternatives are developed, while location- and action-
specific ARARs relate to remedial alternatives and their imple-
mentation. As discussed in the Off-Site RI and FS, numerous
chemical, ,iocation, and action-specific ARARs were evaluated
for the off-site areas. The contaminated soils and sediments
in the off-site areas are impacting the quality of water in
contact with the soils of Chestnut Branch marsh, and the .sediments
of Rabbit Run, Chestnut Branch stream and Alcyon Lake. As
such, cleanup of these areas is necessary to achieve water
quality ARARs.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                -15-
The same rationale applies to the marsh ground water collection
system. However, no federal or state ARARs have yet been
established for soils and sediments. As such, the guidelines
applied to the soil and sediments include the following:
* Cleanup objectives developed by the NJDEP for soils under the
  Environmental Cleanup and Responsibility Act (ECRA);
1
    Health or risk based criteria; and
1
    Comparison to background levels.
The marsh soils, the leachate seep areas, and the sediments of
Alcyon Lake, Rabbit Run and Chestnut Branch all contain contami-
nants that are also present in the surface waters at levels in
violation of federal and state water quality standards and/or
guidelines. The removal and treatment of the soils and sediments,
coupled with the hydraulic isolation of the landfill via an
off-site collection system will eliminate the soil/sediment/surface
water interface as a contaminant pathway. The capture of seepage
in the marsh, coupled with the interception of contaminated
ground water in the Kirkwood aquifer will ensure that contaminants
present in these areas will not migrate to the surface waters
of Chestnut Branch and'to downstream receiving waters.
In the vicinity of the Lipari Landfill, the Kirkwood aquifer
has been characterized as discharging into Chestnut Branch
stream from both sides of the stream. It is not utilized as a
drinking water source in the local area, therefore, at a minimum,
remediation of the aquifer will be to protect surface water quality.
As such, surface water ARARs (Federal Water Quality Criteria
unc^r the Clean Water Act, Fresh Water 2-Non Trout under N.J.
Surface Water Standards) are appropriate cleanup standards for
the Kirkwood. Table 6 lists chemical specific ARARs under
these statutes for contaminants detected in the Kirkwood aquifer.
A more thorough discussion is contained in the section titled
"Summary of the Comparative Analysis of Alternatives".
In addition to the chemical-specific ARARs, location-specific
and action-specific ARARs exist for activities associated with
the off-site remedial alternatives.
Location-specific ARARs are restrictions placed on the concen-
tration of hazardous substances solely because they are in
particular locations. Location-specific ARARs that apply to
the off-site Lipari areas include; Executive Order 11990 on
Protection of Wetlands and Executive Order 11988 on Floodplain
Management- EPA has sought input from other agencies (e.g.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife, U.S. Army Corps) in developing remedial
alternatives and restoration activities for the off-site areas.
3:nput from these and other agencies will be included during
remedial design to address the specific details of the integration
of the requirements of these Executive Orders with respect to
off-site wetlands and waterways.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -16-
The Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act of 1958 requires that an
evaluation and wetlands assessment be undertaken for the off-site
wetlands that will be impacted during remedial actions. Off-site
studies have characterized the off-site wetlands areas, any futher
evaluations and assessments that will assist in the cleanup and
restoration efforts will be incorporated into the remedial design.
The site of the placement of treated material, the Alcyon
Racetrack, is located in the Borough of Pitman. The downtown
area of Pitman has been designated as an historic district. In
addition, both the Chestnut Branch stream corrider and the
abandoned racetrack may be considered sensitive for the presence
of cultural resources under the National Historic Preservation
Act. Studies to date have not indicated that"any of the off-site
areas are considered to be culturally sensitive areas, however,
a Stage IA Survey will be performed on these areas during the
design phase to futher evaluate cultural sensitivity.
Action-specific ARARs are usually technology- or activity-
based requirements or limitations on actions taken to address
hazardous wastes. These actions are triggered by particular
remedial activities that are selected to accomplish a remedy.
Since there are several actions to be taken in the off-site
areas, a number of different requirements have been reviewed.
The action-specific requirements do not in themselves determine
the remedial alternative, rather they indicate how a selected
alternative must be achieved.
During the development of the.off-site remedial design, action-
specific ARARs for dredging the streams and lake that will be
evaluated include: Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act and
U.S. Army Co'-rss of Engineers regulations. Action-specific
regulations regarding-treatment actions that will be utilized
during remedial design include: RCRA regulations regarding
temporary waste piles (staging areas during treatment) and New
Jersey Administrative Code regulations for air emissions (off-
gases from rotary kiln dryer).
A comprehensive list of candidate remedial technologies was
compiled to characterize each technology and determine its
applicability to the off-site Lipari areas. The remedial tech-
nology screening summary, which is included as Table 7, provides
brief rationales as to why some of the technologies screened
were included for or excluded from further consideration.
The technologies that were retained after the preliminary
screening process were assembled in various combinations to
form 19 general response actions for the off-site areas.
These actipns fall into 10 groups: no action, soil covering,
excavation, dredging, on-site treatment, on-site disposal,
off-site disposal, off-site collection systems, and ground
water recovery and treatment. In addition, an interim measure
to suppress volatile emissions originating in the Chestnut
Branch marsh was developed.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -17-

From the 19 general response actions, the components of 24
alternatives and six disposal/placement options were developed
and are presented below, in addition, alternative-specific
variations involving one or more of the disposal/placement
options and/or excavation options were developed.
Remedial Alternatives
The descriptions of the remedial alternatives are grouped and
presented in the following manner:
Chestnut Branch Marsh Collection System:   Alternatives 1-3
Chestnut Branch Marsh Soil Remediation:    Alternatives 4-10
Alcyon Lake Remediation:                   Alternatives 11-12
Rabbit Run Remediation:                    Alternatives 13-14
Kirkwood Aquifer Collection System:        Alternatives 15-16
Chestnut Branch Stream Remediation:        Alternatives 17-18
Interim Action for Chestnut Branch Marsh: Alternative   19
ALTERNATIVE 1; WELLPOINTS WEST OF THE SEEPAGE FACE
Alternative 1 involves the installation of a wellpoint system
((50-120 wells) in Chestnut Branch marsh between the seepage
face and the containment system. This wellpoint network would
function as an off-site collection system to capture any seepage
resulting from the on-site flushing action. The collected
seepage would be treated at the on-site treatment facility.
This option would require extensive maintenance. Futhermore,
up to 10 percent of the leachate may not be captured by the
wellpoint system. The approximate locations of Alternatives 1,
2,, and 3 are illustrated in Figure 4.
ALTERNATIVE 2a; DRAINAGE DITCH NEAR SEEPAGE FACE
Alternative 2a involves the installation of a French drain near
the base of the leachate seepage face in Chestnut Branch marsh
to collect any seepage from the on-site flushing action. The
drain would capture essentially all of the leachate that may
migrate through the slurry wall. This would ensure that any
future contaminant migration would not affect the off-site areas.
As with Alternative 1, the collected seepage would be treated
at the on-site treatment facility. Excavated marsh soils would
be handle^ either as a RCRA waste or treated to remove volatile
organics.and disposed of as a non-hazardous material.
ALTERNATIVE 2b; DRAINAGE DITCH NEAR SEEPAGE FACE WITH
                IMPERMEABLE COVER
Alternative 2b involves the same technology and steps as does
Alternative 2a. Futhermore, this alternative would require the

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -18-
installation of an impermeable cap over the drain and portions
of the surrounding marsh. This cap would reduce the amount
of rain water infiltration into the trench as well as further
reduce the possibility of volatile emissions from the marsh
soils between the drain and the slurry wall. The disposal
options for excavated soils are the same as for Alternative 2a.
The reduction in rainwater infiltration would reduce long-term
operation and maintenance costs associated with leachate collec-
tion and treatment.
ALTERNATIVE 3: WELLPOINTS EAST OF THE SEEPAGE FACE

Alternative 3 involves the installation of a wellpoint system
in Chestnut Branch marsh between the seepage face and Chestnut
Branch to collect any seepage from the on-site flushing
action. As with Alternatives 1 and 2, the collected seepage
would be treated at the on-site treatment facility. It is
expected that this alternative will result in lower water
levels in the marsh, resulting in a reduction in the amount
of volatile emissions associated with the leachate seeps.
This alternative is best suited for selection with a no action
alternative for the marsh itself since the area between the
wellpoints and the slurry wall would expect to be remediated
through natural processes if no action were taken. It is
anticipated that the process of natural degradation would
take several years.
ALTERNATIVE 4; NO ACTION IN CHESTNUT BRANCH MARSH

Under the no action alternative, it is assumed that an off-site
collection system would be implemented to meet the intent of
the September 30, 1985 ROD. Tuis alternative would rely on
natural flushing and 'degradation of contaminants in the marsh
over time. However, for several years, the marsh would con-
tinue as a source of contamination posing a risk to public
health and the environment.
ALTERNATIVE 5: PERMEABLE COVER IN CHESTNUT BRANCH MARSH

Alternative 5 involves the removal of the vegetation in the
marsh and placement of a permeable soil cover over all or a
portion of the marsh soils. While this alternative will result
in a reduction of public health risks associated with contam-
inants in the marsh soils and emissions from the soils, it
would not reduce the amount of contamination present. The
potential for contaminant migration and discharge into Chestnut
Branch stream would continue to exist. The cover would consist
of two to three feet of permeable sand or gravel over approx-
imately 193,000 square feet of the marsh.
ALTERNATIVE 6; IMPERMEABLE COVER IN CHESTNUT BRANCH MARSH

Alternative 6 involves the same technical approach as Alter-
native 5. This alternative also would utilize a synthetic,
impermeable cap on top of the soil cover. The presence of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 -19-

the cap would add an additional measure of safety with respect
to the elimination of contaminant pathways (air emissions and
contact with soils) that have been characterized as posing
potential human health threats. As with Alternative 5, con-
taminants would persist in the underlying marsh soils and
could continue to migrate to Chestnut Branch and impact
local surface water quality.
ALTERNATIVE 7; TOTAL EXCAVATION OF THE CHESTNUT BRANCH MARSH

Alternative 7 involves the excavation of Chestnut Branch marsh
soils to the top of the Kirkwood clay formation. The excavation
activity in the marsh would involve dewatering the marsh area,
clearing and grubbing of the vegetation, excavation, staging
and disposal of the contaminated soil, and soil replacement,
compaction and resoration of the marsh. Appropriate surface
water and sedimentation control measures would be incorporated.
Water from the dewatering operation would be pumped to the
on-site treatment facility. A volume of approximately 71,500
cubic yards would be excavated from the marsh. The removed
soil would then be disposed of in a new on-site RCRA facility
(Option A) or transported for disposal to an off-site RCRA
facility (Option B). Alternative 7 also contains a cost
option to excavate approximately two feet of soil in Zones 1
and 2 of the marsh, while excavating approximately 10 feet of
soil from Zone 3, the area of highest contamination. Organic
contaminants have been detected in the surface soils of Zone
1 and 2 at lower concentrations than in Zone 3. Excavation
and disposal of marsh soils would result in elimination of
contaminant pathways associated with the marsh.
ALTERNATIVE 8; PARTIAL EXCAVATION OF CHESTNUT BRANCH MARSH

Partial excavation of Chestnut Branch marsh involves excava-
tion of approximately 19,900 cubic yards of soil from Zone 3
within the marsh. This is the area characterized as the area
of active leachate seeps and hazardous emissions. Contaminants
present in the surface soils in other areas of the marsh may
continue to migrate to surface waters. The disposal of the
contaminanted soil would be via Disposal Option A or B. The
activities associated with the implementation of this altern-
ative are the same as those described for Alternative 7.
ALTERNATIVE 9a; TOTAL EXCAVATION OF CHESTNUT BRANCH MARSH,
                TREATMENT FOR ORGANICS, REPLACE SOILS IN
                THE MARSH.

Alternative 9a involves the complete excavation of marsh soils
to the top of the Kirkwood clay, followed by treatment with a
rotary *iln drier. This alternative includes the same activities
associated with the implementation of Alternative 7 except that
contaminated soils would be transported to a temporary storage
area where they would be thermally treated with a rotary kiln
drier to remove organics prior to their disposal. The staging
area would comply with RCRA regulations that detail the design
and construction of temporary waste storage areas. The rotary
drier unit would be located in the staging area.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -20-
A rotary kiln drier operates at temperatures up to about 600'F.
The material placed in such a unit is constantly turned over
and mixed as the kiln rotates. The operating temperature will
result in substantial removal of organic contaminants from
the soil; however, metals are not expected to be significantly
affected by this technology. The off-gases from this unit
would be captured on carbon filters or a similar adsorbent,
or be treated.
The treated soil would be placed back into the marsh and the
marsh would be restored. However, due to the wet marsh
environment, soils placed back in the marsh may continue to
be a source of contaminant '(metals) migration to nearby
surface waters. This alternative also contains a cost option
for limited excavation of Zones 1 and 2 and total excavation
of Zone 3 similar to the one described in Alternative 7.
ALTERNATIVE 9b; TOTAL EXCAVATION OF CHESTNUT BRANCH MARSH,
                TREATMENT FOR ORGANICS, DISPOSAL OF SOILS
                AS A NON-HAZARDOUS MATERIAL

This alternative involves the same activities associated with
the implementation of alternative 9a except that treated soils
would then be disposed of as a non-hazardous material. This
alternative also has a similar cost option for excavation to
approximately two feet. Alternative 9b differs in that the
treated soils may be classifiable as non-hazardous and be
disposed in a suitable off-site location. In the FS, Alcyon
Racetrack, two municipal landfills, and disposal on top of
the Lipari Landfill, were evaluated for placement of the
treated soil. Restoration actions would be undertaken at the
marsh.
ALTERNATIVE 10a: PARTIAL EXCAVATION OF CHESTNUT BRANCH MARSH,
                 TREATMENT FOR ORGANICS, REPLACE SOILS IN
                 THE MARSH

Alternative lOa involves excavation of approximately 19,900
cubic yards of soils from Zone 3 in the marsh. This altern-
ative utilizes the same technology and steps as Alternative 9a.
Contaminants present in the other areas of the marsh could
continue to migrate to local surface waters. Restoration
actions would be undertaken for the marsh.
ALTERNATIVE IQb: PARTIAL EXCAVATION OF CHESTNUT BRANCH MARSH,
                 TREATMENT FOR ORGANICS, DISPOSAL OF SOILS
                 AS A NON-HAZARDOUS MATERIAL

Alternative lOb involves excavation and thermal treatment of
approximately 19,900 cubic yards of soils from Zone 3 of the
marsh and also includes a costing option for similar actions
in Zones 1 and 2 to approximately two feet. This alternative
utilizes the same technology and steps as Alternative 9b.
Restoration actions would be undertaken for the marsh. Disposal
of the sediments in a drier environment would minimize any
potential migration of metals into local surface waters.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -21-

ALTERNATIVE 11; NO ACTION TO REMEDIATE ALCYON LAKE SEDIMENTS
Under the no action alternative, it is assumed that an off-site
collection system would intercept contaminant migration to the
sediments and surface waters of Alcyon LaJce. Once upstream
contaminant pathways were eliminated, in a relatively short
period of time the contaminant concentrations in the water
column would be expected to decline. However, contaminants
present in the sediments would persist for an undetermined
period of time. The potential for contaminants leaching from
the sediments into the water column would continue.
ALTERNATIVE 12a; DREDGE AND DEWATER SEDIMENTS FROM ALCYON
                 LAKE, DISPOSAL OF SEDIMENTS IN A RCRA FACILITY

Alternative 12a involves the hydraulic dredging of the sediments
from Alcyon Lake, followed by dewatering with filter presses
or similar equipment. The filter press water would be routed
to the on-site treatment facility. Approximately 140,000
cubic yards of dredged material would be pumped from the laXe
directly to portable filter presses located near the shore.
The water removed from the dredged material would be discharged
to the on-site treatment facility. The final volume of the
dewatered sediments is estimated to be 56,000 cubic yards.
The dewatered sediments would then be placed in a new on-site
RCRA facility (Option A) or transported to an off-site RCRA
facility (Option B) for disposal. The activities involved in
transportation and the disposal at either facility would be the
same as in Alternative 7. This alternative would result in the '
removal, of contaminated sediments, and the potential for contam-
inant leaching from the sediments into the lake waters wou^d be
eliminated.
ALTERNATIVE 12b; DREDGE AND DEWATER SEDIMENTS FROM ALCYON LAKE,
                 TREATMENT FOR ORGANICS, DISPOSAL OF SOILS
                 AS A NON-HAZARDOUS MATERIAL
This alternative involves the same activities associated with
the dredging of .sediments from Alcyon Lake as discussed in
Alternative 12a, but includes thermal treatment of sediments
to remove organic contaminants and disposal as a non-hazardous
material. After dewatering, the sediments would be treated
thermally with a rotary kiln drier to remove organic contami-
nants. The sediments may then be classifiable as non-hazardous
and placed at a suitable off-site location. As in Alternative
12a, this alternative would remove the contaminated sediments,
thereby eliminating any potential contaminant leaching from
the sediments
        •     into the water of the lake.
ALTERNATIVE 13: NO ACTION IN RABBIT RUN

Under this no action alternative, contaminants present in Rabbit
Run would continue to persist and affect the water quality of
Rabbit Run and downstream receiving waters.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -22-

ALTERNATIVE 14a; DREDGE AND DEWATER RABBIT RUN SEDIMENTS, DISPOSAL
                 OF SEDIMENTS IN A RCRA FACILITY

Alternative 14a involves the removal of approximately 400 cubic
yards of Rabbit Run sediments with a bacJchoe or similar equip-
ment and placement in a dewatering basin to separate the water
and the solids. The dewatered liquids would be treated at the
on-site facility. The solids would be disposed of in a new
on-site RCRA facility (Option A) or transported to an off-site
RCRA facility (Option B) for disposal. Restoration actions
would be taken for Rabbit Run as necessary.
ALTERNATIVE 14b: DREDGE AND DEWATER RABBIT RUN SEDIMENTS,
                 TREATMENT FOR ORGANICS, DISPOSAL OF SEDIMENTS
                 AS A NON-HAZARDOUS MATERIAL

Alternative 14b utilizes the same technology as Alternative 14a
with an additional treatment step. After dewatering, the sed-
iments would be treated with a rotary kiln drier to remove
organic contaminants. The sediments may then be classifiable
as non-hazardous and placed at a suitable off-site location.
Liquids would be treated at the on-site facility. Restoration
actions would be taken for Rabbit Run as needed.
ALTERNATIVE 15; NO ACTION IN THE KIRKWOOD AQUIFER

Under this no action alternative, contaminants present in the
Kirkwood aquifer would continue to migrate. The off-site RI
reports indicate that the Kirkwood aquifer discharges locally
into Chestnut Branch and Alcyon Lake. While this aquifer is
not utilized as a drinking water source in the study area,
contaminants discharged to surface waters are likely to result
in contaminant levels that exceed Federal Water Quality Criteria
for surface waters as indicated by evaluations performed
during the on-site RI/FS.
ALTERNATIVE 16; PUMP AND TREAT THE KIRKWOOD AQUIFER

Alternative 16 involves the utilization of existing Kirkwood
wells and the installation of pumps and a piping system to
the on-site treatment facility. The Kirkwood aquifer would
be pumped for the duration of the on-site flushing to ensure
that all existing and potential future contamination is
contained, removed and treated. If needed, pumping would
continue after the flushing effort has been completed. Pumping
rates, duration of pumping, and cleanup levels to insure the
protection of surface water quality, and monitoring associated
with this alternative will be incorporated into the monitoring
plan th^t is being developed to evaluate the effectiveness of
the on-site remedial actions.
ALTERNATIVE 17; NO ACTION IN CHESTNUT BRANCH STREAM

Under this no action alternative, contaminants present in
Chestnut Branch stream would not be remediated. A potential

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -23-


for adverse affects on the water quality of the stream would
continue to exist due to the leaching of contaminants from
the stream sediments.
ALTERNATIVE 18a; DREDGE-'AND DEWATER CHESTNUT BRANCH SEDIMENTS,
                 DISPOSAL AT A RCRA FACILITY

Alternative 18a involves the same technology and disposal
options as Alternative 14a for the Rabbit Run sediments.
Restoration actions would be undertaken for Chestnut Branch
as necessary.
ALTERNATIVE 18b; DREDGE AND DEWATER CHESTNUT BRANCH SEDIMENTS,
                 TREATMENT FOR ORGANICS, DISPOSAL AS A
                 NON-HAZARDOUS MATERIAL

Alternative 18b involves the same technology and disposal
options as Alternative 14b for Rabbit Run. Restoration
actions would be undertaken for Chestnut Branch as necessary.
ALTERNATIVE 19; INTERIM MEASURE IN CHESTNUT BRANCH MARSH

Alternative 19 involves the undertaking of temporary remedial
measures in Chestnut Branch marsh to mitigate volatile emissions
from the seepage face areas. This measure would be undertaken
when hazardous emissions from the marsh are considered to pose
a potential human health threat. Volatile emissions from the
marsh are most pronounced during the warmer Spring and Summer
months. The interim measures could involve clearing the
vegetation in portions of Zone 3 of the marsh followed by the
placement of absorpitve materials and a temporary cap, or the
possible use of vapor'suppressant technologies. Vapor suppres-
sant foams are available but require repeated applications to
be effective. The placement of absorptive materials and a
temporary cap would be effective and require little or no
maintenance.
DISPOSAL OPTIONS DISCUSSION

In addition to returning treated soils and sediments to their
places of origin, the marsh, the streams, the lake, and six
other locations were fully evaluated as potential locations for
the disposal or placement of treated and non-treated materials.
A discussion of the individual disposal options is presented
below.
OPTION
(A) Construct a New On-Site RCRA Facility.
While the construction of a new on-site RCRA facility is
technically feasible, there are several considerations that
detract from this option as a preferred disposal location. The

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -25-

modified to accomodate the addition of three to five feet of
treated soils. The impact of this additional soil on the
integrity of the existing cap is unknown. Furthermore, while
flushing of contaminants has proved successful at other at
other hazardous waste sites, and preliminary tests indicate
that it also will be successful at the Lipari site, EPA has
maintained that, in the event flushing is not successful at
Lipari, other remedial measures will be pursued. The presence
of additional material on the existing site would add a
measure of difficulty in the event of any future intrusive
activities, including on-site soil monitoring.
D) Dispose of Treated Materials at the Gloucester County
   Municipal Landfill.
Disposal of treated soils and sediments at this facility would
attain ARARs, reduce mobility, and utilize treatment as a
permanent remedy. The cost would be significantly higher than
placement at either Alcyon Racetrack or the Lipari Landfill.
There also may exist a problem with resource capacity or avail-
ability.
Landfill capacity and the need for fill material is very limited
in New Jersey. The availability of the use of municipal landfill
cells for treated, non-hazardous material is uncertain. Similar
institutional problems may be encountered in proposing to use
the treated material as fill or cover. Also, it is possible
that the community'where the landfill facility is located may
be hesitant to accept materials, even though treated, from a
Superfu.nd site. Further, disposal at a municipal facility
would require extensive truck t affic during transportation.
Conversely, the use of Alcyon Racetrack as a placement location
would not require truck traffic in Pitman or in the surrounding
communities.
(E) Disposal at Montgomery County Suburban Landfill of Treated
    Materials.
The same advantages and disadvantages apply to this option as
exists for the Gloucester County Municipal Landfill.
The placement of treated material back into Alcyon Lake was
rejected in the FS because of concerns over blocking artesian
springs originating in the Kirkwood aquifer. The increase in
flow to Alcyon Lake provided by these springs will assist in
attaining the goal of maintaining fishable/swimmable water
quality in Alcyon Lake. Futhermore, metals are not expected to
be significantly affected by the treatment process. At present,
there are no promulgated standards or guidelines to address
contaminant concentrations in sediments. However, it is-accepted
scientific knowledge that many contaminants, especially metals,

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -23-

for adverse affects on the water quality of the stream would
continue to exist due to the leaching of contaminants from
the stream sediments.
ALTERNATIVE 18a; DREDGE-AND DEWATER CHESTNUT BRANCH SEDIMENTS,.
                 DISPOSAL AT A RCRA FACILITY
Alternative 18a involves the same technology and disposal
options as Alternative 14a for the Rabbit Run sediments.
Restoration actions would be undertaken for Chestnut Branch
as necessary.
ALTERNATIVE 18b; DREDGE AND DEWATER CHESTNUT BRANCH SEDIMENTS,
                 TREATMENT FOR ORGANICS, DISPOSAL AS A
                 NON-HAZARDOUS MATERIAL

Alternative 18b involves the same technology and disposal
options as Alternative 14b for Rabbit Run. Restoration
actions would be undertaken for Chestnut Branch as necessary.
ALTERNATIVE 19; INTERIM MEASURE IN CHESTNUT BRANCH MARSH
Alternative 19 involves the undertaking of temporary remedial
measures in Chestnut Branch marsh to mitigate volatile emissions
from the seepage face areas. This measure would be undertaken
when hazardous emissions from the marsh are considered to pose
a potential human health threat. Volatile emissions from the
marsh are most pronounced during the warmer Spring and Summer
months. The interim measures could involve clearing the
vegetation in portions of Zone 3 of the marsh followed by the
placement of absorpitve materials and a temporary cap, or the
possible use of vapor" suppressant technologies. Vapor suppres-
sant foams are available but require repeated applications to
be effective. The placement of absorptive materials and a
temporary cap would be effective and require little or no
maintenance.
DISPOSAL OPTIONS DISCUSSION
In addition to returning treated soils and sediments to their
places of origin, the marsh, the streams, the lake, and six
other locations were fully evaluated as potential locations for
the disposal or placement of treated and non-treated materials.
A discussion of the individual disposal options is presented
below.
OPTION
(A) Construct a New On-Site RCRA Facility.
While the construction of a new on-site RCRA facility is
technically feasible, there are several considerations that
detract from this option as a preferred disposal location. The

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                -26-


are significantly more mobile in a sediment/water interface
than are metals in a soil that is not in contact with ground
water. Daily fluctuations in the pH of aquatic systems, as well
as the activity of benthic organisms, lead to increases in the
dissolution of metals from sediments to the aqueous phase. The
alternatives that utilize treatment and placement of treated
soils and sediments in non-aqueous environments will provide
better assurances of maintaining surface water quality.
SUMMARY OF THE COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES

The previously discussed alternatives were evaluated using
evaluation criteria derived from the NCP and the Superfund
Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986. The criteria
relate directly to factors mandated by SARA in Section 121,
including Section 121(b)(1)(A-G) and EPA Interim Guidance on
Selection of Remedy (December 24, 1986 and July 24, 1987). The
criteria are as follows:
4
    Compliance with legally applicable or relevant and appropriate
    requirements (ARARs)
4
    Reduction of toxicity, mobility or volume
* Short-term effectiveness
4
    Long-term effectiveness
4
    Implementability
4
    Protection of human health and the environment
4
    Community acceptance
4
    State acceptance
4
    Cost
A summary of the discussion of these criteria, with the except-
ion of State acceptance, is contained in Table 8. Due to the
high level of agreement between EPA and NJDEP on the proposed
remedial actions in the off-site areas, a separate column was
not presented in the summary. The criteria of protection of
human health and the environment was divided into two columns
to more fully describe these two important areas. A discussion
of the objectives of the nine evaluation criteria is provided
below.
           *
Compliance with ARARs
Section I21(d) of CERCLA, as amended by SARA, requires that
remedial actions comply with all applicable or relevant and
appropriate Federal and State requirements for the hazardous

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -27-

substances, pollutants, or contaminants that are present and
attributable to a site. The contaminated soils and sediments
in the off-site areas are impacting the quality of water in
contact with the soils of Chestnut Branch marsh and the sedi-
ments of Rabbit Run, Chestnut Branch stream and Alcyon Lake.
As such, cleanup of these areas is necessary to achieve water
quality ARARs. The same rationale applies to the marsh ground
water collection system. The alternatives that utilize treat-
ment and placement of treated soils and sediments^in non-aqueous
environments will provide better assurances to maintaining
surface water quality. These includes Alternatives 7b, 9b, 12a,
12b, 14a, 14b, 18a, and 18b.
Contaminants in marsh soils outside of the slurry wall serve
as a reservoir for future contaminant migration to adjacent
surface waters. Collection of ground water in the marsh will
intercept these contaminants as well as any potential migration
of contaminants in ground water that may occur as a result of
the on-site flushing activities. Alternative 2a and 2b pro-
vide the best assurances of capturing leachate in the marsh,
and in meeting the intent of the September 30, 1985 ROD. The
marsh collection system will be placed as close to the slurry
wall as possible within the limits of construction technology.
Soil east and north of the collection system in the marsh
will be excavated and thermally treated to remove organic
contaminants that are presently affecting water quality in
downstream receiving waters. The rotary drier technology
will result in the removal'of organic contaminants from the
marsh soils. In order to avoid creating an air emission
problem, vapor controls shall be utilized in order to meet,
at a minimum, NJDEP air emission standards (NJAC T^tle 7,
Chapter 27, Subchapter 17). Specific technological consider-
ations such as retention time, operating temperatures, and
optimum vapor collection technologies will be determined
during the remedial design.
Ground water extraction from the Kirkwood aquifer (Alternative
16) is also being undertaken to protect surface water quality
and to meet the.intent of the September 30, 1985 ROD. In
New Jersey, the Kirkwood aquifer is classified as a GW-2 drinking
water aquifer. In the immediate vicinity of the Lipari Landfill
site, the Kirkwood is not utilized as a drinking water source.
Due to the poor yield of the formation (Off-Site RI, phases 1
and 2) and the abundance of high yeild aquifers in the local
area, it is unlikely that the Kirkwood aquifer in the site
vicinity would be utilized as a drinking water source in the
future. The area of contamination in the Kirkwood is confined
to the upper portion of the formation. The Kirkwood has been
characterized as flowing upwards into Chestnut Branch stream,
with this surface water stream acting as the discharge point
and hydrologic boundary for contaminant migration in the Kirkwood
aquifer. For these reasons, in this unique situation, the

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -28-


application of surface water standards should be applied to
cleanup goals for the Kir3cwood aquifer. Chestnut Branch and
Alcyon Lake are classified as FW2-NT. The surface water quality
criteria for this classification are listed in Table 6. For
those compounds, such as bis(2-chlorethy1)ether that are not
listed in the FW2-NT classification, Federal Water Quality
Criteria established under the Clean Water Act should be applied
as a guideline for cleanup goals. A chemical-specific list of
compounds detected in the Kirkwood aquifer and corresponding
Federal Water Quality Criteria are listed in Table 6.
The need for additional extraction wells to best ensure that
contaminants present in the Kirkwood aquifer are removed in
order to minimize impact on surface water quality will be deter-
mined during remedial design. The extraction and treatment of
ground water from this formation should continue, at a minimum,
for the duration of the on-site flushing. The specific rate of
flushing and any allowable residual concentration of contami-
nants will be incorporated into the Monitoring Plan and will
reflect surface water quality criteria. A similar approach
will be taken with respect to the collection of leachate in
the marsh area.
The placement of treated soils and sediments at the Alcyon
Racetrack would not exceed current RCRA guidelines concerning
the disposal of treated materials. Soils and sediments have
been examined using the Extraction Procedure Toxicity (EP-TOX)
test for metals and pesticides. The tested materials have
not exhibited hazardous characteristics associated with the
EP-TOX procedure and have not been classified as a listed
waste, therefore, are not considered to be a RCRA waste. I..
addition to the EP-TOX procedure, the Toxic Characteristics
Leaching Procedure (TCLP) which includes an analysis for organic
compounds has been developed to further define leaching character-
istics. The EP-TOX procedure will be used on treated materials
during remediation to ensure a level of treatment that is protective
of human health and the environment. Additional tests such as
the TCLP test will be utilized as needed to ensure that effective
treatment that is protective of human health and the environment
is achieved.
Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility or Volume
This evaluation criteria involves the performance of a tech-
nology or remedial alternative in terms of eliminating or
controlling risks posed by the toxicity, mobility or volume
(TMV) of hazardous substances. The ability of each alternative
to attayi this criteria is summarized in Table 9. Alternatives
that uti'lize treatment provide the best assurances that a
reduction in TMV will be achieved. Off-site collection will
reduce the mobility of contaminants in the ground water,
on-site treatment will reduce toxicity and volume. For the

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -29-

marsh, Alternatives 2a and 2b provide the best assurances that
TMV will be reduced. Alternative 2b will reduce the amount
of clean water infiltration to the trench, thereby reducing the
total volume of collected material to be .treated. Alternatives
9b, 12b, 14b, and 18b provide the best assurances for TMV reduction
in the marsh, streams and lake. These alternatives all
utilize treatment technologies. Excavation and RCRA disposal
does not affect the toxicity or volume; treatment followed by
replacement in original areas does not affect the mobility of
metals.
Short-Term Effectiveness
The short-term effectiveness criteria measures how well an
alternative is expected to perform, the time to achieve per-
formance, and the potential adverse impacts of its implemen-
tation. Alternatives that utilize excavation and/or excavation
and treatment have an increased potential for short-term adverse
impacts associated with short-term exposure to contaminant
releases. This includes Alternatives 6 through 10 (a and b),
Alternatives 12 a and b, 14 a and b, and 18 a and b. The
short-term impacts of the alternatives are summarized in Table 9.
These impacts can be mitigated through proper health and safety
controls.
Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence
Long-term effectiveness and permanence addresses the long-
term protection and reliability of an alternative. The evalua-
tion of. the alternatives under this criteria is presented in
Table 9. The removal and treatment of contaminated soils and
sediments will ensure that water quality and air quality goals
are met. Alternatives 9b, lOb, 12b, 14b, and 18b achieve
these goals. Alternatives 2b and 16 will provide assurances
that contaminated ground water does not impact local surface
waters. Specific engineering considerations of the rotary kiln
technology such as operating temperature, retention time, and
off-gas treatment will be determined during the remedial
design. Optimisation of these parameters to maximize the
removal of contaminants coupled with proper soil engineering
practices will ensure that the placement of treated materials
at the Alcyon Racetrack will not require future monitoring and
will result in a permanent remedy. As described previously and
shown in Table 8, residual metals are not expected to pose a
human health or environmental concern.
Implementability
Implemehtability addresses how easy or difficult, feasible or
infeasible, it would be to carry out a given alternative.. This
covers implementation from design through construction and
operation and maintenance. The implementability of the altern-
ative is evaluated in terms of technical and administrative

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               -30-


feasibility, and availability of needed goods and services.
All alternatives have resource requirements with the exception
of the No Action alternatives (4, 11, 13, 15, and 17). All
actions utilize resources that have been implemented with avail-
able, proven technologies. The summary of the evaluation of
the alternatives under this criteria is presented in Table 9.
Protection of Human Health and the Environment
Protection of human health and the environment is the central
mandate of CERCLA as amended by SARA. Protection is achieved
by taking appropriate actions to ensure that there will be no
unacceptable risks to human health and the environment through
any exposure pathways.
The excavation, dredging, dewatering, thermal treatment (Altern-
atives 2b, 9b, lOb, I2b, 14b, 16 and I8b), and final placement
of treated materials at the Alcyon Racetrack coupled with the
on-site flushing/leachate collection and treatment action will
ensure that the existing off-site contamination from the Lipari
Landfill is permanently removed from the environment and that
no future off-site contaminant migration occurs.
Contaminated soils and sediments in the off-site areas passed
the EP-TOX test and, therefore, are not considered to exhibit
adverse leaching characteristics relative to metals and
pesticides. Material as it is processed will be analyzed
using the EP-TOX test for leaching characteristics and other .
tests, such as .the TCLP test, which includes analyses for volatile
organics,    as needed. Target Compound List (TCL) analyses for
individual hazardous compounds will also be performed during
treatment to ensure that the treated materials conform with
acceptable environmental guidelines such as those established
by the State of New Jersey for soil cleanup.
The impacts on the health and safety of workers and nearby
residents will be closely monitored during remedial actions.
Excavation in the Chestnut Branch marsh is likely to cause the
most significant environmental and human health concerns due to
the potential for contact with contaminated soil by workers,
inhalation of hazardous volatile organics during excavation,
and transport of contaminated sediments to downstream receiving
waters.
Appropriate measures would need to be taken during excavation
of the marsh soils to protect workers and nearby residents.
Among the candidate possibilities for reducing volatile
emissions and improving construction conditions are the
following ;
' Lowering of the ground water table in the immediate vicinity.
  This may be accomplished by one or more of the following
  methods: dewatering the containment system; pumping from

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -31-

  well points in the Cohansey; pumping from well points in
  the KirJcwood, temporarily rerouting Chestnut Branch and/or
  Rabbit Run.
' The use of vapor suppressant technologies such as vapor
  suppressant foam and portable inflatable worktents.
The workers and residents would "be protected through measures
outlined in project-specific health and safety plans and
through contractor adherance to Occupational Safety and Health
Act (OSHA) regulations. Strict air monitoring at the construc-
tion site as well as in the nearby residential areas would
need to be implemented. Noise associated with the rotary
drier unit may need to be mitigated through noise suppressant
housing or insulation. It is not anticipated that any such
noise would be noticible except possibly during night-time
operation, if night-time operation is acceptable to the local
community. Dust and particulate matter are not expected to
be a concern due to the damp nature of the marsh soils and
the lake and stream sediments.
The disturbance of soils during marsh excavation and sediments
during dredging will likely result in an increase in suspended
sediments that may carry contaminants into the local surface
waters. Rerouting of streams, the use of silt curtains, and
limiting the flow of water at the Alcyon Lake spillway would
all result in a minimization of the transport of suspended
solids in local surface waters.
Community Acceptance
This evaluation criterion addresses the degree to which members
of the local community support the remedial alternatives being
evaluated.
The community has shown a great deal of support for the
proposed off-site cleanup. The mayor and the town council of
the Borough of Pitman moved to purchase the Alcyon Racetrack
in order to expedite the off-site cleanup action. The Borough
already owned the adjacent park and had debated purchasing
the racetrack and adjoining woods for several months. By
purchasing that property, Pitman has assured that:
(1) land for placement of treated materials will be available;
(2) a complete staging and disposal area is removed from
    residential areas;
(3) truck transportation traffic will not impact the local
    communities; and
(4) remediation can be performed at a relatively low cost.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -32-

Mr. Douglas Zee owns the property (orchards) between the landfill
and the racetrack. Discussions with Mr. Zee indicate that he
is willing to allow truck access to roads on his property
between the Lipari Landfill and the racetrack. The completion
of a formal access and easement agreement with Mr. Zee would
ensure that truck traffic impact in the community is Xept to
a minimum. Existing roads are shown in Figure 1. The specific
concerns of the community with regard to the remedial activities
include, suppression of volatile emissions during excavation
and dredging, noise associated with the rotary drier, off-gas
collection/treatment of contaminants from the rotary drier,
testing of treated materials during and after treatment to
assure effectiveness of the treatment, potential public health
and environmental impacts associated with residuals in treated
materials, final aesthetic appearance of the racetrack area,
and use restrictions on the racetrack area. Detailed
responses to the community concerns are contained in the
Responsivness Summary (Attachment F).
A corollary issue associated with the impact of the Lipari Land-
fill on Alcyon Lake is the need for a watershed management plan
to address other point and non-point sources of pollution which
may impact the lake. Efforts are underway to integrate the
off-site remediation with the goals of a comprehensive watershed
management plan.
Cost                •
Costs are evaluated in terms of capital costs, operation and
maintence costs, and present worth costs. These items are
included in Table 9. The costs associated with the prefered
off-site remediation of Alcyon Lake, Rabbit Run and Chestnut
Branch stream represent the lowest costs for the remediation of
these areas. This is significant in that the prefered alternatives
also involve treatment to achieve a permanent remedy. The cost
associated with remediating Chestnut Branch marsh is not the
lowest, however, it does provide the greatest assurance for
protection of public
                «
                     health and the environment.
The collection of leachate (Alternatives 2b and 16) addresses
the requirements of the September 30, 1985 ROD. Alternative 16
will utilize the existing wells to the extent that it is feasible
(a pumping network will be required and the need for additional
wells will be evaluated during the remedial design) as well as
the on-site treatment facility. Costs associated with this
option primarily involve operation and maintenance. Collection
of leachate in the marsh area, Alternative 2b, is not the least
expensive alternative for collection of seepage in the marsh.
However, it does provide the greatest degree of public health and
environmental protection and, further, has the lowest operation
and maintenance costs. The range of costs associated with
Alternatives 1, 2a, 2b, and 3 vary by less than 10 percent
($5,788,000 to $6,365,000). Table 10 shows the costs associated
with the preferred alternatives, and the range associated with
other candidate alternatives for the same operable unit.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -33-


SELECTED REMEDY
 Through the comparative analysis described in the preceeding
 section and as outlined in Table 9 and in the off-site FS, the
 remedy that has been selected which provides the best balance
 among the criteria and satisfies the statutory requirements of
 Section 121 of CERCLA, as amended, is a combination of Altern-
 atives 2b, 9b (Option 2) 12b, 14b, 16, 18b, and 19 with place-
 ment of treated materials at the Alcyon Racetrack. The off-
 site collection system (Alternatives 2b and 16) will ensure
 that contaminated ground water in the Cohansey and Kirkwood
 aquifers does not discharge into Chestnut Branch stream. These
 actions will ensure that surface water criteria under the Clear.
 Water Act and New Jersey surface water standards are achieved.
 Alternative 9b will ensure that contaminants present in the
 Chestnut Branch marsh do not continue to migrate and impact
 local surface waters and sediments. Exposure routes for air
 inhalation and soil contact characterized as posing potential
 long-term human health threats will also be eliminated. Altern-
 ative 12b will remove and treat contaminated sediments that
 contain contaminants present in the water column of the lake at
 levels that exceed FWQC. Additionally, BCEE has been detected
 in fish tissue from the fish of Alcyon Lake. Ingestion of fish
 from the lake was characterized as an exposure pathway associated
 with a long-term human health threat. Appropriate sampling and
 any necessary removal, relocation, and/or restocking of aquatic
 wildlife will be made prior to lake remediation. Alternatives
'14b and 18b will remove and treat contaminated-sediments in
 Rabbit Run and Chestnut Branch stream that contain contaminants
 present' in the water column at levels that exceed surface water
 criteria and standards. All of the downstream and downgradient
 areas have been shown to contain elevated levels of Lipari
 related contaminants.
The use of the Alcyor? Racetrack as an area to place treated,
non-hazardous material will be in compliance with ARARs, provide
protection of human health and the environment, is easily
implemented, will provide long-term effectiveness, and has the
support of the local community. At present, the only guidelines
available for soils are New Jersey soil cleanup objectives. As
discussed earlier, treated material is expected to be within
the guidelines of those objectives. During remedial design
activities the determination of site-specific information such
as soil properties and depth to ground water will be incorp-
orated into a determination of minimum site specific cleanup
levels for soils and sediments prior to their placement at the
racetrack. The levels that will be set will ensure protection
of humag.health and the environment. The estimated cost asso-
ciated with the selected remedy is $21 million (Table 10).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -34-
STATUTORY 'FINDINGS/SUMMARY
The selected remedy satisfies the nine evaluation criteria to
the greatest degree of the alternatives examined.
The Agency has been explicitly directed by Congress in Section
121(b) of CERCLA, as amended, to select remedial actions
which utilize permanent solutions and alternative treatment
technologies or resource recovery options to the maximum
extent practicable. In addition, the Agency is to prefer
remedial actions that permanently and significantly reduce
the mobility, toxicity or volume of site wastes. Applying
this statutory preference here, Alternatives 9b, 12b, 14b and
18b provide the greatest degree of long-term effectiveness
and permanence by utilizing a treatment technology that will
permanently remove organic contaminants attributable to the
Lipari Landfill in the off-site areas. In addition, excavation
and dredging will also fulfill the preference for permanent
elimination or reduction of the public health and environmental
risk. Because of the potential mobility of the contaminants
in sediments and the bioaccumulation in fish, this permanent
solution is appropriate. There would be virtually no residual
risk associated with this alternative since the organic
contaminants would be removed through the thermal treatment
process and the excavation and dredging plans. Also, there
would be no need for eventual replacement of the remedy since
the residuals from the treatment process will be non-hazardous.
Finally, this remedy is reliable, and will avoid the long-term
uncertainties associated with land disposal of untreated
wastes. Hence, protection of human health and the environment '
on a long-term permanent basis is best assured by the selected
actions. These actions, coupled with leachate collection and
treatment in the Cohansey and Kirkwood aquifers (Alternatives
2b and 16), ensure the permanent elimination of Lipari related
contaminants in the off-site environment.
The thermal treatment process would comply with all action
specific ARARs. In addition, the residuals from the thermal
treatment would be determined non-hazardous and would not pose
a threat to human health or the environment through any
exposure pathway.
The Agency believes that the rotary kiln drier technology is
available and reliable for the treatment of contaminated
soils and sediments existing in the vicinity of the Lipari
Landfill site. This technology has been successfully imple-
mented at the McKin Superfund site in Gray, Maine to remove
volatile organics and PAHs (polyaromatic hydrocarbons) from
soils. .The land area is available for the siting of the
treatment process units and placement of the treated, non-
hazardous soils and sediments. Pilot testing of the equip-
ment would be utilized to ensure the operational reliability

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               -35-


of the unit on site-specific soils and sediments. Although
this remedy would require measures to control possible risks
related to construction and operation (e.g. air emissions),
the Agency's analysis indicates that all of these factors can
be adequately controlled.
 The capital costs for thermal treatment of the soils and
 sediments followed by placement at the Alcyon Racetrack are
 less than the costs associated with disposal (with or without
 treatment) at a municipal or RCRA facility. Futhermore,
 because the thermal treatment process represents a permanent
 remedy, there would be no long-term operation and maintenance
 costs associated with future monitoring. While the selection
.of the remedy involves the balancing of costs and effectiveness
 against the relative benefits of each alternative, the Agency
 is statutorily required to favor remedies that are permanent
 and that utilize treatment technologies which permanently and
 significantly reduce the toxicity, mobility or volume of the
 contaminants.
The selected actions represent the best balance of the nine
evaluation criteria and are cost-effective, permanent solutions
to contamination problems existing in the environment.
The community prefers that all of the contaminated" soils and
sediments in the off-site areas be excavated/dredged and
treated to permanently remove contaminants. While there has
been some local apprehension at placing the non-hazardous
treated, materials at the Alcyon Racetrack, the majority of
the local citizens and elected officials strongly favor this
option. The .. rimary community concerns to be addressed
during remediation will be noise, odors, and vapor controls
associated with the remedial actions. In addition, demonstra-
tion of the effectiveness of the treatment processs would be
required. Restoration of the racetrack area to an acceptable
aesthetic level would also be required.
The selected remedy would be protective of human health and
the environment'by: 1) utilizing treatment to reduce toxicity
and mobility of the waste; 2) being the most effective and
permanent solution in the long-term; 3) being relatively easy
to implement; and 4) assuring short-term effectiveness.
Furthermore, Altenatives 2b and 16 would meet the intent of
the September 30, 1985 ROD relative to leachate collection.
In summary, EPA has selected Alternatives 2b, 9b, 12b, 14b,
16, 18b, and 19 because they are protective of human health
and the environment, will attain all applicable or relevant
and appropriate requirements, are cost-effective, and utilize
permanent solutions and treatment technologies or resource
recovery options to the maximum extent practicable. Addition-

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -36-


ally, since these alternatives employ thermal treatment to
eliminate the principal threat at the site, this option would
also satisfy SARA'S preference for remedies which employ treat-
ment as their principal element to permanently and significantly
reduce toxicity, mobility or volume of the contaminants.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SECTION   V




ATTACHMENTS

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       ATTACHMENT A
GROUNDWATER CHARACTERISTICS

OF LIPARI LANDFILL SAMPLES

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  GROUND WATER CHARACTERISTICS OF LIPARI LANDFILL SAMPLES


                                                  UPari Landfill •aopling
                                Radian Corp.
                               Field*                     JRBC       IT CorpC     JRBC'd CD«e"'
  Volatile organic             1983   1983              9/26/83      9-10/84    12/84-4/85 3/85
     contaminant               (ppb)  (ppb)              (ppb)        (ppb)       (ppb)    (p?b)
Acrolein                          NR        NR               NA         <500        NA         NA
Acrylonitrile                     NR         NR              ND         <500        KA         NA
Benzene                        3,000     4,500            5,900        2,200    29,000     1 ,371
Bronofora                         NR        NR             <500g         <50        NA
Brooooethane                      NR        NR               NA           NA        NA        <10*
Carbon tetrachloride              NR        NR             <100g         <50        NA        <10g
Chlorobenzene                     18       <50              270          110        NA     1 ,005
Chlorobrooone thane               NR         NR            <100g         <50        NA        <10^
Chl o roe thane                   12       <50          47,<100g        •<50        NA        <10gg
2-Chloroethylvinyl ether          NR         NR            <250g         500        NA       <id
Chloroforc                         8        48              760          <50        NA        750
Chloromethane                     NR        NR               NA           NA        NA        00s
Dichlorobrooomethane              NR        NR               300        <50         KA        <1C"
Dichlorodifluorome thane           NR       NR              <250g      <500         KA        <10g
1 , 1 -Di chl oroe thane        , 54       <50               760         18        630        58S
1 , 2-Di chl or oethane         5,900    8,100    5,500,<69,000n     41,000     54,000    75 ,459
1,1-Dichloroethylene                4      <50              . 78        <50         KA        145
1 ,2-Dichloropropane               NR       NR           24,<50g        <5C         KA        <10g
1 , 3-Di chloropropy lene      • NR         NR           7,<250g         50         NA        <10E
Ethylbenzene                    1,000      420            4,400       2,000         NA        619
Methyl bromide                     NR       NR             <500g       <500         KA        KA
Ethene di broad de                 NR       NR                NA         NA         NA       <20g
Methyl chloride                    NR       NR           <1 ,000s      <500         KA         NA
Methylene chloride                510    3,300           39,000       2,800     46,000    17 ,450
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane         NA        NR             <500g        <50         NA        <10g
Tetrachloroethylene                 7      <50          40,<100g        130         NA         92
Toluene                        9,900    30,000           75,000      37,000     87,000     2 ,056
trans-1 ,2-Pichloroethene          26      <50               360         88         NA        219
1,1, 1-Trichloroethjne              1      <50          73, COO8        <50         NA        <10g
1 , 1 ,2-Trichloro«thane          NR        NR              <250g       <50         NA        <10S
Trichloroethylene                 14       <50          21,<100g        220         NA        177
Trl chlor of 1 uor oioethane      NR        NR              <250g       <50         NA        699
Vinyl chloride                    10       <50          96, < 100*     <500         NA        <10S
Total volatile organic            NR        NR                NA         NR         NA   176 ,96:
   compounds                                       *

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  GROUND WATER CHARACTERISTICS OF LIPARI LANDFILL SAMPLES

                                                 UParl Landfill sampling

                                 Radian Corp.
                                Field8               JRSC      IT Corp0
                                1983   1983        9/26/83     9-10/84    12/84-4/85    3/85
Extractable contaminant         (ppb) (ppb)         (ppb)       (ppb)       (ppb)

Add extractables:
  2-Chlorophenol                   NR      NR         <500g         <40        NA         22
  2,4-Dichlorophenol                9      ND      15,<500g      13,<40        NA         14
  2, 4-Dimethyl phenol             NR      NR         <500g         <40        NA        <10g
  1,4-Dinitrophenol                NR      NR           NA          NA         NA         35
  4,6-Dinitro-o-cresol             NR      NR      <5,000g          <40        NA         NA
  2,4-Dinitrophenol                NR      NR      <5,000g          <40        NA         40
  2-Nitrophenol                    NR      NR        <500g          <40        NA         20
  4-Kirrophenol                   no       ND        <50Cg          <40        NA         NA
 £-Chloro-m-cresol              NR         NR        <500g          <40        NA              a
 2-*ethyl-4,6-dinitrophenol     NR         NR          NA            NA        NA        <10g
 Pentachlorophenol              NR         NR        <500g          <40        NA         NK
 Phenol                     11,000 22,000          22,000         9,000        NA        <10*
 2,4,6-Trichlorophenol          NR     NR            <500g          <40       . NA        20

Base-neutral extractables:
  Acenaphthene                       NR     NR       <100£          <40         N.'      <50g
  Acenaphthylene                     NR     NR       <100       5.6,<40         NA       <50g
  Anthracene                         NR     NR       <100g          <40         NA       <50g
  Benzidine                          NR     NR     <l,000g         <160         NA      <100S
  Benzo( a) anthracene               NR     NR     <l,000g          <40         NA       <50^
  Benzo(a)pyrene                     NR     NR     <1,000*          <40         NA       <50»
  3,4-Benzofluoranthene              NR     NR       <100g          <40         NA       <5'">~
  Benzo(g,h,i)perylene               NR     NR       <250g          <40         NA       <50^
  B*nzo(k)fluoranthene               NR     NR       <100g          <40         NA       <50g
  bis_(2-Chl oroe tho'xy )aethane    NR     NR       <200g          <40         NA       <50g
  bis(2-Chloroethyl)ether         8,000 12,000     83,000        15,600   510,000         44
  bis (2-Chloroisopropyl)ether       NR     NR       <200g         <160         NA             g
  bis(2-£thylheryl)phthalate         NR     NR                                  NA       <50g
  4-Bromophenyl phenyl ether         NR     NR       'OOO*          <40         NA       <50g
  Butylbenzyl phthalate              NR     NR        <100g    4.0, <40        NA        <50g
  2-Chloronaphthalene                NR     NR        <200g         <40        NA        <5C^
  A-Chlorophenyl phenyl ether        NR     NR        <100g         <40        NA        <50g
  Chrysene                           NR     NR        <100g         <40        NA        <50g
  Dlbenzo(a ,h)anthracene            NR     NR        <250g         <40        NA        <50g
  1 ,2-fiichlorobenzene             150     ND    370,<400g         440        NA         49
  1 ,3-Dichlorobenzene               NR     NR        <400^         <40        NA         27
  1 ,4-Dichlorobenzene               NR     NR    ]90,<400^g   3.0,<40         NA      1,619
  3,3' -Dichlorobenridlne            NR     NR        <ioo          <40        NA       <100g

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 GROUND WATER CHARACTERISTICS OF LIPARI LANDFILL SAMPLES

                                                      LiPari Landfill stapling
                                    Radian Corp.
                                                                                             g t
                                   Field"     Labb        JRBC    IT Corpc       JRB C ' d
                                   1983       1983      9/26/83   9-10/84      12/84-4/85 3/85
Extractable contaminant            (ppb)      (ppb)      (ppb)     (ppb)          (ppb)

Base-neutrals, continued
 2,4-Dlchlorotoluene                 NR          NR        NA          NA '          NA   5,018
 B-Chlorotoluene                      NR         NR        NA          NA            NA   3,983
 Diethyl phthalate                    10         <1       350          94            NA     <50*
 Dimethyl phthalate                   NR         NR      <100g        <40            NA     <50g
 Di-^r-butyl phthalate                 6                   44         <40            NA
 2 , 4-Dinl t rotoluene             . NR         NR      <100g        <40            NA     <50g
 2,6-DinitrocolueTie                 NR          NR      <100g        <40            NA     <50g
 Di-TV-octyl phthalate                NR         NR      <100g        <40            NA     <5C/
 1,2-Diphenylhydrarin*               NR          NR      <100g        <40            NA    <25Q^
     (as azobenzene)
 Ethyl eneimine                      NR          NR        NA          NA            NA     <50^
 Fluoroanthene                        NR         NR      <1002        <40            KA     <50g
 Fluorene                            NR          NR .    <100g        <40            NA     <50^
 Hexachlorobenzene                    NR         NR      <100g        <40            NA     <50^
 Hexachlorobutadiene                 NR          NR      <200S        <40            NA     <50^
 Hexachlorocyclopentadiene            NR         NR      <200g        <40            NA     <50g
 Hexachloroethane                    NR          NR      <400^        <40            NA     <50g
 ldeno(l ,2,3-cd)pyrene               NR         NR      <250g        <40            NA     <50g
 Isophorone                         180        160       <200g       <160            NA     <50^
 Naphthalene                          70        280       430         120            NA     <50^
 Nitrobenzene                        NR          NR      <200g        <40            NA     <50g
 N-Nitrosodimethylamine               NR         NR        ND         <40            NA     <502
 N-Nitrosodi-iv-propylamine          NR          NR        ND a       <40            NA     <50ga
 N-Nitrosodiphenylamine               NR         NR      <100g        <40            NA     <50g
 Phenanthrene                        NR          NR      <100g        <40            NA     <50g
 Pyrene                               NR         NR      <100g        <40            NA     <50g
  1,2,4-Trlchlorobenzene             NR          NR      <200g        <40            NA   5,965
 1 ,2-bi£( 2-Chloroethoxy, )
    ethane                   30-70 ,000 30-70 ,000    140,000          NA     1,600,000      NA
 bis(Chloroaethyl >ether              NR         NR        NA         <40            NA      NA
 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodi-
    benzo-2.-dioxin                  NR          NR        NA         <40            NA      NA p
  1,4-Diethylene dioxide              NR         NR       'NA          NA            NA     <50g

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

              GROUND WATER CHARACTERISTICS OF L1PARI LANDFILL SAMPLES


                                         LiPari Landfill sampling

                         Radian Corp.

                        Field*    L*bb     JRBC    IT CorpC     JRBC'd     CD-e'f
  Pesticide/PCB         1983     1983    9/26/83   9-10/84    12/84-4/85   3/85
   contaminant          (ppb)    (ppb)    (ppb)     (ppb)       (ppb)      (P?b)
                                             1
Aldrin                    NR     NR                              NA        <0.5g
                                             i
BHC, alpha                NR     NR        <2         <1         NA        <0.5g
BHC, beta                 NR     NR        <2         <1         NA        <0.5g
BHC, delta                NR     NR        <2*        <1         NA        <0.5g
EHC.ganaa                 NR     NR         2.2       <1         NA        <0.5g
Chlordane                 NR     NR        ND        <10         NA        <0.5S
A,4'DDT                   NR     NR        ND          1         NA        <0.5g
4,4'DDE                   NR     NR        ND         <1         NA        <0.5g
4,4'DD?                   VR     NR        ND         <1         NA        <0.5E
Dieldrin                  NR     NR        ND         <1         NA        <0.5S
Endosul fan-alpha         NR     NR         2.1       <1         NA        <0.5g
Endosulfan-beta           NR     NR         2.1       <1         NA        <0.5g
Endosul fan sulfate       NR     NR        ND        <1          NA        <0.5g
Endrin                    NR     NR        <2        <1          NA        <0.5g
Endrin aldehyde           NR     NR         2        <1          NA        <0.5?
Endrin. Vetone            NR .   NR        NA        NA          NA        <0.5g
Heptachlor                NR     NR        <2        <1          NA        <0.5F
Heptachlor epoxide        NR     NR          2       <1          NA        <0.5P
PCB-1242                  NR     NR       <25g      <10          NA        <0.5g
PCB-1254                  NR     NR       <25g      <10          NA        <1.0g
PCB-1221                  NR     NR       <25g      <10          NA        <0.5g
PCB-1232                  NR     NR       <25g      <10          NA        <0.5g
PCB-1246                  NR     NR       <25g      <10          NA        <0.5g
PCB-1260                  NR     NR       <25g      <10          NA        <1.0g
PCB-1016                  NR     NR       <25g      <10          NA        <0.5g
Toxaphene                 NR     NR        ND       <10          NA        <0.5g
Methoxychlor              NR     KK        NA        <l          NA        <0.5g

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 GROUND WATER CHARACTERISTICS OF LIPARI LANDFILL SAMPLES

                                                                             c
Volatile nonpriority       IT CorpC 9-10/84 Base-neutral extractable IT Corp 9-10/84
     pollutant                   (ppb)       nonpriority pollutant         •(ppb)

Acetone                              620          Aniline                            <40
2-Butanone                     100,<500           Benzole acid                       460
Carbon disulfide                     <50          Benzyl alcohol                  29,<40
2-Hexanone                       23 ,000          4-Chloroaniline                5.2,<40
4-Methyl-2-pentanone              7 ,700           Dlbenzofuran                      <40
Styrene                           1 ,100            2-Methylnaphthalene          2.1,<40
Vinyl acetate                        <50          2-Methylphenol                     180
^-Xylene                          9 ,200           4-Meth"ylphenol                   100
Total xylenes                     3 ,500          2-, 3-, 4-Nitroanilines            <40 eac!-.
                                                  2 ,4 ,5-Trichlorophenol            <40


           GROUND WATER CHARACTERISTICS OF LIPARI LANDFILL SAMPLES

   Metal          Rad iana 19E3        JR£C 9/26/83           IT CorpC 9-10/84   CDMe*f 3/85
contaeinant            (ppc)               (pptt)                  (ppc)             (ppc)
Antimony               <.005               <.20/.21* '             <.001             <0.01g
Arsenic                <.003                .074" '/. 087"-         '.016            <o.oo:g
Barium               NR                NA                         NA                   .40
Berylllus             <.0005               <.05                    <.001             <0.01g
C^mi urn              <.005                 .023/.068J              .011                .006
Chromium              <.001                5.1/51.0*                   .050          <o.o:
Copper                  .062                .15/.203                   .25           <0.01g
Iron                 86                      NA                        NA               NA
                                                    J
Lead                 •<.003              .12/.92                    .01                .06
Manganese               .20                NA                         NA                NA
Mercury               <.0002             .013                        .0042            <.001g
Nickel                  .004             .30/.703                    .05               .07
Selenium              <.003              .21                         .006            <0.01g
Silver                <.002               .026/.080J                 .003 '          <0.01g
Thallium'.            <.003              .27                       <.001             <o.oo:s
Zinc                   .071             1.2/1.3J                   3.96             • .14
Cyanide                   NR             .02                          NA              4.95
Phenols                   NR           18.4                           NA                NA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

            GROUND WATER CHARACTERISTICS OF LIPARI LANDFILL SAMPLES

      Conventional            IT Corpc 9-10/84   DuPont* 3/85      CDM*'f 3/85
        parameter                   (ppm)           (ppm)            (ppa)

Dissolved organic carbon             NA              863               NA
PH                                   NA                6.3              6.3
Total suspended solids                NA              70            532k
Biochemical oxygen demand             NA             NA           1,319
Chemical oxygen demand                NA             NA           2,820
Aononia-ni t rogen                   NA              NA              55.55
Total kjeldahl nitrogen              NA              NA              57.65
Phosphorous                          NA              NA                NA
Phosphate                            NA              NA               0.37
Total dissolved solids               NA              NA           1,536
Total volatile suspended solids      NA               NA            164
Volatile dissolved solids            NA              NA               490
Conductivity                         NA              NA           1,900 unho.'cc:
Oil and grease                         4.8           NA               7.7
Total organic carbon                 240             NA                NA
Chlorides                            NA              NA               318.2
Nitrates                             NA              NA                 0.03
Alkalinity                           NA              NA               327
Hardness as CaCO.                    NA              NA               188

\aboratory composite of samples from monitoring wells C-lOa, C-6a, and C-4a.
b
 Composite of sample drums upon receipt at laboratory.
 Highest value (worst case) is indicated.
 Limited sampling done by JRB Associates from December 10, 1984, to April 15,
 1985. There were four sampling events performed during this period.
 Collected frott production well PV-1 at conclusion of 24-hour pump test.
 Field measurements performed by Camp Dresser & McKee, Inc., in March of 1985
 indicated leachate temperatures ranging from 10 to 16 centigrade.
•Element Is less than value given and not detected by the technique employed.
 Report with detection limit.
 Due to the high interference levels encountered, an unusually high detection
 limit exists. An undeterminable amount of results may be due to
 1,2-dichloro«thane.
 Below method detection limit. O^iantitation and/or identification may be
 unc rtVin at this level.
 Hig/.est value represents the maximum concentration found in shallow driven
 wells outside of containment system.
 nay be low due to extended holding time of sample.
Notes: NR Not reported; NA Not analyzed; ND Not detected

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       ATTACHMENT B

SUMMARY TABLES FOR OFF-SITE

LIPARI SAMPLING PROGRAMS

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        LIPMI UMDFIU.


                                                MILS yiTHIN CDfraiNNDff EYSTW                                                                      OOMEWOIENT IOJ.S
                                  i                                                                                        -
 SPWUNS loamm      MA             1      M3                        «                                   R-3                     CP-3                e-ii                 C-ll                 C-24


 SPNU MMCN             «          1 U              me               23               NDC                24                     MOTH                IOC                                        13

 OMTWCTOR             J*l         1 JRI            UC             m                      uuc                Jtt                CM                  we                   jn                    m
                                                                                                                      -


 wisma             •-I2-I3        1 I-IO-H         ll-ll-ll       0-12-43            II-K-4I           8-12-43                 5-23-«3             l-K-41              8-12-03              8-12-13


 turn                                                   t
                                                                   I'l
                                                                         1
                                                                                                            •I/I               •I/I                                     •I/I                 •I/I

 (Draws           i         irt.NoUi i     in.iMt 1     IFI.IMt I            IFI.IMt I         IFI.N0U 1           IFI.IMt 1          IFt.Notr •        IFI.Notff •            IFI.Mf 0              IFt.Nott
                            1   1 I       1                                                                                                                                                    ,     *
                                                                         •
                                                                                                                                  1                                        •

IKTdS                       1   1 1                                    1                                .    1                1                                             1                1
1                           1   1 1                                    1                                     1                I                                             1                1
IAMMM                       III 1 III                       N          I II                     N            I II         • |                                 N             I I
                                                                                                                                                                              I              I II
HWTIMMT          110.20110        M 0.201                   0   110.201                         0    1(0.201             31 IU                                0       (0.201          1(0.201
IMSENIC          M 0.011          l( 0.011                      l( 0.01 IN)                          110.011             3 IU.I                                        0.0231         II 0.01 IN)
IWIIW            1      III       1       III               N   1        III                    H    1         III    (711 1                                  M            ill        i mi
IKOTILHN         II0.05IW         l(0.«|                    E   1(1031                          E    1(0.051            0.3 IU                                E       10.031          II0.03H0
ICMMIIM          10.0131          1(0.011                   T   KO.OII                          1    1(0.011                4 IU                              T        0.0231         II 0.011
IOUIIM                      III 1 III                       A            III                    A            I II       7170 1                                A             III       1       III
IOMMIIM            2.3 1          1 0.30 1                  L    0.47 1                         L       0.531             14 II                               L        3.11           10.381
ICWU                   III        1       III               1                III                S            I II           4 IU                              S           III         1      III
(Oral             0.001           !( 0.091                       10.021                               (0.021                                                          0.131           1(0.021
                                                                                                                          •
nm                      III       1       III               A            III                    A            I II         •                                                III        1      III
Hi no             0.0311          1(0.021                   N   0.0X1                           N      0.0731             •                                           0.121               M 0.021
imnrsitM               III        1       III               A            III                    A            I II     (43901                                                   III        1          III
INNnCSE                III        1      Hi                 L            III                    I            I II         71                                                   III        1          III
IKICUIIV          (0.0011         1(0.0011                  T   1(0.001 (NO                     r     (O.OOIIW
                                                                                                                          •
                                                                                                                                                                      (0.0011             10,00101
INIDtfL           117 1           1 0.0791                  I    1(0.051                        s      0.12 1        If 101                                           0.30 1              10.052 1
iraiossnn               III       1      III                1   1        III                    i            III     1(113011                                 1             III           1      III
I9O.WHH             till          1 0.0141                  S   II 0.01 IK)                     s      0.02(1             • 1                                 S        0.0031             Ifltll
ISIU«              0.02(1         1(0.011                         0.0311                               0.0101               3 IU                                       0.0191             1(0.011
ISOOItM                 III       1      III                           I II                                  III          i 1                                               III           1      III
IIHUIM            (0.101          1(0.101                         0.10 1                               0.12 1               4 IU                                      (0.101              1(0.101
II1N                    III       1      III                           I II                                  III           17 IU,«                                             III                   III
IVmnOHM                 III       1      III                           I II                                  III       (31        1                                          IN. I              III
IIIIC              o.25i          i o.oaii                        0.03M                                 2.1 1             • 1                                     •
                                                                                                                                                                        0.901              0.0311
1                      i           i     i                             I                                     1                1                                              1                   1
ICVIMIK           (0.011          1(0.011                        (0.011                               (0.011              • 1                             •           ( 0.011              ( 0.011
IfHMlS              0.061         1 3.00 1                        1.05 1                               0.46 I                 IN. I                                    0.23 1              0.37 1
IK R7N1 «H IDS              III 1 III                                  I
                                                                       •
                                                                         II                                  I II             I II                                           I II                I II
                            1            I I                                                                 i     ...        i                                            1         i-      , ...   1 -   ...

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                           LIPWII UMDFIU.
                 i

                 /                         VBWVIENT IO1S
                                           I                                                                                 IKUS HI THIN CONTAINNDff SYSItN

 9MIIN6 LDCRTION          C-«                  R-1                    C-2&                  C-13         .        C-17            C-3                Ml                C-IOfl          C-IOA               C-M

 smiftME* m               27                    1                     12                    7                     MK              NIC                IOC               MK                33                IOC
                                                                                        -
 raitMUM                  in                   tn                     m                     Jfll                  m               UC                 in                HC                JW                we
 DATE SNUB              0-12-M                 O-IO-AI            O-IO-fJ                   HO-W              •-l(HU           (-K-M                 t-IO-41           (-IMI             M2-A3             (-K-OI

 IMIT9                    •I/I                                        •1/1                  •I/I                                                                                      •I/I
                                                                                                                                                                            •


 OMUMB                e        (Ft.>Me 0            IFJ.IMs       e        iFt.iw* 6               IF».Nol«   e      in. Not» 1         IFt.Note 8        Ifl.Note S        IFt.Note 1        IFt.N»tt •        IFt.Note
                                 (                                         •

IN£t*S                           ,                  1                      i                       1                                                                                        1
1                                I                  1                      i                       1                                                                                        1
lAUMINM                          IN. ft.            IN. A,                 IN. A,                  IN. ft,               N                                  N                   N           IN. A.                N
ifKTiioir            1(0.021               M O.MIND           H 0.20110             H 0.20110                            0                                  0                   0   ( 0.20IND                     0
IWSENIC              10.01(1               MO.OIIND           l( 0.01 IND       M 0.011                                                                                              0.0251
IRMIW                1      IN. A.         1       IN. A,     1        IN. A.  1       IN. ft.                           N                    -             N                   N           IN. A.                N
IKmillM              1(0.051               M 0.031            1(0.051          K0.05INO                                  C                                  C                   C   (0.051                        C
ICMMll*              M 0.011               MO.OIIND           IIO.OII          M 0.011                                   T                                  1                   T     0.01(1                      1
IOT.CHW                     IN. A.         1      IN.A,       1        IN.A. 1         IN. A,                            A                                  A                   A           IN. A.                A
 IOOOIIIM               I.I |              1 0.0331           1 0.17 1         1 0.21 1                                  L                                  L                   L      3.1 1                      L
ICOWLI                         inn.        1       IN. ft.    1        IN.A. 1         IN. ft.                           S                                  S                   S           IN. A.                S
ICOWCI                 0.0471              1(0.021            1(0.021          1(0.021                                                                                                0.0301
IIMM                        IN. ft.        1       IN. ft,    1        IN.A. 1         IN. ft.                           A                                                      A           IN. A.
lUflO                  0.0711              M 0.021            1(0.021          1(0.021                                                                                                O.OJ2I
                                                                                                                         •          •                                           •
iwncsnii                  IN.A.            1      IN.A.       1        IN.A, 1         IN. A.                            A                                                      A           IN. A.
IWWBVCSE                    IN.A,          1       IN. A.     1        IN. A.   1      IN. A,                            L                                                      L           IN. ft.
IPCBCURT             1 (0. 0011            1(0.0011           10.00101         MO. 0011                                  »                                                      V   0.00111
INIOta               M 0.031               1(0.031             10.0(4 1        1 0.12 1                                  S                                                      S     0.11 1
IPOTPSSIUI           |       IN.A.         1      IN.A.        1       IN.A. 1          IN. A.                           1                1                 1                   1            IN. A.
ISODtllll            1(0.01 IND             1(0.011            MO. 01 IND       1      IND                               S                S                 B                   S     O.OJ1I
ISIIVEI              M 0.011               M 0.011             1(0.011          1(1.011                                                                                               0.0131
 I9DOIUN                       HA.         1      IN.A,        1        IN.A, 1       IN.A.                                                                                                  IN. A,
 IIHPLLIM              4.27 1              1(0. 01 IND         1(0.101          1(0.01 IND                                                                                           (0.101
 IfIN                         IN. A.               IN. A.              IN. A, I          IN. A,                                                                                              IN. A.
 IVPMttlUN                    m. A.                IN. A,              IN. ft. 1       IN. ft.                                                                                               IN. A.
 IIINC                 0.191                 O.OKI               0.0251         1 0.04(1                                                                                                1.2 1
  1                           1                    1                   I        1      1                                                                                                    1
  ICYIWIK              ( 0.011 ND            1 0.01 IND          10.011         MO.OIIND                                                                                            ( 0.011
inrMLS               0.201                     0.171              0.10 1        1 I.J 1                                                                                              o.n i
IKICnff SOLIDS                 IN.A,                IN. A.              IN. A.  1       IN. A.                                                                                                IN. A,
                                                                                                                                                                                              1    1• 1

Jj, ,« /                                                      •                •    •              *



                                                                                                              .^                                                                                                  ^

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                            LIPMI UWDFIUL                    ^B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ^K.
n " '•'                                                                                                         BCMCHRDIOfT HttiS

    SWUNG UDUim            O*-3               CP-3                    C-7                   C-7                 a»-e                a>-2                O^7            C-tfi          !     C-2S           !               c-s
    SflWlf MMCT            B                  ioe                     me                    37                  33                  IOC                 NN771          IOC                  II                             NONE

    GOfTWCKN               jn                 JW                      uc                    m                   m                   jn                  cm             we                   in                             m
    JflflE 9m0    *     •-tf-*J               «-ll»««             4-H-ll                I-IZ-M                  l-^M            12-IO-M                VJI-«3              (-It-fll        1-10-43                     12-IO-M

    INI IS                 •I/I
                               a                    l_
                                                                                            •I/I                •I'l                                    If/I                                I/I
                                                                                                                                                                              |   '              *                 .       .   4
                                                                            *                     1                  1- -. _           1

    CDHMOS             i          in.iw* •      ^
                                                    IM.Notr       i             in.Natt I
                                                                                                  •
                                                                                                   IFI.Notv 1          IFI.Ngtt 1        IFt.Nat* 1
                                                                                                                                                         _.[
                                                                                                                                                               IFt.NoU 1       IFI.NMr 1         IFI.Kbt* I                       IFI.Mt
                                                         |
                                                                                                                       1                                                                         •


IKTALS                         i                                                                  1                    1                                                                     1
1                              i                                                             . 1                       1                                                                     1
IAUKINM                     IR.H.                        N                       N             IN. A.                  IN. A.               N                                     N        IN.A.                                   N
                                                                                                                                                        •
IPHNWWr               1 0.20IW                           0                       0    io.ni                Mo.201                           0           31 U                      0   II 0.201                                     0
iwsoiic                0.0381                                                          0.0151       1(0.011                                             1?                            II 0.011
IVMIM                       IN.A.                        N    •                             IK, ft. 1    IN.A.                              N          3?S                        N   1 IN.A.                                      N
iK*ninn               IO.OSI                             r                            I0.09INO      1(0.051                                 E   110.41                            E   II0.05INO                                    C
lOVHItM                0.0161                            1                             0.0171         O.OJII                                T   IC4.JI                            I    Mfl.OII                                     T
IOICIIM                     IN. A.                       a                                  IN. A.         IN. A.                           II I3MX»                              A          I", ft.                               A
ICMONIM                 J.t 1                            i                               J.I 1              17.) 1                          L   1 477                             L     0.74 1                                     L
ICOMLT                      IN.*.                        9                                   IN. A.              IN. A.                     S 1(141                               S          IN. ft.                               S
 lam*                  0.0*31                                                           0.10 1              0.0501                                      •                                 o.oeoi
II«M                        IM.«.                        ft                                   IN. ft.            IN. A.                                                           A         IN.A.
                                                                                                                                                        •
(LEAD                  0.0*01                            N                              10301               0.0771                                    1140                        N      0.03?l
IMHCSIUN                    IN. ft.                      A                                    IN.A.              IN. ft,                              UM                          A         IN.A.
imevcsc                     IN, A.                       L                                    IN. A.             IN. A,
                                                                                                                                                        •
                                                                                                                                                                                  L         IN.A.
itcmm                 0.001(1                            r                             (O.OOIIND           (O.OOIIM)                                    •                         T     (0.001 IW
iNioa.                 O.OVI                             i                              0.11 1             0.11 1                                      394                        S      0.10 1
(POTASSIUM                  IN.lt                        I                       1           IN. A.              IN. A.                              (44201                       1          IN.A.                                  1
ISODMUN               ( 0.01 IN)          •              s                       8      0.19 1             O.OKI
                                                                                                                                                        •                         S   l( 0.011                                     8
ISILVU                 0.0111                                                           0.0171             O.OOTI                                                                     1(0.011
                                                                                                                                                        •
ISOOIM                      IN.NL                                                            IN. A.              IN. ft.                                                              1        IN.lt
                                                                                                                                                        •
IIW1IM                10.101              '                                            ( 0.101             1 0.101                                       3 III                        II 0.101
(TIN                        IN.M.                                                            IN. A.              IN. A,                                 IT IU.I                                IN. It          •

ivmnoiw                     IN.N.                                                            IN. A.              IN. A.                              (141 1                                      IN. A."
I/IMC                  o.»                                                              O.O 1               0.331                                       • 1                                0.131
1                                                                                            1                         1                                   1                                    1
ICVfWIK               (0.01                                                            (0.011              ( 0.011                                      • 1                               ( 0.011
iwnas                  O.M                                                              0.17 1              1.6 1                                          IN. A,                         0.79 1
ISUSTOOCT OLIOS                    N.H.                                                           IN. A.         IN. ft,                                    IN. ft.                            IN. ft.
1                                                                                                 |                    1                                    1                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                           w*H^BW»

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                    IIMRI UMFIU.
                  1
                                                                                 DMGmiCNT MEU.S

 SWUNG LOCATION           C-IO                 C-ll            OH                                 C-27              C-27             C-21              C-31

 smf mm)                  •OC                  NONE            34                NB8778           •8773             NOC              MMOO              NBI773

 iwt*tlM                  J»                   m               M                 cm                             1
                                                                                                                    cm               OH                cm
 WESmO                MO-M                 IMO-04           0-10-41          3-23-05             V21-03             3-20-03         V22-«3           3-33-03

 WITS        /                                        •        I/I               •I/I                1'»                                               •I/I
                                                                                        1



 (BOOMS               •        in.wt •            IFI.Nolt 1        IFt.Nott 1          IFt.Nott 1     IFI.Nolt 1        IFI.Nolt 1       IFt.Nolt 1          IFI.Nolv
                      __          _   ._                            t __                                                                                    .

                                                                                  '
INOH5                                                               1                                1                                    1                 1
1                                                                   1                                1                                    1                 1
IAUMINM                          'N                   N          IN, ft.       »                  • 1
                                                                                                                           •
                                                                                                                                    f    1            • 1
IflNTIMXr                         a                   0    (0.201          1331                   31 IU                    0          31 IU           31 IU
 IMSCNIC                                                    0.0871             43 R            (111 1                                  3 IU.R          3 IU.R
 IMRIM                                                N          IN. A,     1060                  • 1                         N   1(121 1          (711 1
 IKVnilUI                                             I    (0.031              10                3.3 1                        E   1(0.31 1           0.3 IU
 IOVNIIM                                              f     0.0601           1.2                   4 IU                    f           4 IU            4 IU
 lOLCIM                                               i          IN. ft,  &3000                21000 1                     A        137001        131700 1
 lOflOtllH                                            L     31.0 1            100 R              106 1                     L         UK IR        111.41 IR
 IOTWLT                                               I           IN. A.   15.31                  4 IU                     S           4 IU            4 IU
 ICOPPCR                                                    0.20 1             (                  I1                                 •                •
nmn                                                   ft          IN. ft.      •                  • 1                      ft        t                •
ILfflO                                                N     0.* 1           . •                   • 1                      N         t                •
INDOCSIW                                              A           IN. A, ' 17000               1364011                     ft     142001          1340
IMMBICZ                                               L          IN. A.      360                  • 1                      L         44              133
Mtcan                                                 f    0.00241             t                  • 1                      T         t                •
iNitxa                                     .          1     0.70 1            103                 • 1                      1         77           1(8.11
ipotflssrw                        I                   1           IN. ft.   3*0                (476011                      1     (464011         1(271011
ISODflUN                                              8     0.0211             •                  • 1                      B         • 1               • 1
ISIIVOI                           •                         O.OMI          in.oi                  • 1                                  ] IU             1 IV
ISODlUt                                                          IN.M.     1 1030001              • 1                              303001           1310 1
iTHflLLiiM                                                  0.24 1             10 IU               3 IU                               10 IU             4 IU
(TIN                                                             lift.         17 IU.R            17 IU.R                            17 IU.R           17 IU.R
IWMVIUN                                                          IN. A,     (101 1                72 1                                 4 IU             4 IU
III*                                                        1.3 1              11 1               • 1                                • 1               • 1
1                                                                1                 1                  1                                  1                 1
ictmioc                                                    (0.011              • 1                • 1                                • 1               • 1
IPtfNU                                                      7.1 1                  IN. ft.            IN. A.                             IN. A.            IN. A.
ISUStMO SOLIDS                                                    IN. A.           IN. A,              IN. A.                            IN. A.            IN. A.
1                                                                 1                1                   1                                 T                1
1 —-

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                    COM     I9B7



                                                                              t-t           R-7              R-9     H-10    11-11   11-12 R-ll     11-14 R-16
       Location                                                      R-S



Volatlleti
X^tone                       770     1200   66000    NA .   20000    10U      510           ISO      10U     10U      •00 seooo        lou    10U      10U     100
Bentene                      SOU       10   2SOOO    HA     10000     su      500            su       su      SU      2 SO 2600J        SU     su       su      SU
2-Butanont                   79J     2000   2SOOO    N*     20000    100     1000            19      100     lou      2JJ 6SOOJ        100    lou      1011    100
0Uoioform                    SOU     2500   2SOOU    NA     1000U     su      500
                                                                                             SU       su      Su      2SU SOOOU         su     su       Su       su
1,2 Dichloroethan*           sou     180J   2500U    NA     10000     su      sou            su       su      su      2 SO 14000        SU     su       su       su
Cthylbcniene                 sou     asw    2SOOU    N*     10000     su      SOU            SU       su      su      2SO SOOOU         SU     su       su       SU
Methylene chlorite           sou     160J   JSOOU    Km     1000U     SU      SOU            su       SU      su      2<>0   •BOO       SO     su       SU      su
4-nethyl-2-pentanom          1000    1100   29000    N*     20000    100     1000           100      100     100           106000      100    100      lou     lou
                              SOU    2SOU   J'jOOO   NA     10000     su      500
                                                                                             su       so      su      2 Ml   S700       Su     su       SU      su
1,1.1-Trlchloroe than*        sou    2SOU   25PQO    m      10000     su      SOU            SU       su      SU      2SU SOOOU         SU     su       Su      su
Total *yl«ws                  sou    2500                   1000U     su      sou            su       SU      su      2 VI SOOOU        SO     su       su      Su
SeBl-VolatlUat
Beniolc Acid               sou        167   6200U    SOU     SOU     SOU      SOU           sou      sou     sou      SOU    S4000     sou    sou      sou      sou
bia| 2-CMoroethyl )ether    71       1*00   21000     •      100     100      100           100      100     100       11    S5000     lou    100      100      100
bU(2-Cthylhexyl Iphthalat* 10U       260U   1260U    100      6J     10J      100                    100     100      lou    20000      7J     9J      100      100
                                                             lou                            100
Icophoran*                 lou       2600   1260U    100             100      100           100      100      lou     too     1500     100    100      lou      100
4'Hethylph«ral             100       2fOU   1J600    10»      100     loo     100
                                                                                            100      100      100     100     2900     10U    100      100      100
Phenol                     100        4'0    1100     •       100     100     100                             100     100    28000     10U    100      100      100
                                                                                            100      10U




Ka«plt location              C-J1    C~>2   C-J1 C-3JAJ C-J4



Vt>l»tll«*t                                  .

Action*                       10U     10U    100     10U    10U      100
ftciutn*                       SU     su       su     SU     SU       su
2'ButMOM                      100    10U     100     lou    100      100
CM or of om                    su     su      su      SU     SU       Su
1 ,2-DlchlototthM*             Su     su      su      su     su       SU
Ethylbrnitnt                   su     su      su      su     SU       SU
HrLhylvne Chlorld*             su     su       su     SU     su       Su
4'h>thyl-2-penUnont           100    lou     101)    100    100      1DU
Tolucn*                        su     su       su     SU     su       SO
1 , 1 . 1-TrlehlorMthmw        SU     SU      su      SU     su       SU
Tt>t«l rylcntt                 SU     SU       su     su     SU       SU

•«Bl-VOl*tll«ti
                                                                                   Key i
tontoic Acid                   SOU    tu      93     sou    sou      SOU
bi •( 2-Oilorovthyl Icthcr     10U    100    100     100    100      loo                   CttlMted value for • tentatively Identified compound.
bii(2-CUiylheiyl)[*ith«Ute     100    lou    100     100    100      100                   Nnt analyird (or.
Itophoiane                     100    100    100     100    100      100
4 -H» Ihy 1 phenol
                                                                                           frafioiinil vnx analyzed for but not detected. Detection limit reported.
                               10U    100    100     100    100      100                   Ttirse ri>n|iotinr1c irqiilre dilution to quantify the* within the linear ran9*
rhenol                         100    100    10U     100    100      100                   of the ttAfwUid* calibration curv«.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 MELLS KITHIN CON T AIH«EN T SYSTE'
                                   SASPIE LOC       r-2       r-2             r-3        r-3
                                   S*n?LE 1      13-1185      23             13-1187     24
                                   ccNTRftCTOK      KM:       m               KM: JP.E
                                   BATE SA«;£!11-14-81 8-12-E: ll-H-81 8-12-8?
                                      UNITS      PPB     PPB      PPB    PPB
            COfKL'KS

VO:A::LES
                                                     2700             10
BENIENE                                                                7                       30
gDfj»*"^u' flCftBrT^ijr                                                                        47


put n^ntrifYp^r
put nf'^P^HftH^
                                                                                          . 8:
C::U..:::ETHASE,:,I-
                                                      t*f      stnn                        ae
BICH.O«2£THA«(E.1 1 2-                                »«t      ....                       BE




ETHYLFENZENE
KETONES                                             306JO


BETHYLENE M.2RIDE                                    ,140          3?f              60        100
JTyprijf
TETPAlf.2'3ETIJ.ENE
TDIUENE                                                                 4           4C         5S



TR1CHLORIETMYLENE
V!w v L CH.I'IPE
viN'jDEN- C«:OF:CE

SE'IVClATllES

ACENAfHTHYLENE

BENZOlilPYRENi
j'e i-^.^f(i O^^^^H'IY'ETMA 1 .'                     6100      8500             1430      8500
BIE(-2-:HLOF:3ETHCIY)»£7HANE
BIS(-2-CHLOF::E"HYL)ETH£F'                           3400      7400              640      44CC
8IS'.2-ETHYLHEIYL)PHTHA1ATE
BL'TYiBENZYLPHTHALATE
CU'E'iE

tl-H-DITYL PHTHAlATE


Di:-.:CR:i£NZENEil,4-
IIETHYL»H T HALATE


FLUORENE                       '

NAFTHALENE
PHENANTHRENE
PH£N3i.                                                               35('                     57
PYRENE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         1                          IELLE H'THIN CON^AJN'-NT SYSTER
                                         1
                                         SARPLE LOC   C-15 C-17 C-3            C-19         C-10AC-10A C-4A C-M C-23
                                         SAMPLE 1 7 5                            2                35            39      it
                                         CONTRACTOR    JRB     JRB     MMC      JRB       MC      JRB  VNC     JRE     JPi
•^Ifc                                    BATE SAILED 8-10-83 8-10-8! 4-14-81 8-10-8! 4-14-81 8-12-8! 4-14-81 8-12-8: B-1C-B!
                                            UNITS      PPB    PPB      PPB      PPB      PPB      PPB  PPB     PPB     Pffc
^r               CGRWNJS
                                                                                              '
  VC.ATI'.ES

  ACETONE
  BENZENE                                                       790    2290     4400                78     13000    426i   IE::
  BP.3«:iCHLflF;3R£THAKE                                                         280
  •fiftMicnDv
  prynj. fc
            U" .
 CARB3K D1SL'I.FIOE
 CHLGREBENIENE                                                                    73                                 2?C     2C
 CHLGP.5£THA«                                                    24               47                                          4
 CHLD8OfOB'                                                     410              740 '                                21
 B!CH:ORC£TW.«.1,1-                                                      23C     450                         200      77      r.
 BICH.ORO£THfcNE,l,2-                                           48C    3020?                5C       74    33800    550?   2C'.'.
 BICHLOROETHYLEN£,TRANS-I,2-                                                      43                          40      4!     7B
 BICHLOR3PPBFAN£.1,2-
 BICHLOR36«F£NE.1.3-                                                                                                           •7

 ETHYLBENZENE                                                    430     81C    4400                 49     5720    2400   Ei'.
 ttTON;-
 «ETHYL4-,-2-PEN*AN:NE
 KTHYLENE CHLOflSE                                              14??   !:4C? 39COI           40      3fc   14iOC     9!t     <c:
 STYREKE                                                                                            .
 TETRA:H:OP:ETHE«                                                                                            190              !:•
  TOLUENE                                                 2     !20?           73C-CO                18    47?:; 4!?::              «!::
  TRICHLO B QE!Hf>NE,l,l.l-                                                        73
       LORSETHA.HE, 1,1,2-
•      .OPSET-rLEN:                                                                                                           14
  VINYL CHLOR15E                                                                   76
  VINYLIDENE HLORIDE                                                                                                           2
                                                                                     •
  lYLENESlTCTA!.)                                                       4400                               21830

  SER1VOLAT1LES

 ACENA'HTHYLENE
 ANTHRACENE
  fifutn (
  Ciruw  / •1-
             t c^crrur
                r i Si!1!.
  B:s(-2-:y.:^.::ETH:jY)ETHt.s-
                 i
                                                               4200C   42400   10CPOC     T700     nooc    274?c    7«?c !:c:
  BlS!-2-CHLOR }£TH3lY)B£THAN:
  BlS!-2-CHLCR3ETKY:iETHEe                                     7500?   3400?   B300C      IBICO'   57oe    MIC?     45?:            !e::
  8IS(2-ETHYLHiIYL)PHTHALATE
  Bl'TYLHNZYLPHTHA.ATE
                                              •
  CUSENE                 '                                                                                   30C'
  B1-N-BJ?YLPHTHAL«.TE
  BI-N-O:TYL PMTHALATE
  B!CH:OP.OB£<!!N£.1.2-                                                           370
                                                                                  «#» V

  B!:HLCf:3BENZENE.1.4-                                                                                                      10?
  Bl£THrLPrtTHA;.ATE                                              85              350                                 54      17
  FLUORANTHENE                       *
  FLUORENE
  HFTUVI Durii^i       t         '
  BlTHYLPHiN2L,4-




«
  NAPTHALENE                                              10                      140                                         4-
          tiTHREME
                                                               J2000   13900    12000                       5800    450? 170?
           E
  TRi:«:r-:fli -••-,;:. :.'..-

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    SA«LE IOC         MB         CM
                                                                 MB      CP-B    C-27 C-27\SCIL C-29       Ml
                                    SArrJ 1            1          34     BE531  -BB541   b»?!3   BH2E    llll*
                                    COKTRA:TOR   JRB      JRB     JRB     CDR     CDR     CDR     CDR     CDR
                                    IATE SABMB B-10-E3 12-10-84 1-12-83 5-23-B! 5-29-85 5-2C-E5 5-22-85 5-23-E5
                                       UNITS     PPB      PPB     PFB     PPB     PPB     PPB     PPB     PPB
            H^SS

V:.«:::ES


lEKlEKI                                                220C      1490    2400                                    IOC.1
tfM*n?p OF fl «rTHASE                                   300                94
BF.:«FDRK                                                                                                                2J

e5-?:!E«E«1IIE                                             4J                78

CH.DF.:rOW.                                             72C                190              4iJ
B!Iu.LG$!ETn3NE,l,l-                                    760                1EC              9?J
81CH.C.S.2ETHAKE,1,2-                                  450C               2000             8500    38
Ji:K.DS2ETHY;.EKt,TRA»iM,2-                             300                 45

J10LO*J«F.:'E»ii,l,3-
ETHYUENIENE                                            2400               1700                                           2J
KETONES
HETHYi.4-,-2-PENTAN:NE                                                                     B3oc                   BE::   6J
BETHYLEKE CH.ORICE                                     5000                 3SO
STYREN-                                                                                                                  2J
7ETRA:H.ORIETH£liE                                                                                                       2J
TO.UENE                                               3 Cftft«
                                                        ^vV*
                                                                 91^**
                                                                 <Cw»v   3i:::         13CJ
TRlCH.DP.3iTHA*E,I,l,l-
                                              •
TFJCH12F.3ETHAKE, 1,1,2-                                                                                                 3J
TF.ICHLORBETHYLENE                                                               21
VINYL CHLORIDE                                             94
VINYultENE CH.DF.IBE
lYLEKESnOTAJ

SERIVOLATILES

A:EN;*HTHYIENE
BEN:C(i)PYF.ENE
B15(-2-CK:OR3ETHCJY)EfH«>ii                       .   140000      5700   seooc
BlS(-2-CH:OR3ETH3IY)«ETHAI(E
B15I-2-CHLDRDETHYDETHER                               58000       B900   27000               BJ
BJS:2-ETHYLHEIYL)PHTHS:ATE                                                  45                    210J
IL'TYIBEHYLPKTHAIATE                                                                                     •2»5J
CWiNE

 JI-M-O:TY: PHTHAIATE                                                                                    270J
                                                             t



-8IETHYi.PHTHAi.ATE '          •'                          210                   71
  FLUOP.J.KTHENE
  FlUORENE

 KA?THALEN:                                                210
 PHENAKTHP.ENE
 PHENOL                                                 5300               2000       -,

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            DO«N:t;:iEN' HELLS
                                       ID:   CP-2      CP-2 .CP-7 C-4A C-22                C-22
                                SAMPLE I      33              8B!T2            IB
                                CONTRACTOR    m        m        m         «»: m
                                DATE SAILED B-12-87 12-10-84 5-31-85 6-16-81 8-10-BJ 12-10-84
                                   WITS       m        m       PPB     PFB     PPB      PPB




 BENIEHE                                       24CC     2BOC               3770    1100       250


 CARBON BISULFIDE
 CHLCSSBEHENE                                     21
                                                164
 B1W:OR5ETHAHE,1,1-                              76                         780
 5ICHL3S5ETH«N£,1,2-                                                      1J50C
 DlCHlBR2ETHYLENE.TR«Ns-l.?-                                                200     200


                                               1100                        1770     2200
 KETONES

 KTHYLEME CK.OMSE                             12'J?C
 STYPiNE

 TOS.UEK                                      7i::r                       rsoc     19(00 1100
 TRICH-.OR2f:TH«£.l,l,l-
               . 1.1,2-

 VINYL
             -: CHiGPlEE
                                                                           72tf

' 5EUVOLAT1LES


 ANTHRACENE

                                             14000?     61000             152000   47000    410C
 B!S(-2-CHLORGETH:iYIBETHAIi£
 llS(-2-:»LCK£TH.YL)ETHEF                     71000    24000?       2?0   BS'OC    26000     7700
  BIS!2-ETHYIH£IYL)PKTHA:6!E

  CU-.ENE
  Bl-N-B'.1<ri:i.PHTHA:ATE
  BI-H-OCTYL PHTHALATE
                                                  27                 6J

  J1ETHYLPKTHALATE                                30                 2J               41
  FLU3RANTHENE
  FLUOP.ENE
  KTHYLPHiMi.,4-
  UAFTHALENE                                                                          34
  PHENANTHR£N£
                                              22000     21000              10100      38

                                                                     6J

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                  DOMSfAIIENT HELLS
                              SAHFLE LOC          Ml       C-ll     C-24     CP-3   CP-3      C-7      C-7
                              SA-SLE 1                      36       15       32                       37
                              CONTRACTOR            MC      JRE      JRB      JRB    JRB       NX: JRB
                              BATE SfiW'LEB       6-16-B1 8-12-B3 8-12-B3 8-12-8! 12-10-84   6-u-Bj B-I:-E:
                                 UNITS              PPB     PPE      PPB      PFB    PPB      PPB      PP6
            C:«::H:S
VOLATILE*

ACETONE
BEMENi 1                                               ??!"    ti'.    3*0    1700    f90C      6°0     !*';C
•s^pvpu nonirTHgtyr                                                             97

CAP.B3N PISL'LFJDE '
CH.D-SKN'iNE

CHLD'S'OpT1                                                             43     240                       2c:
DICKLOF:3£THftS£.!,l-                               20°:                7C     120              400      15C
BICKLOP.SETHASE.1,2-                                                    32     300      5E     7310     220C
D1CHLOR3ETHYLENE,TRAKE-1,2-                                             SB     230              120          B:
SICHLOROPR3eENE,l,3-
ETHYLBE«ENE                                                    4!C    1400     660             HBO     i?c:
KTONES

!tTHr*£N£~CH:OP::E"*"                                                 'l«C      93     9?:     4470     11?:
STYRENE
TETft:HLOF.:ETHENE
TO.UEfE                                                370      6?C    400    6200     K'.    ::::•: 4e:::
TF.ICK.OR2ETHAN-.1.1.1-

TRI:HLOF.:ETHY.ENE
VINYL CHLORIDE
viNYLiDEKE CHLORIDE
JYLENESITCTAJ                                          1 1A
                                                                                               4200

SE«IV3LAT1LES
                                              .




BENlCdlPYRENE
B!S!-2-CHLD*OETK:iY)ETHAN£^                                   3BCTO   1300C   1600C   2700     5450C   37CCC

BIS;-2-CH.OROETHYL)ETH£f                                       4900   17000   9000    t?0?     2:rc:   20:::
B1S!2-ETHYLHEJYL)PHTHALATE
BUTYLBENIYLPHTHALATE

D'.-N-BL'TYLPMTHALATE
DJ-H-OCTYL PHTHALATE
t!CHLOpISEN:EN£,l,2-                                                              4
81CKLOP.SB£N!ENE,1,4-                                                   190
BIETHYLPHTHALATE                                                         62      14                          21
FLUORANTHENE -            •
FLUORENE
«ETHYLPHENOL,4-
«APTHALE«E                                                               89       B
PHENANTHRENE
PHENOL                                                           62             260    790     13400    7JOC
F-YREME
TH:H:0»3PHEM3L.2,4,6-

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       Onsite Soils - Baseline Soil Sampling Results CDM 1987
                           Average Maximum                                  AvcrnKc Maximum                                   Average Maximum                     Average Maximum
                                     |(t>)                                      (liit/lti                                        ttntf

SEMIVOLATILES                                    VOLATILES                                         INORC.ANICS                                  PESTICIDES
Phenol                     10.9.18    130.000    Acetone                    6.914      43.000      Antimony                   7.5     11        Amrlorl248        9.788      11.750
bi.n(2<hloroethyl)clher    12.241     310,000    Melhylcnc Chloride         3.500      TO.OOO      Arsenic                    3.5     30        4.4 DDT           R7         170
2-Chloro phenol            19.550     36.000     Carbon DJRulfidc           220        1.300       Bnrium                     10.5    35        4.4'-DDD          569        2.400
1 ,3-Dichlorobcnzene       220        220        lrann-1 .2 Dichlomdhene    9          9           llrry Ilium                0.7     1.6       4,4 DDK           .1..-I95   .11.000
1 ,4 •Dichlorobcnzenc      1.116      2.200      Chloroform                 94         1.800       Cadmium                    13      50        Dicldrin          110        110
Benzyl Alcohol             2.994      29,000     1.2-Dirhlamclhane          25.816     320.000     Chromium                   21.6    251       F.ldrin           I HO       I HO
1 ,2-Dichlorobcnzcne       16.884     130,000    2-Bulannnc                 75         240         Cuhnll                     3.4     1.1       llcplnchlor       Ki         27
2 Methyl Phenol            498        4.300      1 ,1 ,1 -Trichloroclhane   1.603      6.400       Copper                     20      76.1
bis(2 ChloroisopropyDelher 460        460        1 ,2-Dichloj-opropnno      2          .1          Lend                       6.9     56
4-Mclhylphcnol             722        3.400      Trichlorocihcnc            6.840      .15.000     Mercury                    02      1.4
N-Nitroso-dipropytaminc    72.1       1.4W ~     Benzene                    7.657      50.000      Nkkrl                      4.2     19
laophorone                 9.276      1.10,000   2-Hoxaiwne                 61         76          Silver                     1       1
2,4-Dimcthylphenol         167        1,100      4-Mrlhyl-2-Pentananc       2,577      7.1.000     Vanadium                   15.2    94
Benzole Acid               6.209      19.000     1.1.2-Trichloroclhanc      2          2           7inr                       28.9    278
2-4 -Dichlorophcnol        7.408      46.000     Tclrachloroclhonc          25.595     270.000
1 .2.4-Trichlorobcnzcne    918        2.900      Toluene                    260.011    3.200.000
Naphthalene                7.437      5.1.000    Chlorobcnzcne              1.847      16.000
4-Chloroaniline            2.000      2.000      Ethylbcnzcnc               64.408     1.200.000
4 -Chloro-3-Mclhlylphenol 6.000       6,000      Slyrcne                    169.897    2.300,000
2-Mcthylnaphlhalcne        2.726      16.000     Totitl Xytonci             269.5114   5.400.000
2,4.6-Trichloro phenol     370        376 '      2 Chlnmdhyl Vinvl Ether    21.000     21 .000
2-Chloronaphthalene        3.185      12,000
Dimethyl Phthalate         687        1.200
Accnaphlhlcne              112        220
2.4 -Dichlorophcnol        7.408      46.000
4 -Nitro phenol            9.035      18.000
Dihcnzofuran               260        250
2.4 Dinitrololucne         2.800      2.800
Dicthyl Phthalalc          866        4,300
                           140        220                                              _
                                                                             •                                   -   --   -          -•   •"    '             _                     •   •••-   •   - . - . - -
N-Nilroso-Diphenylamlne 14.885        23.000
Pcnlachloro phenol         2.0.13     4,000
Phcnanlhrcne               677        1.400                                                 ,
Anlhracene                 48         65
Di-n-bulyl Phlhalale       1.734      6.800                                                               •
Flouranlhcne               369        600
Pyrcne                     267        460
Butyl benzyl phthalato     1,060      7.200
Bcnzo<a)Anthraecne         213        340
Chryscne                   169        360
his(2-clhylhexyl)phlhalatc 29.290     470.000
Di-n-ociyl Phthalatc       1.632      5.100
Bcnzo(h)nouranlhcnc        475        700
nenzodOflournnlhertc       475        700
nrn7o(n)pyrrnr             126        240

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                        Chestnut Branch Marsh Soils

                                     (DupofOP-ir
                             r.p-i      orifi <ip 2        RP-3     CP-4     OP-5     OP-6      GP-7   CP-8

yQL/VTlLES
Mclliylcno Chloride                     2J         7J      4»       5.1               6J               4J
Acclnnc                                            170                       170'
Bcnurnc                                                                      fij
Tolurnc                                                                      U
Elhylltcnzcnc                                                                H*

SFMfVQIATlLES
N Nilrnsodlphi nylaminc 5fiOB           440*       1200B   fison 840B        1800B    1400B     870*   1.100B
Di n-hulyl pthnlatc       1100*         15004      1800*   2:ioo*   2HOO»    2200*    1800*            IfifXI*
Hcxachlambonwnc                         120*
bb(2-Elhylhcxyl)phlhi«UlB               i:io«      2HOJ    IfiO*    ino*     3?ai     700,1     190B   660B
Pyrcno                                             ir.al
BCCE                                                                RfHX)    2100     1600             7400
1 -2 Dichlorobrnzcne                                                21 al
Nnphlhiilcnr                                                        2f,al
bi.i(2-Chloroc(hoxy)cthanc                                          770(»J   3.100J   2.100.J          9500J
Phcnanlhcnc                                                                                            2HO.I
Flournnlhcne                                                                                           :uo.i
Pyrcnc                                                                                                 4nal
Bcn7<X«)Bnthac»nc
BonzolbXInuronihcno                                                                                    :ioai
4-4-DDE                                            97      22                110                       140
4-4 DDD                                            IRQ                       OH                        610

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

•)   •'-




                                       Chestnut Branch Marsh
           COM   ioa r >   Soil Confirmatory Sample Locations
                              UPwl lunilM. Ctaumlrt County.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         N



                                      oucester
                                    County Utihtnj




                          LiPari
                         Landfill




                                                                   r            Security
                                                                                fence




                                                       -    Arto     '

                        Landfill access road^-"~-               " •       * "*


 • Soil Sampling Site
400            0

 Seal*


                                                               COM       1985
                                      Chestnut Branch Marsh Soil Sampling Sites
                                                     LiPari Landfill. Gloucester.County. New Jersey

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                <J&Zrt3tfS?IKS3IU!B>.-
                                                               r&&;r*'*™fr *-;*«i;«i
                                                                 «^|k
                                                                  Vf ///1   ^~^£lit////
                                                                                             sa: e


(_)sedliwnt stiiptlng site
• Surface water, sampling site
^ Sed<wnt qrab and boring sampling site
 1.000              0        1.000
   Scrle                       reel


                                          COM   I98S   Stream Grab and Lake Grab/Boring
                                                                         Sampling Sites
                                                         LiPnri Landfill. Glottceslof County. New Jersey

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                            SW27
                                                                                                            SE-27




SW SurUc* W«l*f
SC airwm Mlmwt Mid loM Cor*



 Scol»       (••I


                                                                                 COM     I9HS/I986
                              Lake and Stream Surface Waler, Stream Sediment and Lake Core Sampling Sites

                                                                          LiPari Landfill. Gloucester County. New Jersey

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   Chestnut liranch Marsh Soils

                                               nup
(Jig/kg)                    «P-9   OP-10       OP-10   C.P11   OP 12   GP-13   OP-14    CP-15

VOIATILES
Mrlliylrnr Chloride         4J     27*         37*     »*      B*      B*      19*      4*
Acetone                             IB*        49*     »*      4*      13      11*      2*
Chloroform                         9           12      4.1     :u      14      9        3J
1,2-Dichloroclhnnc                 !>!)        72
Tclrarhlomclhrnr                   .1.1
Toluene                            3.1         6                       A       2J
1.1-Dichlororthanc                 10          4J
Trtchoroethrno                     :ii     B                           4.1
lran»-l .2-nirnlorocthono                      7
Prnr.cnc                                                               IJ
Tola! Xyloncn                                                          3.1

pRftHVfH.ATll.ES
h ii(2-rhloroelhyl tether          60J         H:U                     3700
2 Mcthylnaphlhalenc                                                    34J     1SJ
N-Nitrosomdiphcnylainine 4 BO*
Di-n-hutylphthnlalc       1300*    10*         B9*     30*             93*     BO*      22*
bW2 Elhylhc»yl)phlh»l«te 1 30J     :ioo*       420*                    B60*    fi:ioa   120*
bU(2.Oilnrocthoxy)cthanc 6HJ                                           5100J
Naphthali-nc                       BJ          9J      2J      3J      47J     10J
Di n Orlyl Phlhnlnto               430*        130*    230*    560*    S30*    240*     120*
Isophorono                                     7J                      R.I
Bcnr.oic Acid                                                          130J
Arcnaphthnlcnc                                                         f.2.1   21J
Arena phthylcnc                                                        I90J    3RJ
Dibenzofurnn                                                           3IJ     lil
Plourrno                                                               200J    r.nj
Phcnanthrcnc                                                           1BOO    BfiO
Anthracene                                                             230J    nij
Flouranlhonc                                                           2400    750
pyrcnc                                                                 ir.oo   RRO
Ben7.o(a)Anlhraccnc                                                    870     :r2nj
Chryacnc                                                               1200    400
Benr.o(b)Flouranlhcnc                                                  1400    2/OJ
Bcn7o(k)Flournnthcnc                       •                           I7IU    MJ
Ben7.o(n)Pyrrnc                                                        HliO    2H(U
lileno(1.2.:i-ril)Pyrenc                                               f>r.o   200.1
Ben7.n(|{.h.i)Perylrnr                     .                           7RO     240J

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        Chestnut Branch Marsh Soils

(ITIK/VK)      CP-1   r.p-in   GP2    CP-3      GP-4    r.ps   OP-fl   GP-7    CP-B     CP-9    RP-10   GP-17   CPU    CP12   OP 13   C.P-14   CP-15

Amcnlc         3.1*   1.5*     48*    14.2      2.6*    109*   7.1*    15*     152»     1.2*    2.3*    2.4*    2.3*   24*    65.5*   3 3»
Barium         20     15       104    61        21      7:«    4H              114                      19      101    13     120     24
Beryllium
Cadmium        ,
Chromium       13*    11*      24 •   23*       fi.3«   19*    12*     fl.9»   66*      2.6*    3.4 •   6.8*    9.9*   18*    96*     21 •     67*
Copper                         20     12                18                     20                               48            74      10
Lead           14*    8.7*     •244   40        17*     96     48      43»     256      13.7»   15      23      6.7*   5.2»   424     80       2.5*
Mercury                                         0.14    0.3    02              05                                             05      0.13
Nickel                         87     64                                       16                                             16
Selenium                               .
Silver
Thallium
Vanadium       12     11       28     20        7.7     26     22      59      33                       81      12     27     39      11
Zinc           7.1*   r>6«     L74»   i :ir.«   55*     122*   !>•>•   6M»     1 r.4»    56*    54*     5!»»    06*    115*   325*    109*     68*

SE Sediment*

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                               Chestnut Branch Marsh Soils
      .                     CDM 19H5
                            wcnti DUP          WCB 11 WCB »2 WCB 12 WCB 13 WCB 13 WCB 14 WCB M WCB 15 WCB 15
(ug/kfi)                    (0)      (0)       (2)    (0)    (2)    (it)   (2)    (0)    (2)   (0)    (2)

VOLATILES
Mclhylcnc Chloride          24 H     19B       30*     1B»     42*     17*    6*      22»    11*      14*     3»
Arclonc                     330      820       18      37      87      1.10   44      180    87       200     24
Carbon Dinulfidc            3.1 *    33                        11      24     6J
4-Mcthyl-2-Pcnlanonc        19                         2.1     7J      6.1    6.1            13
Xylcne (Total)                                 40B     31*     600B    6»     6<JB    310             69
Benzene                                                2-I     9       100    U       94              97
Chlorobcnzene                                          22      4J
Elhylbcnzcnc                                                   110     10     20      160             110
1 ,1 -Dichloroethano                                           3.1

SEMJYOLAT1LES
bis(2-Elhy Ihcxy Dphlhalale 300J               170J    1 501   170J
1 ,2-Dichlornbcnzcno                  180*                     41MB    220*   130*    170*
Pyrcne                                         83J
Naphthalene                                            76*     230J           850
bis(2 Chloroclhyloxytethane                            2370T   5040T   710T           170J   531 OT           7930T
BCEE                                                                          3400*          5500


INORGANICS

Arsenic                     16       41        12      27                                             16
Cadmium                                                                               34     3                9
Chromium                    16       14                11                             31              18      22
Iron                        16000    32900     11100   20100   46RO    109000 4100    174000 2970     1R100   22000
Lead                        65       254       61      154     6.1     18     26      210    6.7      241     184
Mercury                              0.28              0.2                                            0.3     0.24
Nickel                               95        32      71              78     39      112    26       4!)     41!
Zinc                        65       55        52      107     16             10      256             :u      98

(0) Sample taken from 0-6 Inchon below mirfncc.
(2) Sample lakrn from 18-24 inches below mil-face.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                          I/eachate Liquid

                            SA A                          S&A                    llnrt
                            8/79                          10/79                  I!W2
VOIJVTILK                   1      2      3       4       :i       5      6


Chloromcthnnc
Pmmnmctlinnc
Vinyl Chloride              12     17     64              58
Chloroolhnnc                5.2                           2fi      .12
Mrthylcno Chloride          6      57     07      12      2H90     110    2H     4, .100
Acetone
Cnrt>on DiMilfido
1 ,1 -Dichlomrlhcnc                       04              44
1 .1 -Dichlororthano        36     150    97      6       129      6.2
1.2-Dichlomrlhcnc                  24                     2H
Chloroform
1.2-Dichlnmcthanc                                         1.33H    12.1          H.noo
2-Butnnnno
l.l.l-Trichlomclhene
CiiHxin Tolrf'hloridc
Vinyl Aretnlc
Bromodichloro methane
1,2-Dichtorapropane
ci»-l ,3-Dkhloropmpiinc
Trichloroelhcnc                           25              23       0.2
Dihtumochloro methane
1,1,2-Trichloroclrmne
Bcnr.cnc                    1456   2012   IfiOS   171     1.190    100    9.R    1,200
trann-1,3-Trichlorocthanc
Bromororm
4 Methyl 2 Pcntunone
2-llcxsnone
Tclrachlorclhcne
1,1.2.2,-Tclrachlorclhane
Toluene                     14400  2^000 15500    1530    12,700   622    51     9.200
Chlomnrnzcnc                4..1  "9.5   5.0      1.2    "2.H      0.7    0.1
Elhylhcnwnc                 706    1100  f>H4     82      5HO      62     .1.4   1.000
Slyrcne
Xylenc* (Totnl)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               Leach a to Liquid (ng/1)
                               TAC.A
                               Nov H7    •'
VO1ATILE                       7.1       7.2        7:i   Z4    25   76

Chlnmmclhnnc
Bmmomrthnne
Vinyl Chloride
ChlnrncQinnc                                              6J
Mrlhylrne Chloride             750       920R
Arrtnnc                        7400      H700       2R    150
Cnrbon Diaulfidc               5IJ                  15    16         42
1,1 -Dichlornrlhcnc
1,1-Dichlnmclhnnc              U
1,2-Dithlororlhcne             6
Chloroform
1.2-Pirhlorocthine             1200      1100
2-Bultmane                               540
1.1.1 -Trichloroethtne
Carbon Tclmchloridc
Vinyl Acetate
Bromodichloro methane
1,2-Dichloropropnne
tis-1,3-Dichloropropanc
Trichlornclhcnc                      _          _   .
bibromochioro methane
1.1,2-Trichloroclhanc
Benzene                        450J      1100       21    610   41   2J
trans-1 ..l-Triochlorocthanc
Bromoform
4-Mclhyl-2 Pcntannnc           11000     22000      22    14
2-Hcinnonc
TclTBchlororthcne
1,1.2,2,-Tctrnchlomclhanc
Toluene                        650       7600       20    6
rhlorobcn^cne                                             51
Ethylhrn7.cnc                  4J        IflO       2J    100   5
Slyrcnc
Xylrnr (Tnlal)                 1J        620        4.1   150   16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                              Lcachate Liquid (pg/l)
                             TAOA                                                   TACA                                                   TACA
                             JunBfi                                                          •IKK                                          KrpHfi
VOLATILE                     Zl       Z2         Z.I   Z4      Z5      Z6     Z7    "l\          7.2       Z.1     7.4      7.5     Zfi    Zl       7.2     Z.1   Z4     Z6   7,6

Chloro methane               4J       19
Bro mo methane
Vinyl Chloride
Chloroclhane                                           .12                                                          15.1    15.4J                                 24     6
Mclhylcne Chloride           500 B    4600B            IIOOB                        1267*       3.166*             741*                    300J     2200          200         7
Acetone                      15,000   17000            MI 00   24B     20 B         1 2028•     <)*KUi*    524*     2095*                  21000    140OO         1300        6J
Carbon Dinulfide                                                                                           6J               18                                    25     4J
1 ,1 -Dichlorocthene                                                                             1.17*                              U
1,1-Dichloroclhane                                                                               137*                       3.6J
1 ,2-Dichlorocthcne                   5200                                                       72*                                3.1J
Chloroform                                                                                                                                 2.1                    2
1 ,2 Dichloroethane                                                                 656         1525*      12.4J                    6.4                                       12
2-Butanone                                                                          822*        20H4J*     46.3     60.1                            3500*                2J   6.1
1 .1 .1 .Trichloroelhane                                                                                                                                                      BJ
Carbon Telrachloride                                                                                                                       100J                   300J
Vinyl Acetate
Bromodichloro methane
1,2-Dichloropropane
cis-1,3-Dkhloropropene
Trichlorocthcne                             __
Dibromochlro methane
1,1.2-Trichlorocthnne
Benzene                      200J     1000             .1900   80      190          ioaJ         1110*     3.2J     2789    273     192    200J     800           2500
lrani-1,3-Triochloroethane
Bromoform
4 Methyl 2 Pentanone         12000    18000            5700                         flfil?       24.119*            4.130                  20000                  .100
2-Hcxanone                            6.1                                                                                                                         24
Tclrachlnroethene
1.1,2.2,-Tclrachloroethane
Toluene                      m>u_     4ROO             8900    J?B                  434          7275*              4261                   400J     4600          3200
Chloro benzene                                         8        36 "                                       5.2J    "6M      67.3    41                                   17
Ethylbcngcnc                          6                900      1.10                2.8.1       194*       :in.5    624     71.H    19     50J      200           600
Styrcnc
Xylcncn (Total)              200      600              3800    240                  8.9          704*      118      1528    117     4.6J   60J      700           1400   4J

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             Leachatc Liquid

                          S&A                                                          S&A                       llnrt
                          9-Aiig-79                  22-Aug-79                         10CM79                    Ji)HI
SEMIVOLAT1LE              1         23               12              .1       4        3      5         6


Phenol                                                                                 2.400   5.900    490
bia(2~chloroelhyl)cthor     44.000 3H.OOO   76.000           1.10.000 210.000 R4.0OO   230.000 29.000   14.000   52.000
2-Chloro phenol
1,3-DichlorobcnzenC
1,4-Dichlotobcniono
Benzyl Alcohol
1,2-Dichlorobenzene
2 Methyl Phenol
bls(2-chloroiwpropyl)rlhcr
4-Methylphcnol                    ._.
N-Nilrono-Di-n-Propylamlnc
Hexachlorocthane
Nitrobenzene
liwphorone
2 Nilrophcnol
2.4-Dimethylphenol
Benzoic Acid
bin(2-chlon>clhoxy)clhanc
2-4-Dichloraphcnol
L2.4_iTrichlprobcnzenc .
Naphthalene
4-Chloroaniline                                              94      49                46      57       .10
Hcxachlorobutadlene
4 -Ch loro-3-Mcthy I phenol
2-Methylnaphthalcnc
Hexachlorocyclopentadienc
2.4,6-Trichlorophcnol
2,4,6-Trichlorophcnol
2-Chloronaphlhalcm;
2-NUroanallne
Dimethyl Phthalate
Aoenaphthylene
S-Nltraanaline

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         Leachate Liquid

                               TACA                                      TAOA                                                 TAC.A
SEMTVOLATILE                   June 1986                                 August 1986                                          fw-p-Hfi
                               Zl      Z2      Z3   Z4     75     Z6     7.1     7.2          7.1    74     7.5     Z6        71         7.2     Z3   Z4     Z5    76


Phenol                                                                   lfi.1l J   9468*            314*           12.1      1500       8600
bis(2-chlorocthyl)ethcr        4400   3200          4500   3400   4000   1188.1*    27852*    132*   11471* 9847*   9:ir»4»   6000       12000        1ROO   490   300
2-Chlorophcnol
1,3-Dichlorobcnzcne
1,4-Dichlorobcnzcnc
Benzyl Alcohol                                                                                                                           120J
1,2-Dichlorobentene                                                                           42*    2.9J           3.5J                                           1BJ
2 Methyl Phenol
bin(2-chloroi(iopropyl)elhcr
       .          _            -360
N-Nitroso-Di-n-Propylaminc
Heiarhloroclhanc
Nitrobenzene
Inophorone                            160J                                                           13RJ                     HOJ        HO           1H     4J
2-Nitrophenol
2,4-Dimethylphenol
Benzole Acid
biR<2<hloroelhoxy)ethine   3390J       14HOJ                             2BOOOJ     3AHOO.I                         77.1
2-4-Dichlorophenol
1 .2,4-Trichlorobcnicne                             _                                                                                                 _
                                                                                                                                                                   _
Naphthalene                            340          SP'»                                                                                              150          18J
4-Chloroaniline
HcMachlorobuladlene
4 a.loro-3 Mcthlylphenol
2-Methylnapthalene
HcxachlorDcyclopentadicne
2.4 ,6-Trichloro phenol
2.4,5-Trichlorophcnol
2-Chloroncphtnalcne
2:Nitroanaline
Dimethyl Phthalalc
Accnaphlhylrnc
3-Nilronnalinc

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          Lcachate Liquid
                          TAC5A
                          November 1987
SEM1VOLATILE              7.1     7.2       Z.I     Z4       Z5     Z6

Phenol                       lr.00    2600    MO    29J             4J
bis(2<hloroclhyl)clhcr       H4<lO    5MM) 2200     6:iOO    SlOO   66
2-CMorophcnol
1 ,:i-l)ichlomhrnzcnc
1.4 - Dichlorobcnzenc
Benzyl Alcohol               :U                     6.1
1.2-Dichlorobcnzcne                                 I HO.)          3J
2 Mel hyI Phenol             3.')   . flfl
bis(2-C'hloroii%opmpyl)clhcr
4-Mcthylphcnol               130       370    260   6.1
N-Nilroso-Di-n-P^opyliimine
Hcxnchlnroclhanc
Nitmbcnzcnc
Inophorone                   190       ISO          19J      6J
2Nilrophcnol
2.4 Ditnrthvlphcnol                                 8J
BrnroicAcid                  2000      11000 7RO
bls(2-chloroclhoxy)clhane
2-4-Dichlorophcnol
1.2,4-Trichlnrnbenzcnc
Nnphthnlcnc                        * 12.1     50J   4200     26
4-('hloronniline                            .       670      7J
Hrxachlorohutadlcne
4 Chloro 3 Mclhylphcnol
2-Mcthylnaphthalcnc                                 420J
Hrxachlnrocyclopcntadlene
2,4.6-Trichlorophcnol
2,4,R-Trichlorophenol
2-Chloronaphlhalcnc
2-NitrDannlinc                           _     _
Dimclhyi Phlhnlalc
Arcnnphthylcnc
3-Nitmnnnlinc

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                    T ^achatc Liquid
                                                                          (MK/U

                                    S&A                                           -s & A                         TACA
                                    n/79               22AiiR-79                  10/10/7!)                      Juno 1986
SEMIVOLAT1LE                        1      2   3       1       2    3     4       .1        S       «            Zl       7.2       Z.I   Z4   ZS   Z6

Aconiiphlhcnc
2.4-Dinilrophcnol               *
4-Nilrophcnol
DibcniofurBn
2.4-Dinilrololucne
2,6-Dinilrololucnc
Diclhylphlhlnle                                    .                              28       95
4 -Chlorophcny I -phenylclhcr
Flourcne
4 Nitroanillne                                                            -                                       _
4.6-GFnilro-2-Mclhy]phcno1
N-Nilroaodiphcnylamine
4-Bromopbcnyl-phcnylclher
Hcxachlorobcnzrne
Pcnlachlorophcnol
FTtenanlhrcnc
Anthracene
Din butyl phlhalaU                                     9S      10                          08       08
Flouranlhene                                                                               0.7      06
Pyrene                                                                                 .   OH       0.6      _    _             _
BulylbcniylphthaUle
3.3'-Dichlorobcniene
Bcnio(a)Anthr>ccne
biM2 EthylhcxyDphthalile                                       97                 II       106      14
Chrydcne
Di-n-odyl PhlhaUle                                                                         6
Bcnzo(b)F1ouranlhcne
Bcn7.o(k)Flouranlhcne
BcnKXaJPyrcne
Indcno(lL2,3<d)Pyjene                                                                            ... . . .
Dibcnr.o(a.h)Anthraccnc
Bonr.o(K,h.i)Perylcne

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    Lcachate Liquid

                             TAOA
        •                    AiiRBfi                             '               Novfl7
    '                        7.1       Z2   Z3      Z4               7.S   Zfi   7.1      Z2             73      Z4        ZS   Zfi


Accncphlhene
2.4-Dinitrophenol
4 Nitrophcnnl
Dibeniofurnn
2.4-Dinilrololuene
2,6-Dinilrololocno
DielhylphlhiilnU
4-Chlorophcnyl-phcnylcthcr
Flourcne
4-Nilronniline                              ._   . . . . . .                                   ...                         _
4,6 Dinilro 2 Mrthylphcnol
N-Nilrmodiphcnylomine
4-Bromophcnyl-phrnylclher
Hex achtorobcnzc ne
Pcnlachloro phenol
Phcnanlhrenc
Anlheacne
Di-n-butyl pthilile                                      fiO.1                                           8J
Flouranlhcnc
Pyrcnc                          .._                                                                                   _.
BulylbcnzylphUlntc
3,3'-Dichlorobcnzcnc
Bcn7o<B)Anlhr»ccnc
bis(2 EthylhcxyDphlhdate                                                                  320J           1.10J
Chrysene
Di n-ortyl PhlhiUU
Benzo(b)Flouranlhcne
Benio(k)Flouranthcnc
BentoCalPynnc
lndeno(l .2.3-cd)Pyrenc                __                    _                            _          .
Dibento<«,h)Anthr(iccnc
B«nio(K.h,i)Pcrylcnc

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                           Lcachnte Liquid

             SAA           S AA                        SAA
             0 AUK 19711   i2Auffl»7n                  100(179
             1      2      I       2                   3       5

Arncnlc                    H.J    20.1   19     27
Bnrium
Beryllium                         2J
Cndmium                           K:i    9      6J
Chromium                   40J    CIO    30J    SOJ    10           20
Copper                     110    CIO    110    95     120    .10
Lend                              r,4n   ionJ   200    60     HO    :mo
Mrmiry
Nickel                     30     40.1   20J
Sclcnlutn_
Silver
Thnllium
Vnnndium
Zinc                       96     400    257    I HO   40           4H

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                           Leachate'Cun
                                                                                    Liquid

            TAGA                                                 TAGA                                                 TAC.A
            Jun-A6                                               AiiR-86                                              Sop w;
            Zl       Z2      Z.1   Z4        Z5          7.6     Zl        Z2       Z.1   7.4      Z5       7.6       Zl       Z2     7.3   7.4    Z5     Z6


Arsenic     106      228           67        29                  26        I0..1                   14*                100      90*          14     60
Beryllium   .102     30J •         13J       15J         10J     1.1       4              5        :i2      27        97       50
Cadmium     159J     91J           157J      21 OJ       292-1   16        29             77       42.1     .164
Chromium    1670J    71 OJ         7KKJ                                                                               1.150    700                 680    90
Copper      1920J    «»IJ          .'1(155   806.1       H70J    77.       1.18*          191*     1205*    1167*     1130     580
Lead        12000    1890          1140      976         .182    456       99H            705      58H!)    2.150     9040     2460         270    3920   218
Mercury     1.5      0.5           0.7       0..1        0.4                                                          1.2*
Nickel      257J     6BJ           477J              •                     45                      1250     99        400      200                 1110
Selenium
Silver                                                           438J
Vnnndhim    2070     1110          141J                          114       246            12.1     H9T>     .180      1370     1180         310    1490   .110
Zinc        G690J    1160          1050-1    82RI        755.1   .126      lifift         :i:,o*   ;i!MO*   I.'IOO*   4MOO     2570         1070   4010   240

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                    Lcachate Liquid (pg/l)
            TAGA
            Nnvrmhrr 1 9H7
            Zl     7.2       Z3       Z4       Z5       Zfi

Arsenic
Barium
Beryllium   23*     .19        1.1    15       .17      17
Cadmium     «2*     :i64»      H»     1.115*   412*     4.12*
Chromium    1060*   7.'IO»     5.1*   110*     22S«     126»
Copper      U2.1*   fi!i5»     HH*    225*     :IHO»    19.1*
Lend        6270    .1970      .1HH   1510     2.lfiO   1410
Mercury     .10*    1.7'       1.5*   OH'      !.«•     1.7*
Nickel      291     125      -.11     4fl      104      74
Selenium
Silver
Thnllium
Vnnndium    947*    1610*    fifl*    1970*    3660*    2716*
Zinc        4900*   2160*    am*      10R5»    2filO*   10SO*

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  Chestnut Branch Stream
                             S & A 9/79     Radian I !>H2      COM I9H5
                             Wnlcr (MK/I)
VOLATILE                     I        2                        SWI    SWfi   8W.1   SW4   SE1     SE5    SE.1   SE4

Chloro methane
Bromo methane
Vinyl Chloride
Chloroclhane
Mclhylcnc Chloride                                             5.1           2*     2«    620B           490B
Acetone                                                                      21*    10*   72R            Hill   120
Carbon nUniriiVj
1,1 •Dichloroclhcnc
1,1 -Dichloroclhane
1,2-Dithlorocthcnc
Chloroform
1,2-Dichlorocthane
2-Butanone                                                                   17*    19*                  10
1.1.1 -Trichloroclhane                                                                            1.3J
Carbon Tclrnchlorido
Vinyl Acetate
Bromodichloro methane
1,2-Dichloropropane
cia-1,3-Dichloropropane
Trichlorocthcne              0.8
Dibromochlro methane
1.1.2-Trichloroclhanc
Benzene                                                                      5J           8fi.J          9.7B
tran«-l,3-Triochlorocthane
Bromofonn
4 Mcthyl-2-Penlanone
2-Hexanone
Tctrachlroelhene
1.1,2.2,-Terirachlroethane
Toluene                                                        5.1
Chlorobeniene
Ethylbenzene
Styrenc
Xylenct (Total)

SW Surface Water
SE Sediment

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             Chestnut Branch Stream
                             EPA/ERT :i/HH
                             Rl              R2              R.1              R4          S9         RIO        Rll
VOLATILE*                    SW     RE       RW      SE      RW    SE         RW   RE     RW   SE    RW    RE   RW    RE



Chloromcthanc                                                                                  fiJ
Bromomclhnne
Vinyl Chloride
Chloroclhnnc
Mcthylcne Chloride           12                      15B     1.1   15              4RB                          12    16
Acetone
Carbon Bisulfide
1.1 Dichloroclhcne
1 ,1 -Dichloroclhane
  .             -
2-Bulanone
1 .1 .1 -Triochloroethine
Carbon Tctrachloridc
Vinyl Acetate
Bromodichloro methane
1 ,2-Dichloropropane
cls-1 ,3-Dichloropropane
Trichloroethene
Bromochloromclhane
                       __________ _______ ____ ___________
Benzene
trans-l.S-Trichloroelhane
Bromororm
4-Methyl-2-Pcntanone
2-llexanone
Tctrachloroethene
1 ,1 ,2.2,-Tctrachlorocthane
Toluene                      2J                                    30B             37 B
ChloroberiMiM
EthylbenMM         _                                  160J
Slyrcne                ~ '''    "                   .....                ~"
Xylencs (Total)                                      4RJ

SW Rurfare water |1K/I
SE Sediments

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            Chestnut Branch Stream
                               S & A !V7!»    Hurt 19NI     Rn nnlOH2   CDM I !»H.1
                               Surface
SEMIVOLATILE                   I        2     SW1     SW2   SW    SE    SW|      SW5   SW3   SW4   SRI   SEA   SE.1   SE4

Phenol                                        2HO     2HO   fiH
bis(2-ch1orocthyl)clhcr                 ROO                                            20J
2-Chlorophcnol
1 ,3-Dichlorobcnicnc
1 ,4-Dichlorobcnzcnc
Benzyl Alcohol
1 ,2-Dichlorobcnzcne
2 Mclhyl Phenol
bis(2-Chloroiiiopropyl)cthcr      ___
4-Mclfiylphcnol

llcxochlorocthnnc
Nilro benzene
Isophorone
2-Nitro phenol
2.4-Dimdhylphcnol                                                                      20J
Benzole Acid                                                                                                   122J   4601
bin(2-Chloroelhoxy)cihiinc                                                             14    17
2-4-Dichlorophenol
f,2.4~-TrichlroDenzcnc
Naphthalene                                                                                                           21J
4-Choroaniline
Hcxachlorobutalcne
4 Chloro-3-Mcthlylphcnol
2-Mcthylnapthalcnc                                                                                                    14J
llcxachlorocyclopcnUdiene
2,4,6-Trichloro phenol
2.4,6-Trichloro phenol
2-ChloronapthaJcne
2-Nitronanallne
Dimethyl Phlhalate
Arenaphthylene
3 Nitroanaline

SW Surface Water UK"
SK Srdimrnl

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                Chestnut Branch Stream
             EPA/ERT .VHH
             SI                      82               8.1                   84             89          810      SI I
SEMIVOLATILE SW     SE               SW       SE      SW        SE          SW     SB      RW    SE    SW    SE SW   SE
       «                                                        _•                                           _
Phenol
bM2«hloroelhyl)cther                3J       41      4J  47  13J               HJ
2-Chloro phenol
1 ,3-Dirhlorobcnxcne
1,4-Dichlorobrnzcnr
Benzyl Alcohol
1.2-Dichlorobcnicne
2 Methyl Phenol
bls(2 ChloroinopropyDclhcr
4 Mrthjrlphcnol ___________________________________.....___........___________________............._
N-Nilroso-bi-n-PropyTiniinc
Hcxachloroethanc
Nitrobenzene
laophorone
2-Nitro phenol
2.4-Dimdhylphcnol
Benzole Acid
bia(2-Chk)roclho»y)eth«nc                                                                  10J
2-4-Dichlorophcnol
  »      !      r     __ __ _        _    _   _ _     _     _   _   _   -    -
Niphlhnlc'ne                                  .....                              - • •--         12J
4-Chloroiniline
Hcxnchlorobuladiene
4 Chloro-3 Mclhlylphenol
2-Mclhylnaphthalcne
llcxachlorocycloprntadirne
2,4,6-Trirhlorophcnol
2,4.5-Trichlorophcnol
2 Chloronaphlhnlcne
2_-Nilronan«|ine__      ___          __        _
Dimethyl Phlhalatc         .......   "
Acenaphlhylene
.1 Nltroanaline


SW Surface Wain- MR/1
SE Sediment* MK^K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           Chestnut Branch Stream
             •               S&A9/79                       Rmtinn'1982    COM 1985
                             Water <HR/1)   Sediment
SEMIVOLATILE                 1        2     1        2     SW     SE      SW1   SW5   SW3   SW4   SE1    SE5    SE3    SE4

Accnapthene                                                                           20J                              2ar
2.4-Dinitrophenol
4 Nllrophcnol
Dibenzofuran
2.4-Dinitrotoluene
2,6-Dinitrotoluene
Diclhylphthalatc
4-Chlorophcnyl-phenylclhcr
Flourcne                                                                                                               47J

4.6-Dinilro-2 Mcthylphenol
N-NUrosodiphenylamine
4-Bromophenyl-phrnylclhcr
Hcxachloro benzene
Pentarhlorophcnol
Phenanlhrcnc                                66      10                                            31 J   100J   42J    B90J
Anthracene                     fifi                 10                                                                 1HOJ
Di-n-bulyl .nMhiilale      0.6        0.5   170     IfiO          500
Flouranlhcne                                61      8                                             67 J          41 J
Pvrene                                      48                                                           19OJ          660J
Butylbenzylphthalate
3.3'-Dich)orobenzcnc
Benzo(a)Anthracenc
bis(2-Elhylhcxyl)phthalate 0.5        0.3                  17     3.000                                                56.000B
Chryscne                                    R5                                                                         B60J
Di-n-octyl Fhthalale                                              1.000                           9fiJ   1ROJ   16RJ
Benzo(b)F1ouranlhcne                                                                                                   11.000
Benzodi )Flouranlhcnc                                                                                                  11.000
Bcnzo(a)PyTene                              B7
                                                                                                                       340J
Dibenzo(a,h)Anlhracene
Bcnzo g,h.i)Perylen«                                                                                                   890J

SW Surface Water (ig/1
SE Sedimenli (i«/Vg

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        Chestnut Branch Stream
                           ERT/EPA Mnrrh 1988
                           SI      •       S2           S3           S4             S9          SIO             Sll
SEMTVOLATILE               SW     SE       SW           SW   SE      SW      SE     SW    SE    SW    SE        SW     SE


Acenapthene                                                                               .19
2.4-Dinilrophcnol
2.4-Nitrophcnol
DihcnzoCuran
2.4-DinUrotoluene
2.6-Dinitrololucnc
Dicthylphlhalalc                                             90
4-Chlorophcnyl-phcnylcthcr
Flourene                                                     .12                    4H
4 Nilroanilino
4.6 Dinitro 2 Mcthylphcnol
N-Nilrosodiphonylomino
4 -Bromophcnyl-phcny Iclhcr
HcxachlorobcnKcnc
Pcnlachlorophcnol
Phenanthrcnc                      24            79           250             7.1          410         190              1RO
Anthrncene                                                   40                           65          .12              61
Din butyl phthalnle                                                                                   HH
Flouranthcnc                      29             150         4.10            120          700         :mo              3.10
Pyrcne                            27            ,100_        270             HR           450         ._240_           210
Bulylbeniylphlhalale                             5.1                                                   8HO
3,3'-Dichlorobcnzcnc
Bcnio(a)Anthraccne                                                                        210          120             100
biii(2-Ethylhcxy1)phth>late 94B   100           1RO          2.10    21 OB   250    HOB   1RO          1000     84 B   95
Chryscne                                        76           190 '                  60    250          K;O             120
Di-n-oclyl Ph thai ale            i son         290B         200B            640B         MOB          1 <)OB          170B
Bcnto(b)nauranthcne                             100                          86           320                          89
BeniofliMloaranthene                                         140                          79
BcnioUIPyrene                                   56           i:m             49           190          110
lndcnodA»^)Pyrer>c                              .16          85                           50           79              61
bihcnta(afh)AnthrBcrnc .
Bcnio(K,h,l)Pcrylcne                            41           100             21           70

SW Surface Water
SE Sediments

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             Chestnut Branch Stream
            S & A 3/7S                              F«i! C. Kiiri   tinman i ;in£           COM loss
            Wntcr ((UK/|)      Sediment (mK/VK )   19HI
            1        2         1       2            SW              SW       -SE            SWI    SW5   SW.1   SW4    SE1   SK5     SE3    SE4

Arsenic                        1.5     0.7
Bnrium                                              R4                        I.OOfl    .
Beryllium                                                                     12                                             3       44     11
Cadmium                   *   O.ft      0.5         0.3                                                                              2      2.5
Chromium             33        4.7      30                                   3.300                       5.B'   4.3*   e     H       14     84
Copper      14       13       l.fl      1.7         5.0                      .'l.fiOO                           28     .14   5.3     119
Lend                           11       11          2.5                                     17»          1.1    16     II    I2'J«   34»    820
Mercury                        0.2      0.3                                                                                          0.15   1.4
Nickel                                  1J          26                        1.400         14           1.1    12                   11
Selenium                                            10
Silver                                              1(1                                                         6»
Thulium                                 1.8                                                 2.3          56     4.4    2.4   3
Vonndium                                                                     2.700          55*          21     15*    10    1ft     13     76
Zinc        6J                 8        12          22                        in.ooo                                                 436

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                            Chestnut Branch Stream
                 ERT/EPAMnrch 19HH
                 SI             S2          S3             S4             S9            S10          Sll
                 SW     SE      SW   SE     SW      SE     SW     SE      SW     SE     SW    SE     SW     SE


Arsenic                              .BB            .KB           .74 B          1.14         .41B
Bnrium
Beryllium                            .088           .IB           .168           .MB          .I2B          .088
Cadmium
Chromium         881    .9B          4.6    952.    7.3    811    5.3     1470   4.3          44     R7B    2.3
Copper           23     2.7B         4.1    II B    S.I     IIB   56      7.4B   53           60     6 IB   2.0
Lead             28     4            25     2.:iB   20     2.2B   IH      14     96           62     7.1    9.3
Mercury
Nickel           61     .KB          1.2B           1 BB   7.4B   2.1 B   B.4B   29B          3.2B          1 .SB
Selenium        J.88.   OHB                 .BB
Silver
Thalium
Vanndium
Zinc             61     7.1          17     20      22     22     22      21     28           nr>    13     12

SW Surface water PK/I
SE Sediment!! nig/kg

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 Rabbit Run SW & SE

                             S&AOT9      Hart 1981    Rndinn 1982   COM 1985
                             Wnlor       Wnlor        Wntrr
VOLATILE                     1     2                                SW6    SEfi   SW7   SE7   SW8   RE8

Chloromclhnne
Brnmomrlhnnc
Vinyl Chloride
Chlomclhanc                        2.0
Mclhylrnc Chloride           1.7   9.H                                     S6»    6J          SJ
Acetone                                                             .14*   1406         22    II*   r>H*
Carbon Disuinde
i.l-Dlchtorocthone
l.l-Dlchloroclh»nc                 8S                 1.9
l.ZJJIchlprocthrnc
Chloroform
1.2 Chloroclhan*
2-Bulanone                                                                        19*         38*
1,1,1 -Trichloroelh«r>e                                                    2.9J                     2IJ
Cirbon Telrachlonde
Vinyl Acetate
Bromodichlorometrmne
1,2-Dichloropropane
cis-1,3-Dkhloropropane
Trichorocthcne
Eioromocfiloromclhane
1,1,2-Trichloroclhanc
Benzene                                               .1.1                 1.4*                     2.6*
trnna-1,3-Triehlorocthiinc
Bromororm
4 Methyl-2-Pentanoi>e
2-Hcxanone
Tcrtrachlrocthene
1,1,2.2,-Tctrachlorocthine
Toluene                            644                12                                            35*
v,t>kii\>i>entene
Elhylbcnzcnc                       26
Stymie                                                                            5J
Xylenct (Total)

SW Surface Water UK/I
SK Sediment

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             Rabbit Run
                              SAART79            Hart        Rndnin       COM 19H5
                                                 19H1        l!IH2
SEMIVOI.ATILE                                    Wnlor       Wnlrr        SWfi   SEB   SW7   SE7   SWfl   SEH


Phenol                                 2HO       72
bis(2<blon>ethyl)clhcr       * 2.100   I.'IOOO   4.KOO       103                       R7                 2.r.al
2-Chlorophrnol
1 ,.1-Dichlortihrnzcne
1,4-Dichlomboiucnc
Benzyl Alonhol
1.2-DichloroDcnicne
2 Mclhyl Phenol
hi*(2-chloroi!W>propyl)rthcr
4-Mclhylphcnol                                                                                            3fiO»
N-Niiroso-bi-n-Pmpylnmine
Hcxachlornclhanc
Nitrobenzene
Isophoron*
2-Nilro phenol
2.4-Dimdhylphcnol
Benzole Acid                                                                                               200»
bi*(2 Chlorocthoxy)cthiinc                                   140                       I9J         16J    1H.I
2-4 -Dichlornphenol
1,2.4-Trlchlorobcnzcnc
Nnphthiicno                     "" .   19         ( j-                           280
4-Chloroantline
Hcxnchlorohutadicne
4 <hloro-3-Mclhylphcnol
2-Mcthylnaphlhalcnc
Hcxachloroeyclopcnladicnc
2,4.6-Trichloro phenol
2,4,6-Trichloro phenol
2-Chloronnphthalcnc
2-Nitrpanalinc                           . _.            _
Dimethyl Phlhnlnlc
Accnnphlhylenc
3-Nilmannlinc

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        Rabbit Run

                            SAAB/79         Hart I9HI   Radian I9H2   COM
                            Water (jig/1)               Water
                            1         2                               SW6   SE6      SW7   SET   SW8   SES


Aeenaphthene
2.4-Dlnltrophcnol
2.4-Nitro phenol
Dibenzofuran
2.4-Dinilrotoluene
2,6-DinlltD toluene
Dlcthylphlhalalc           l.«        1.0                                   77B                        89J
4-Chlorophenyl-phcnylclher
Flourene                                                                    38J
4 NUro«nlllne
4.6 Dinitro-2-Methylphenol     ""
N •NUroaodi phcnyl ami ne                                                                              20»
4-Bromophcnyl-phcnylcther
Hcxachlorobcnxcnc
Pcntadilorophcnol
Phenanthrcne                                                                260J
Anthracene                                                                  f,8J
Di-n-bulyl phthalate       0.6        1.6                                   11<U     10*               65»
Flouranthcnc                                                                490
Pyrenje                                                                     620
Bulylbentylphlhalale
3,3'-Dichlorobeniene
Bento(a)Anthracene                                                          160J
bi»(2-Ethylhciyl)phlhalale 3.6        1.2                                   2.900B                     3.700*
Chryacna                                                                    2.10.1
Di-n-octyl PhthalaU
Benso(b)P1ouranlhen«
BentoOOFkmranlhene
Bcnzo(a)Pyrene                                                              267.1                      4.600
Indcnp<l ,2.3-cd)Pyrene
Dihcnxofa,fi)Ant1)raccne

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   Rabbit Run

                        S4AJV79        Hartl9fll   Radian I9H2   CDM198S
                        Water (MR/I)   Water       Water
                        1        2                               SW6   SF6    SW7    SE7    SW8   SER

Arnonic                 10J
Beryllium                              10                        2            4.2    .1.6
Cadmium                 ftj      4J    Ofi                       6.7                 2
Chromium                         110   1.1                       14    12     6.H    :i.9         42
Copper                  2.1      2.1   7                         25    6.5    65            «.7   1.5
Lead                                   .1                        H2J   .1.U   12.)   2.4    2HJ   .18
Mercury                                                                              0.1          0.12
Nickel                           20J   40          4             16
Selenium                               9
Silver                                 12
Thallium
Vanadium                               19                        11    7.3    11     1.7    7.4   .1.0
Zinc                    22       10J   11.1                      90    .16    4!>    10     .17   :i:i
SW Surface Water pg/l
SE Sediment*

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        Alcyon Lake Surface Water
                                                                                        (MR/I)

                                         S &A             Rndinn 1982       COM l!>85                       TAGA I9H6/H7                     EPA/ERT 3/HH
                                      Surface Water
VOLATILE                          1    2        .1    4                      SWIO                SWl   f?W2       SW.1     SW4     IA   LR       L8     L9

Chloromcthnne                                                                                                     2100     1000
Bromomclhono                  ^
Vinyl Chloride
Chlororlhanc
Mclhylcnc Chloride                                                                                                                               IflB   68
Acetone                                                                                          .11              .1008    .1008
Carbon Bisulfide                                                                                       tfi*       1HOOO     4000
1,1-Dichlorocthcnc
1,1-Dichlorocthanc
l,2;Dicblqrpcthcnc
Chloroform
1,2-Dichloroclhane
2-Butanone
1,1.1 -Trichloroethane
Carbon Telrachlorido
Vinyl Acetate
Bromodidiloro methane
1,2-Dichloropropane
cis-1.3-Dkhloropropane
IdcbJoioclheoe
Dibromochtoromethaite
1.1.2-Trichloroclhnnc
Benzene                                                                                          20                        100J
trana-1,3-Trichloroclhane
Bromoform                                                                                        64*   48         11000    5900
4 Mcihyl-2-Pentanone
2-llcxanone
Tclrachlrocthcne
1,1,2,2,-TcrtrBchloroethane
Toluene                                        0.9                                               BOO   JOO                 900     1J            38
Chtorobenzene                                                                                    6     :U
Ethylbcnzcnc
Styrcne
Xylcne (Total)                                                                                   .10   .1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   Alcyon Lake Surface Water

                                   S&A1979              HnrtlORl     Rndinn I!)H2       CDM l!W5         TAGA/F:RT19H(i/H7                 EI'A/BRT 3/HH
                                  Surfnre Water
SEMIVOLATILE               1       2       .1     4                                      SWIO      SW1   SW2      SW3        SW4    1.5    U      L7       |J»

Phenol                                                                   10                        .ai
bis(2-chlorocthyl)cthcr     270    330     240    7RO    280             70                11      I'M   14       930J       6.4J   19.1                   14J
2-Chloro phenol
1,3-Dichlorobcntcne
1,4-Dichlorobcnzcnc
Benzyl Alcohol
1.2-Dichlon>bomcne
2 Methyl Phenol
bis(2-Chk>rolaopropyl)elhcr
4 -Mcthylphcnol
N-Nilroso-TTi-n-Propylamlne
Hcxachloroclhnne
Nitrobenzene
Imphorone
2-Nilro phenol
2.4-Dimcthylphcnol
Bcniok Acid
bis(2-chloroclhoxy)ethine                                                 73
2-4-Dichtorophenol
1,2.4-Trichlrobenicnc
Naphthalene
4-Chloroanilinp
Hcxachlorobuladiene
4 Chloro 3 Mclhlylphenol
2-Mcthylnaplhalcne
Ilcxachlorocyclopentadiene
2.4.6-Trichloro phenol
2.4,6-Trichlorophcnol
2-Chloronaphthalcnc
2-Nitroanalinc
Dimethyl Phlhalate
Accnaphthylenc
3-Nilrnnnalihc

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        Alcyon Lake Surface Water

                             RAM 979                             HART   RnUinn. TAC.A/F.PA                         EPA/ERT
                     •       1  2    3           4               I9H1   1UH     SWI      SW2         SW.l    SW4    1.5    L5       U   1.7   LB   L»
SEMWOLATILE


Acenaplhene
2.4-Dinllrophcnol
4-Nitrophenol
Dibentofumn
2,4-Dinitrotolucne
2,6-Dinitrololucnc
DicthylphlhlMe
4-Chlorophcnyt-phenylcthiT
Flourcne
4 Nitro«nlllne
4.6 Dinilro 2-Mcthylphcnol                   "               "           '""           "   ~
N-Nitroaodiphcnytiminc
4-Bromophcnyl-phcnytcthcr
Hcxitchloro benzene
Pentachlorophcnol
Pheninthrcnc
Anthracene
Din-butyl phlhaltte        OB          1.0       1.4   1.1              60                     O.M
Flouranlhenc
Pjrrene                                                                            _
                                                                                                                                7
ButylbenzylphthiUlc                                    "           ~"          "       "               """
3.3'-Dichlorobentcne
Benzo(B)Anlhnccne
bis(2-Elhylhexyl)phthalate   0.5       0.6       1.6   R.5              170                                        120B   130B
Chryeene
Di-n-ortyl phthalate
Bento(b)Flouranthene
Bento(k)Flourmnlhene
BcnztXaiPyren*
Indcnod ,2.3<«l)Pyrein
Dibcnzo<*.h (Anthracene            .
Bcni:o(K.h,l)Pcrylcne                                                                                                                              ^^^

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       Alcyon Lake Surface Water

            S & A 1979               llnrt   Rnilinn             COM I!)H5 TAOA/ERT                   EPA/ERT .'IMS
                                     I!)H|    I!»H2                        Rfi/87
            1       2                                              SW10    8W1    SW2   SW3    SW4    iJi     L6      L7   La

Arsenic                       3J                                          7.6J
Barium                               78
Beryllium                                                          1.4    1.5J
Cndmium                              0.1                                                69*
Chromium                                     9                     6.7    34*                         932                  2190
Copper      13      13   12   1.1            17                    r.o           2fl»   19'           9.0B                 6.9B
Lend                                                               17     234*   21 •   125    12     102                  8.7
Mercury                                                            0.2           0.3J   01.1   0.2J
Nickel                        10.1            100.1                                                   7.4                  S.1B
Selenium                                                                                              0.9B
Silver      50J
Thulium
Vnnndium                                     21                           14*    1.V    14J    14J
Zinc        34                10J    49      3                     17     31*    46*    26J    15     19.5                 15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                          Alcyon Lake Sediments


                   Radi.nl 982     COM IflSB                                                     COM 1986            E PA/ERT 3/H8
                                   Bl             B2               B3             B4                                 lA      L5        U     Li    L8      Lfl
VOLATILE                           Shnllow Drop   Shallow Deep     Shnllow Drop   Shnllow Drop   SEI9   SEW   SE2I   Shnllnw D«-ep                 Shallow Deep

Chloro methane
Bro mo methane
Vinyl Chloride
Chloroelhsne
Mclhylene Chloride           120   25B    1700B 2ROOB      lOflB   290B   120B    27R                                                                     5HB
Acetone                            40R    30flR fiHOO*     1.10    1HOO   :nn     17B
Ciriwn Dlsulhte                                                                          6.1
1.1-Dichloroethcne
1.1-Dichlorocthane
ULDichloroclhcnfi
Chloroform                                                         HJ
1,2-Dichloroethnne
2-BuUnone                                         1ROOO*
1.1.1-Trichloroethane
Carbon Tetrachloridc
Vinyl Acetate
Bromodichloro methane
1,2-Dichloropropane
cis-1,3-Dkhloropropene

Bromochloroowthane
1.1.2-TrichlbroclhBne
Bcntene '                    20
tran§-l ,3-Trichloroelhane
Brnmoform
4 -Mcthyl-2-Pcntanone                                      11J                           600B
2-Hcianone
Tclrachlroclhene
1.1,2,2,-Tcrtrachlroethene
Toluene                                                                                                                              _ 40B   11B   14B    601
Chlorobentene
Ethylbcnzcne
Slyrenc
Xylcnc (Total)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                Alcyon Lake Sediments

                              COM 1985                                      EPA/ERT MARCH 19HH
                              PI           B2         H.1 -      R4         l/<   1,5  Lfi  L7   L8    L8
                              Shllw Deep   Shllw Deep Shllw Deep Shllw Deep Shllw Deep           Shllw Deep


Phenol
bis(2-chlorocthyl)cihcr                                                               400   64          42
2-Chlorophenol
1.3-Dichlorobcn*cne
l,4-Dichlorobcn*rnc
Benzyl Alcohol
1,2-DichlorobcnZcne
2 Methyl Phenol                                                    540*
bis(2-Chloroinopropyl)cthcr
4-Methyl phenol                                                    1200
N-Nitrono-Di-n-Propylaminc
IlcxBehlorocthanc
Nitrobenzene
liwphorone
2-Nitrophenol
2,4-Dimcthylphenol
 Bcniok Acid
bi»(2 ChlorocthoxyMhane
2-4-Dichlorophenol .
1,7,4-Trichlorobcntcne                                      __          _
Naphthalene"           "               "            ""           "~ '        """"     37         12.J
4-Chk>n>aniline
Hexachlorobutadlene
4-Chloro-3-Mclhylphcnol
2 Methylnaphlhatcno
Ilexachlorocyclopcntadiene
2.4,6-Trichlorophcnol
2,4.6-Trichloro phenol
2-Chloronaphlhalcnc
2-Nltronanallne                                              _               _              _            _
Dimethyl Phlhalatc
Aoeiuphthjrlcnc •
3-Nitronnaline

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                          Alcyon Lake Sediments

                   S&A1979                  Hnrt   COM 19H5                                                                                      KPA/ERT
                   1   2       3      4     19H1   Bl             B2                  B3               B4                                        1.5  L5     L6     L7     LB L8
Scmivolatile                                       Shllw  Deep    Shllw   Drop        Shllw   Deep     Sllw     Peep     19      20       21     R    D                     S  D


Accnapthcne                4.0        28                                                                                                         49
2.4-Dinilrophenol
4-Nitraphcnol
DibenzoCuran                                                                                       •
2.4-Dinitrotoluene
2,6-DinUrolohiene
Dicthylphthlate
4 -Chrfcphenyl phenylclher                                                                                                                       30
Flourene                        29                                                                                                               57          no
4-Nitroanlllne
4.6-Dinitro 2 Mcthylphenol
N-NUrosodlphenylamlne
4-Bromophcnyl-phcnylelhcr
llcxachlorbcnzene
Pcnlachlorophcnol
Phcnanlhrene       32      200 70     360    460   770J    1800                       1500    300J     670      450      1300    650      780    320   76    780    660    300
Anlhrcecene        32      200 10     360    4HO                                                                                                 51    10J   92
Di-n butyl pthalate                                                       2ROJ
Flouranthene        22     160 67     220    460 1600      2400   2300    4 ml        2400    460      870      640*     1400    620      1200   850   170   1700   1200   800
Pyrene              16     140 60     170     500 1500     4400   1700    57a(        2200    340*     960      400*     1400    600      850    560   110 • 1200   970    690
Bulylbcnzylphtalate
3,3'-Dichlorobenzene
Bcnzo(a)Anthraccne                           1.200 840J    1600   770J                10000            410J     290J                             290   47    690    420    290
bis<2 ElhylhcxyDphthatate 34 44 240   46     1.000 710J    7500   6700    1800        5.100   770      1600     1400*     1500   2.10J    1900 430     210   2200   2700   2300
Chryscne                   16         220    1.200 1IOOJ   1700   1200    4 .ml       1500    415*              370J     -720    :ir,oJ   650J 350     70    890    680    490
Di-n-octyl Phthalato 92 260 64        300                                                                                                 330B 930B    450B 350B R90B
Bcnzo(b)Flouranthcne       64         120     480 1ROO     2200   2500    1000        2600    360J     1400*    950*                           260     RO   460 820 310
Bcnzo(k)Flouranthcne       64         120     480 1800     2200   1600    1000        2COO    :ifiOJ   1400*    480*     770     46ai     820
Bcnzo(a)Pyrene             140        300     420 800.1    2000   990J                1200             .I'M)*            SHOJ             490J 280     40    600    440    410
lndcnoO,2,3<d)Pyrene                  23                                                                        250J             260J     140  30      140   230
Dibrn7.o(a,h)Anlhraccne    110        220                                                                       2r,o.l           ;iooJ
Brnzo<g.h.i)Pcry<cne                                                              .                                                       190    37    480   340

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                          Alcyon Lake Sediments
                                                                                       (mp/kg)


            S & A 1979               Hart Radian COM 1985                                                         CDM 1 986              EPA/ERT 1988
            Water                      1981 1982 Rl               B2              B3               B4                                    L5    LS     L6      L7     LB   L8
            1     2      .1    4                 Shllw  Deep      Shllw   Deep    Shllw     Deep   Shllw   Deep   SRI 9   SE20   SE21    Shllw Deep                 Shllw Deep


Arsenic     0.3   0.9    22*   0.9    1.3    4.0   IP                     3.5 '             4.7            41                            .78    .38    52     6.1   8.7   21
Beryllium                1.3                                                      23        0.4            07
Cadmium                  2.3   0.7    l.fi1.7                                               6.1            29                                          2.0    2.6 2.0B    4.2
Chromium    7.9   8.5    70    39     5.5 1.1      81             24      31      39        17     29      38     23      19     234     5.6    4.3    26     40 65       925
Copper      4.2   28     120   1.5    12 1.5       1.12    149    46      14*     41        16     31      24     18      18             5.5    4.8    41     65 77       434
Lead        160   67     82    14     1.3 96       r>!)7   3f.O   400     48      .143*     46     167*    54     57      142    149     :io    21     304    385 562     451
Mercury     1.0   0.2    0.4   0.1                 1.1.    0.7    1.1     008     0.5              0,13    029    0.3     0.3    0.5                   0.17
Nickel      4.5   2J     2J           5.9    6.1   no      98             in      17        14             14     9       11     123     2.9B   3.18   20     26     33   369
Selenium                 0.5                 4.8                                                                  4J      42J    44J
Silver                                                     6.5                                                                           0.2    .3B    .48    1.4
Thulium
Vanndium                                     6.1   75      60     17      9       29        12     18      10     8       11     23
Zinc        16    15     310   17     110    75    522     402    425     G8      281       52     210     86     80*     9RJ    264.1   45     33     297    316     386 546

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

•
COMPOUND          NJIT
                  1979
                              SUMMARY OF AIR SAMPLING PROGRAMS*

                              HARTa
                              1980
                                      NJDEP            WESTON-TATb
                                                        ' 1985
                  LEA         LEA                    LEA        VENTS         LAKE
                                               Z-l   Z-2 Z-3
ACETONE                                                     1.0

BENZENE            Dc                                       1.1        20
BCEE                                                        0.44

CBALKYL BENZENE          :                           0.1    0.2        0.1    0.1
CgALKANE                                                    0.25
C7ALKANE                                                    1.2
CgALKANE                                                               1.1    1.1
CHLOROFORM                                                             D

CHLOROETHANE                                                       •   0.69

1.1-DCA                                                                10J

^fc-DCA                                                     0.29       30 J
 1,1-DCE                                                               10
DICHLOROMETHANE                                             0.12       88
1,4-DIOXANE                                                 0.01
ETHYL BENZENE                                               0.45       1.8    0.085
NAPTHALENE                                           0.12              2.0
PHENOL                                         0.04 0.06
PCE                                                         2.5        12
1,1,1-TCA                                      1.6   1.2    2.7        1.0    0.18
1,1, 2-TCA                                                  0.67
TCE               D                                  0.16    D         2.0    0.16
TOLUENE           D                                         2.5        20     0.58
XYLENES           D                                         1.04       7.2    0.38
                             40ppm



                               -ALL CONCENTRATIONS ARE IN PPM-

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 108 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

* This summary table includes air-monitoring programs preformed
prior to the TAGA program.
a
    Fred C. Hart (1980) samples were analysed   for TOC alone.
b
  WESTON-TAT (1985) samples were in conjunction with the Off-site
remedial investigation performed by CDM.
c
    "D" flag indicates that a compound was detected but not quatifie-J
"J" indicates an estimated concentration.

LEA indicates air samples taken above leachate seeps in the Chestnj4
    Branch marsh.

VENT indicates air samples taken at the on-site passive gas vents

LAKE indicates air samples taken above Alcyon Lake.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 109 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

——— Zone boundir/
  A StmpUng point

200                   200

 Scale              Feet



                     Marsh Air Emission Sampling Sites and Zones
                                 LiP»ri Landfill. Gloucester Couniy. New Jersey

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 110 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          SUWARY OF TAGA RESIDENTIAL AIR MDNOTORING PROGRAM                                                   fj_

COMPOUND                                          LOCATION & SEASON *

                          HOWARD A^/ENUE     HOLLY/CEDAR                  LAKESIDE                    NEIGHBORHOODS                     SPILLWAY
                                        3     12              3           123                          1          23                    1           2        3
                          I     1

ACETO-JE                 66     43     369   165    89    53J         21J         72          81       33J        17          39J       12J         27       36J

BENZENE                  5J     4J      25   2 0 J 3 J -                  - 4 J 8 J                       -        -  8J -                                  --
                                              _   _   _               _      _   _                        _       _ -  _                            _        _
BCEE                      -    3J        -

C3ALKYL BENZENES         15J     -       -    _     _     _       -       _           _       1       4       j       -   -             _           _        _

1,1-DCA                  6J     180     4J    - 3 J -                     - 6 J 4 J                       4J4J                 -        _       3       j    _

1,2-DCA                          5     lea    -      U        -           -       -           -           --                        _ - i j -

1,1-DCE                   -    2J       6J    -      _        _           _           _           _       _       _       2         J           -       -     -

DICHLOROKETHrtNE                37     45J    -      12J -                -       30J 17J                         22J                               12J -

1,4-DIOXANE                     5J       -    -     6J        -           -       6J -                    -           -         -           -       3J        -

ETHYL BENZENE             -    9J       7J    - 1 3 J -                   - 8 J -                         23J-                 14J-                         - -

FREON-12                  -            14J    _      _    _           _           _           4J          -       -             -           -           -    -

ISOPROPYL BENZENE        - 1CJ           -    _     _     _       -       5           j       _           _       -       _     _           6           J     -
M1K .                    -     6J        -    -. 8J -                     - 5 J -                         -4J                   - - 1 2 J -
METHYLENE CHLORIDE        -              -    _     -         _       -       _           -   2       4       J       -             -       _           -    -
1,1,1-TCA                 -    2J-      7J    -     1J        -           -       U -                             U            18 -                     -     -
1,1,2-TCA                -     37.     31J                                                                                     6j           _           _     -
TCE                       -    7J      39J    -     -         -           -       7J          -           -       -                     - - - -
TOLUENE                  9J    8J       26    -      7J       -           -       18 -8J                  10J -                16J                      -     -


          * SEASONS:     1-SPRIN3; Sampling performed during May and June, 1986.
                    »•   2-SUf-WER; Sampling performed during September, 1986.
                         3-FALL;      Sampling performed during October and Novenber, 1987.
           11
            J"   Compounds flagged with a "J" indicates that the compound was detected.
                 A value that is between the instrument detection limit and quantitat•>or.
                 limit will be flagged wiyh a "J", indicating an estimated value.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 111 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

          '•'. .:;" " ">',•»          '•;•
            '-'.-'i .--.•'••••>. ! ::.
                 '.:•••'.'       'v, ; vt
                  »;, '•> •:.«€»«• •.«     I;
                   V •*. Vi «•« i! --'/
                    \\ •.-'.«.     •'; -I-




LEGEND
•••••§ HOAO 8COMCNT MONITOniNQ PATH
       FOR INTENSIVE STUDY


                                                                           ttl   OUCttlH**




                  ROAD SEGMENTS FOR INTENSIVE MONITORING

                                                - J L        PITMAN, N.J.
                                                APPROX. SCALE: f-   400*

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 112 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         iii roKB •' ^p yr       ^*
                                                   *--  /<\

                                         - :'""*  ::-.    N^

LEGEND
   MONirORINQ PATH



                                                              Ml OHCH»M>f




                     NEIGHBORHOOD AIR MONITORING PATHS
                          LIPARI LANDFILL, PITMAN, N.J.
                                 APPROX. SCALE: f-900'

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 113 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         •wiry of 1bojxMMd* lo-t.tl.oly IfcMifiori by TWA ftrioj (ooctrol
                                                                         ftwlyilt Of tann] iMCiutt, IbMtftpKt, on) Wnt Cooplot.
1                              1                  UoplrUctliom III                                                                              Ca^li LoctlioM 1 Wtt   WT6 WYfc WU                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                         «   V3   •"   VI

                                   1
                                         B  B             B     S                          S B              B    8     B   I        I       I      8   I      I    I    I   I        B   8   8 ' 1     I
       ftHyl |tni*nt/iyll«n              III                  1 I        1 I                                1    1     1 I                         III
     Urthyl Itobvtyl Krion*                 1                   1
         t-Mrthyl-l-krtcnol        J
           Pr-vylont |lycol
               fcrylioior                                                                                                                                                                               1
            •ictilorarthant                  1                                                                                                                                                          1
    tll-l*-cMororthy)l rthtr                 II               1     1    1    1            1        . M     1    1     1     1    1               III                       1                           1
                •xrolim                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                •roomoU                       I I I                   . I I I       I I I                   I    S       I    I  I I               I     I   I    I    I    I        1   1   I    1    11
                  Inun*                       1               "l     1   1  1                                                I I I                      I
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
     9k Mbyl froMtln III                                      S                                                  1     1                                                                                    J
     U Mhyl froMtir* 121                      S   B           1           S   B                             I    1     1 1                                                                                  1
            t-Hrpt.no*                                               1                                                 1
         fcniyl •Icohol                               S                                                                                                                                                     1
         (thylm |lyn>l                                B                   III        III                         1           1    1     1         I     1    1
           litthyl tthir                                             1
      Carbon Ittrodilorlot                                               1                 I                 I                                         I I I                                                1
       13 Hytfrac«rbons 111                           1                  I                 1                                            1                                                                   J



      CIO Ny^«r«rtera Ul ,                                                     1
      O ftjttiydr or Kciow
                                                      1   1                                                 1                I          1          I     1   I     I    1       1                 1    1
             fcitral                                                                                 1
                                                                                                     I      t                                                     i
    •Ivthyl ftmi«ld^iytff Ql                                                                                1
        O Nilritt (It                                                                                            1

                                                      1                                                                      1                           1
          Oilorobmtti*                                                                                                       I I

                                   (Mm
                                     III C* Mkyl ftnwUn rvfort lo «y tooowd •ith 4 corbow
                                         •Mo • otnni*) rt«| r«|irdln» of It* orfrw of •nulwtlion of II*
                                         •I* dull*, feu Mrl teniMl
                                     ffl C3 Dlkyl lowilici rvfori lo any ia»jo«^ aitk J cvtom MbftttwtKJ
                                         onlo • kmirr* rin| rrfirdlnt of ih» <i|iii of om«t«-ilian of thr
                                         tlot duiik. Id. iMpropyl bmifw 11 prop»n|l bmimt)
                                     111 Cl hy»oc«rta» rtftr* to wiy mrMMilitrd nydronrtan aith I
                                          riHxm In lit ttnrtin. Irrlwln both «|k*»t M) tlkfwt.
                                     (41 Picaliw/ptwnol rrffri on onkiain rfiirti fraovnlt tioilr to
                                          •inliw, •twnol, or orthyl pyritfint. l)» llfiR cvml ottily
                                          diftiitfwis?) tctati, thru c<apomh ift dirty uipln.
                                   • fil Oiorthjrl l*ni«lofh|fo> My or lormt in lh» *o«rc* by • oimt of
                                          of lylmn ond Iht wlrr »«por.
                                      1(1 C3 ititrllt nltrt to VHkthylnv-lulMonitrilt or t-Omtmnitrilt*.
                                           The TflBR it miblt to drf 11* thr turt bydroc»rban tlrurtwr u4
                                           oVgrrr of »iv«turj|nm of thr ori|inil racpran) in lhi»
                                      IT) C7 niygo'u'.n' h^drarj'w. j|w< i-rl.nl>-.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 114 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               CONTAMINANTS TENTATIVELY IDENTIFIED BY TAGA
                                                  DURING SPECTRAL ANALYSIS OF LEACHATE AND LAKE SURFACE HEADSPACE SAMPLES
                                                                         AND AIR VENT GRAB SAMPLES
                                                                                SEPTEMBER 1986



                                                                     Sample loc<lk>ni |1)
Compound                      ini ini             rut tin            /Ju //u           /in        iii} /in              i«u /<ii              i«u mt      /«/         /«i itii IMI mi twi sw» twi v/ VI W»
Action*                                                                                                                                                                                                    •   X

fiopinol                                                                                                                                                                                                       X

III (/-<Mo«o»lhyl| »lhn
Methyl liobulyl Hetont        H                                      X                                                  X

C5 O*ytj«n»t«d Hydioc Jibon                                X
Ci Hydiooibom                 X                                                                                         X

Oibon Telnchlotldt                     X     .     X     X                    X   X    X                                        X         X     "     X                   X   X        X   X   X

(thykncGlyCol                                     X                  X                                        X         X       X         K                   X       X   X                                    X

lenitn*                       x                                      kx                                                 x       x               >•    x           x       x
Toltttn*                      X               X                X                                                        X             X                   X               X

1.MM<MofO*lhan«(l)                                                   IT

Ct AlkylAiom«tici                                                    X                                                  X       X                     X                           X

l.«-D«o«»f»«                                                                  X

I.I .1 -TiHhkMOtlhtnc                                                                                X                                    X

Chloiobcnicn*                                                                                                                                   x x                       x
Cl AHiylAiomtlkt                                                                                                        x                                                         *
rHoKn»/W»«nol                                                                                                           X                                                                          X   X

Cinol                                                                                                                   X

t.MM(hlo>o*lh«n«                                                                                                                                                          X

C7 Hydiocaibont                                                                                                                                                                                                11

                              No! ft
                              (I)      N4min<] tyttrm utrd           loi lKih.il*. t^rr|.le\ /il|it>leu
                                       ln/onpi|p« I. SW,irlri\ lo \url4i rv».ilri \.mi|ilr numlipi. Vnplpit In
                                       Vi-nl Nicnlin i Air B<q


                              ()}      I./ ilnl>loMiflhjiir/viil>l|lil<iiirtf     iili-iiln.il \|n>lli4nii lln> IAf,A


                              (II      SW1 mil ip|uiilf>dinlii»iir<|Hiii\pip|Miil (I n«iiv\|Hintiv I'lH'i I


                              (4)      Ilii* lnlliiwiiii| l.nt|i>l i mil,ir?tiii.iMl% vwriP •in.ilyr*>il IIM IMI! wt-ii* mil ili-lr
                                       I   I Itll llllMIM'llt^tlf*                         I l(ll.«« Illdlf M'llxMII*


                                       On liliiMinii-lli.ini- (Mflliyli'iu-1 Mniiili'l I I / Ini liliiiiirlli.i«i>
                                       lii-iin \>                                          liiililiinifllii-nr

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 115 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

FOOTNOTES

JRB DATA                                EPA S4A DATA
N.A.   Not Analyzed                     N.A.   Not Analyzed
ND     Not Detected                     NO     Not Detected
                                        A      Approximate Value

WWC DATA
N.A.   Not Analyzed

CD*. DATA
N.A.   Not Analyzed
U      Element was analyzed for but not detected. Reported with the
       detection limit value (e.g. 10U).
R      Spike sa~:'e recovery is not within control limits.
[ ]     Result is greater th*- or equal to instrument detection limit but
       less than the contract required detection limit.
*      Data did not pass EPA quality assurance.
(*)    Duplicate analysis is not within control limits.

REFERENCES
Environmental Protection Agency Surveillance and Analysis (EPA S4A),   8/79.
Scientific Applications International Corporation (formerly JRB Associates,
Inc.) (JRB), Long Term Remeoial Action Monitoring Program, LiPari Waste
Disposal Site, Priority Pollutant Sampling - 8/83.
                      •

Woodward-Clyde Consultants, Inc. (WWC), Project Summary for 1981, Ground-
water Chemistr, ana Monitoring Well Installation (March 1981), LiPari Waste
Disposal Site.
Camp Dresser I McKee Inc. (CDM), Remedial Investigation Data, 2/85-7/85.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 116 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -
      1                           *v^ .            c                              o
                                                                                                  C-37      "                                                               n•*                                        r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            o
                                                                                          (?M)' NORTHWFGT) '»
                                                                                                            »i                                                              *\                                         —
    l\         —                  ••/I *                                          N


                                     x/                                                                                 .-                                                                                             ,--                                  *'
    LI/                       j*                  ^                               .-




                           4i,'//'
                                                                                                                                                       %                                                    C-3n*
                             /y                                                                                       c •.••  ,.<-— OX-
                            ^ v
                                                                                                               t ««• •                                                                                       •

                           / •~~-~~~ •*                                                                          * • > ~ \ v'/^     ^\5 '-
                                                                                             '•wnio.!,^. •"
                       /                      "*
                                                            '   '.'    /»..-
                                                                                             •• «.-.'.17^.iiri .y            •'.•••"                             \. \
                                                                                                                                              .c '
                                                       "-
                   i'/                                 - •—
                                                          -'          - -J'r,..
                                                                      7^-'.*^                ' ••ft.i.At*t,,0^^/
                                                                                                                                                                  \>' -.«•.-«
                                                                                                                                                                       ,N

               » /                                              C-30                                                                                  ^••.•^| Win -x
                                                                                                                                                                    C-II
                                                                                                                                                                                  V'-%v

        tfl                                                                            \*^"**"
                                                                                                 ' >^
                                                                                                           X
                                                                                                           **<[
                                                                                                                                                                            ^       vr
       *'/<l                               >  I                                   •
                                                                                                 i /v- ,                                                                             M^ .r 39
                                                                                                                                                                                            \ K-9
                                                                                                                                                                                              k o»*
                                                                                                 ! 'I'"' "^ - t -~-                                                                               K -B

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '& ^r'vT^o"'"1''
                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                 1                                                           •

                                                                                                 ii ji'*
                                                                                                                                 •   ~-^ ^~
                                                                                                                             rw i      ~- .. -~ ^                                             \ \
                                          1                                                                                                   *   \                               r-i»        it i' \

                                      /
                                       1
                                                                                           -•;;
                                                                                                 •1    ^ rs
                                                                                                           - ,,.                                 • r '.«           *•
                                                                                                                                                                            -           -      ^      .\-    -----•
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   « • ii~^*'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tr-s   f <o\'j.x
                                                                                                                                                  .. ,              ~




                                                                                                 \•1-                                                                                                  7
                                                                                                                                                                            '               1 -ll/"-*        v\                                                                     c lt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ---•-^"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ^V   'it       *

                                                                                                                                                                                        Jlr...
                                                                                                                                                                                  "-'*/ 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                  fr- ° ^,           \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              fi,a*t*   ^.u.--
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 --<^-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         f ?J\'.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ~"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              \',
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M

                                                                                                                                                                            ^x                               //
                                                                                                                                                             K 4
                                                                                                                                                                                 * / ) •""'                          /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               \",\
                                                                                                                    r m*                                                   •<«/lc.|l.                            /'/

                                                                                                 \ \ VV^_^^-^"
                                                                                                                                                                       *S
                                                                                                                                                                                   ./        K-l?«      cr-.//                                                                 )\
                   /
                                                                                                                                                     :-*s^                  ^                           • ' / ••
                                                                                                                                                                                                      C-33.'-' v
                                                                                                                                                                             ?                                                                 --•      '^-
                                                                                                                                                                                                    xX /,•/ *'-- '
                                                                      K-15.                                                                                                                                                                                       ?a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        --^   ^ --*      •— • — "^                  \ \ c»-vooo
/                                                                C-35
                                                                                                           ^
                                                                                                               v-            < "...«..-•;,._,
                                                            (IM ORCHARD)                                       V.


                                                                                                               c.- •'        *
                                                                                                                                                                                  tf«V
                                                                                                                                                                                        s/Mt       »..-,'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  //
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 / /•/-v»
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ^                                              \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ' \1              '
                                                                                                                                                                                  Vi*             .* •
                                                                                                                                                                   r>-r
                                                                                                                                                                           //                 /•••>                    /V ' ' 3   K


                                                                                                                             r'-c       ...--"
                                                                                                                                                     .-- -"^ni.'ii
                                                                                                                                                             '. '.K-14                   /' /••                  /   ///                                     .




                                                                                                                                                                 j c :32r                                   //
                                                                                                 /&"
                                                                                                 / S'/                                                            \         ...^. //- /
    • f nitinq mill

    100        0           WO 200
                                                                                        v-v^-
                                                                                         £'                                                                                      .^- -
    y?nl»                  (•»)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             r«m>p 58
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Monitoring Wrll
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Locations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IIP*. l.-mlM. Tilnirrtlrc Coimly N<-w >nry

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 117 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

            FALL AIR AND LEACHATE ANALYSES FOR LIPARI LANDFILL
                            PITMAN, NEW JERSEY


                             SUMMARY OF METHOD

The Trace Atmospheric Gas Analyzer (TAGA) 6000E was used to perform
headspace analyses on leachate from the perimeter of the Lipari Landfill
and surface waters from Alcyon Lake. Headspace analyses were performed or,
leachate and surface water sampTes to determine the possible
concentrations of target contaminants. A-i" v««»«- were directly san-pled as
well to determine the possible concentratu- • target contaminants.



                                OBSERVATIONS

The headspace technique used in this phase of analyses is a modified
procedure compared to that utilized in previous studies. Previously-
observed data showed the formation of hydrocarbon/water clusters that
possibly obscured the target compounds results and complicated the
ionization process. This headspace technique perhaps can be characterized
as a method development procedure. Thus, a presentation of the data in a
quantitative manner could lead to different interpretations by technical
reviewers. Caution should be exercised when Interpreting the leachate and
surface water quantitative data, as no procedure was utilized to replenish
the analyte in the headspace. Additionally, no systematic performance
evaluation, procedure hts beeti developed for this technique.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 118 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   Ifl J               SIMOlf 1 Of. I IONS:                til 4         (II t        1(1 6                         SIMPlf int.UONS::                        lfi-7               lfl-8           111 9
        SINPlI IOCMIONS:                     III 1      HI 2
                                                                   9PP-                    NHU HIDINGS:                    40     pp.   O.t PCX        2 pp.                            NNU HIDINGS:                         I PP«               4 pp.         160 pp.
             NNU IE ID INGS:                 0.8 PO-    14.1 pp»


                                                                     MS.                                       • V.'. .          MS.           MS.          MS.                                               IVG.                 MS.             MS.             MS.
                                  IVG.          MS         MS.
                                                                    CONC.                                        01          CO.C.        CONC.         CONC.                                                   01            CONC.               CONC.           CONC.
                                   01          CONC.      CONC.

            CO*»OUNO              (ppbl        (ppbl      (ppbl     <«*'                 COMPOUND               (ppbl        lppt.1        (ppbl        (PPbl                        cowaiNO                   (ppbl              (ppbl           (ppbl           (ppbl



iu(2 c»ie*twiNio IINII . t                    Oft        Oft       , .%       IISI2 CNIMOCINUI (IMII                 t       161           111        01*1               6IS(I CNIO.OII.UI IINI[I                t          Oft                  Oft      ,      Oft
                                                                              •tNJINf                                        466               9      01-6               6CN/(Nf                                 6      01*6                     01*6            01*6
•IN/ENI                             6         01*6       Of 6      l*-6

                                                                   (1-28      (INIl IINIINI
                                                                                                                     *       401           191        1       '.'8       El Nil IEN1ENC                         <]          5. *28               01-26           01*28
E1NTI lENMNl                       28         Of 28      01*26                                                   2*
                                              01-14?     01-147    Of !«.»    lOtMNf                             147         too •         tfill •      .'•>             lOiUENE                                147         01*147               01-14?          01*147
lOiUf Nf
                                                         Of JO     01 • ID    CJ IUH IfltlNI                     JO          119         Of It             . \           CJ IH'l      lENtENI                   JO          Of 10                Of JO           Of 10
CJ »l«H IINIfNE                    JO         Of JO
                                              01-44      01*44     Of 4k       IEIIICN1MOI IHEHf                 44         Of44         01-44                           IEUICNlMOtlNI.1                        44          01*44                01*44           01*44
 l|IIICNlMOII«t»l
                                                                   M-6                                               8      01 '6        01-8          Of 6              IIICNIOJOIINENI                         6     01*8                      01-6            Of 6
 tllCNlMOf ININI                     n        01-6       Of 6
                                                                    01-9       1.1,1-II.ICNlOIOIlNINf                9      Of «          01-9         01-9              1,1.1 IIICMl 01 OdNINI                  9           Of 9                01-9            01-9
 1.1.1 IIICKIOIOIININI                        01 •»      01*9

 l.l.l-IIICNlMOtlMNI                It        Of It      Of 11      Of It      i.i, 2- uiCNiMOd.INI .               It       lit          01 -It       Of It             I.I.2-IIICNIMO{1NIN[                   It          Ofll                 Of It           Of It

                                     t        Of'        01*7       Of »                                             7           6S       01-7         01*7              t.roiCNioioctNiNE                       7            Of?                Of 7            Of 7
 1.1-OK»lO»Of !«««
                                              01*7                  01-7       1.1-OICNlOfOII.I.I                    7       J67          01-7         01*7              l.l-OICHlOIOfl.INf                      '     01*7                      Of 7            Of'
                                        7                01*7

            . wotmiNE                   J      Of 1      Of J       Of J       I.I-OKNIOIMININE                      J           24       Of 1         Of 1              1.1-OICNlO.OtlNENf                      1           Of J                Of]             01*1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                21   01*21 01*21
 OICNIMOMININt                      11         oi-n       01*21     Of 21     OICMOtOHflNINt                        2!       419          01-21        Of 21             OIC.IMCMIININE                                                                          01*21

                                               Of It                Of It      1.4 OIOHNE                           It      Of It         01 .It       Of It             1.4 OIOIINI                            It 01*11   Of It                                 Of It
  1 4-DIOIINf                       It                    Of It
                                    201        Of 20)     01*201    01-20)     ICIIONI                              201      too •        01 -201      01-201            ICIIONI                                201 01*201                       01*201          01*201
 ICf 10NE
                                               Of 9       01-9      01-9       MflNfl IS08UIU (IIME                                         18         01 :              "(iNii isoium (flam                     9 01*9                          01-9            01-9
 NCINTl ISOWIU Ml ONt                    9
                                               01-8       01-6      Of A       flfON 12                              8           11       Of 8         C       '.        IHON-12                                 6 01*6                          01*6            01 -8
  IIION 12                               8


        Ul»ll IOCIIIONS:                     UI-IO      If*- II    1(1 1.'            SUPH IOCIIIONS:                     III IJ        III 14       iii-it                   SMPlf IDCIHONS:                         If 1-16             111-17          lit- 18
             NNU HIDINGS:                    20 ppx      2 PV*     o-i ro*               NNU HIDINGS:                     O.t PO-       IPP-         2 PC--                         NNU HIDINGS:                     •O.i pp.             -o.t PP» w MIOIM

  '                               ivc.          MS.       MS.        MS.                                      IVC.          MS.           MS.          MS.                                              •VG.               as.              MS.               Mt.
                                   01          CONC.     CONC.      CONC.                                      01          CONC.         CONC.        CONC.                                             01             CONC.               CONC.           CONC.

            COWOXM) •             Ipcbl        (ppbl      Ippbl     (ppbl              COMPOUND               ippm         Ippbl         Ippbl        (ppbl                    CCHPOUNO                 (p|*M           (ppbl              Ippbl              (ppbl


lisi2 -CNiMOfmutiMii                6        01*6       01*6       01*6      IISl2-CNlMOttNTl| (INEI            6         01-6          01-6         01-6            kisil-CNiaoti.iii flint              6 01*6                          01*6            01*6
61111(111                           9         01-9      01*9       01*9      IfNJENE                            9         Of9           01-9         Cf9             IIU/INt                              9     01*9                      01*9            01*9
II Nil HN1ENE                      41         01-41     01*41      Of 41     IINII IEN1ENI                     41         Of 41         Of4S         Of 41           llBll lENKNI                       41 01-41                          01*41           01-41
ICHUINE                            281        01*261      too •    01*281    lUUCNf                            281        01-281        01-281       n- 281          ICHUfHf                             281          01 -281             01*261          01*281
CJ IKH       IINHMf                10         01*10      01* JO    01 -JO    Cl IHTl l(N7(Nf                   JO         01 -JO        Of JO        l-l- JO         CJ I'ltl 6E.IE.E                    JO 01-10                         01*10           Of 10
iltiicNiMoti.t.1                   41         01-41      Of4J      01-41     IIIIICNIOIOCINENI                 41         01-41         01 -4J       M -41           IftltCNIOIOIIHfNE                   41 01*41                         01*41           01*41
IIIC«lO«Of l«f»C                   It         01 >lt     Of IS     Of It     nicmofOfiHiNf                     IS         Of It         Of It        If It           ll|IN|:«OtlN|NI                     It           Of It               Of It           01* It
l.l.l-IIICNIMOIIIUMf               U          Of 14      01-14     01 -U     1.1.1-IIICMMOffMtt                K          Of 14         01-14        Pf 14           i.t i miCNiMociNiiif                14 01*14                         01*14           01*14
1.1.2   IIICHlOIOIININf            It         Of It      Of It     01 'IS    1.1.2-IIICNlOIMININE              IS         Of It         Of It        nf U            1.1,2    l»IC.l M 0{IHIN(           It           Of It               01 'It          Of It
1.l-OICNlMO(INMl                    t         01-7       01*7      Of 7      1.1-OICNlO.OItNINf                 r         01-7          Of 7         Of 7            1,1 Ml XI 0*0(1 MN(                  ?           •»•*                01*7            01*7
1. 2-OICNlOHOflM.il                 9         Of 9       Of9       Of 9      1,2   OICMtOtOtlN.Nl               i         Of 9          Of9          11.9            i.2-ri(«io*o(iN*Ni                   9            Of»                01*9            01-9
 !,l-OICNlO*OftNfNI                 4         01-4       Of 4      01-4      1,1-OICNlOlaCIHENE                 ,.        Of 4          01-4         III -4          1.1 ou»ioio( iNim                    4     01*4                      01*4            01*4
oicNionMiHim                       10         Of JO      Of JO     01 -JO    OICNIMOMIIHINE                    JO         01-10         Of JO        01-10           OICHIMCMI ININI                     JO           Of JO               Of JO           Of 10
 1.4 OIO»IN(                       20         01*20      01*20     01-20     1.4 DIOlINt                       20         01-20         01-20        Of 20           1,4-0101 INI                        20 01-20                         01-70           01-20
1C 11 ONE                          2*0        01*2*0     01-2*0    01-2*0    irflONE                           2*0        01-260        01-2*0       01 <2AO         icr irwr                           .'60          01 -ft-P            PI -ttO         01-260

mi «u isMutn (fTouf                IS         Ofll       Ofll      Of IS     Ml mil    ISMUItl IflONt          IS         Of IS         Ofll         Of It           MI ion isneuiu «MON(                IS           l>l -. IS           01-11           01-11
 IHON-12                           11         Ofll       Ofll       Of 11    IIION 12                           11        Of II         Ofll         Ofll            III ON    12                        11           Dl -11              Of 11           Ofll

01 • OtlECMON 11MIIS
ppb • Hill HI I1UION
MS. CONC. • MSIIVIO CONCINIIIIION
• - DlillMl VIIUIS MSflVIO *"OVI tOO ppb
ppm^^klS 'I*           Mill I"*

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 119 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   COM     I9R7


                                                                                          R-7     R-i     R-9    R-10    R-ll R-12 R-ll R-14              R-16
       location               R-l     R-l   R-1A    R-JA R-4        R-5



Volatlleit
Acetone                        770   1200   66000   MA .   20000    10U     S10           ISO     10U     10U     •QO   SHOO      sou    sou     100     100
•cntcne                        SOU     10   25000   NA     1000U     su      SOU           su '    SU      su     250   2600J      su     Su      su      su
2-Butanont                     79J   aooo   2SOOO   NA     20000    100     1000           39     100     100     2JJ   6500J     100    100     1011    sou
Chloroform                     SOU   2500   2SOOU   NA     10000     SU      500                   su                              su                     su
                               SOU          35000   NA     10000     SU      500           SU              su     250   SOOOU             SU       SU
1,2 DichloroeOuvtt
                               SOU   »ou    J5000          10000     su      SOU           su      su      su     250   14000      su     su      su      su
Ethyl benzene
                               SOU   160J   JSOOU
                                                    NA
                                                    NA     10000      SU     SOU           SU      su      su     250   SOOOU      su     su      su      su
Methylene chloride
4-lte thy 1 -2-pentanan*      1000   1100   29000   NA     20000     100    looo           su      Su      su     250     asoo     su     su      su      su
Toluene                        sou   2SOO   75000          10000     su      500          100     100     100          106000      100   SOU     lou     100
1 , 1 . 1 -Tr 1 chloroe thane SOU    2500   25PQO
                                                    NA
                                                           looou     SU      500           su      SU      su     2MJ    S700       So    SU      su      su
Total itylenea                 sou   2500
                                                    NA
                                                           10000     SU      SOU           SU      SU      su     2 Ml SOOOU        su    SU      su      SU
                                                    NA
                                                                                           su      Su      su     2MJ SOOOU         SO    su      su      su
a>Kl-Volatllesi
Beniolc Acid                  sou     167   6200U   SOU     sou      sou     sou          sou     sou     sou     SOU   S4000      SOU   sou     sou     SOU
bia(2-OiloroeUiyl)*thtr        71    1*00   21000           100      100     100          100     100     100      11   S5000      10U   100     100     10U
bUI 2-Cthylhexyl tphthaUt*    10U    J60O   12600   100      6J      10J     100          100     100     100     lou   20000       7J    9J     100     100
Icophorane                    100    2600   12600   100     100      100     100                  100             100    1500      100   100     100     lou
                                     2fOO   12600           100      100     100          100             10U
4-H*thylphenol                10U                   100                                   100     100     100     100    2900      10U   100     10U     100
Phenol                        100     4'0    1100    *      100      100     100
                                                                                          100     100     100     100   28000      10U   100     10U     100




Saaple location               C-J1   £>JJ   C-JJ C-JMu     C-J4          C-lV



volatile*!
Acetone                        10U    sou   10U     10U    100      100
•Jcnsene                        SU     su    su      su     Su       su
2-Butanone                     100    lou   100     100    100      100
Chlorototm                      su     w     SU      su     su       su
1.2-DlchloCMthlM                su     su    SU      su     SU       so
Cthylbrntene                    su     su    SU      su     SU       SO
HfthyUne chloride               su     SU    SU      su     su       so
4 -Me Ihyl -2-pentAnon>        100    100   100     100    100      100
Toluene                         su    Su     SU      su     su       SU
1 . 1 . 1-TrtehloroetVfw        su    su     SU      su     su       su
Total cylenea                   SU    SU     su      su     SU       SO
kml-Volatllecs
                                                                                  Reyt
Bcntolc Acid                   sou    •J     93     sou    SOU      SOU
bi •( 2-OUoro*thyl lethrr      100    100   100     100    lou      100           J                value for • tentatively Identified compound.
bU(2-Ethylheicyl (phthalate    100    lou   100     100    100      100           NA         analyird (or.
Itopttorane                    100    100   100     100    100      100
4-rtrthylphenol                100    100   100
                                                                                  U               WBS analyzed for but not detected. Detection Unit reported.
                                                    100    100      100
                                                                                                 ^rMindt leqiilte dilution to quantify then within the linear range
rhenol                         100    100   10U     lou    10U      100                  of the ctAnUicU calibration corv».

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 120 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                             HELLS M!THIN CON             SYSTE-
                                       LOC      r-2      K-2          K-3      K-3
                               SAItfLE I     13-1186 23             13-1187 24
                               CONTRACTOR       MC       JRB          MM:      JRE
                               DATE SA-FLES11-16-8I 8-12-8! 11-16-81 B-12-S!
                                  W:TS        PPB     PPB PPB PPB

VCLATILES
ACETONE                                         2700         10
BEN:ENE                                                       7                  30
                                                                                 47



CHLOF.'UETHt'iE
ru- nttrno
W"te» » »•<
E:Cu..!:j:THftS'E.!,I-
                                                 *t€f     Cf>t                   OC
HCH.SWETKAHE.1.2-                                *^<>     •* * *                 BC




ETHTLJENZEHE
KETONES                                         30600
BETHYL«-,-:-PEKTAII:NE
BETHYLENI CHiOFIDE                                140      3?':          60      IOC
STYRENE
TETRAIH.D'DETHENE
TOLUENE                                                         4        4C          51
TRICHIGMETHAS 1 -.:.!.!-
Tfi i:«:S«.3E?MNE. 1,1,2-

V!«VL
VJN«;I
IYLENES'TOTAL)

SE'JVCLATILES

ACENAPHTHY'.ENE
ANTHF;:ENE
BEN-0(*)PYREN:
B!S'-2-CHLO?2ETH:iY!ETMAM                        610C     B50C         14!C     B5CC
B!E(-2-:HLOF:3ETH2IY)«:THANE
                                                 340C     7400          64C    44C:

BL'TYlHNZYL'HTMALATE
CU«E««E
51-N-B'JTYLPHTHALATE
t!-H-DCTYL PHTHALATE
riCHLOP.OBEN2ENEj.2-
DICfLC«EEN!ENE,l,«-
tlETHYL6HTHALATE
FLUOPANTHENE
FLUOftENE

NAPTHALENE
PHENANTHP.ENE
PHEN3L                                                     35('                      57
PYP.ENE
Tfi::HLOF.:?HEN3L. 2.1/6-

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 121 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                               KELLE «lTy'IN COWJHKST SYSTER
                                          SAMPLE LOC    C-15 C-17                 C-3      M9     MOA     MOA C-6A                           C-M         C-23
                                          SAflPLE        1 7 5                             2                     35                            39           it
                                           ONTRA:TCR    JRE     JRB*   KM:      JRB                   H:         JRB               n:         JRE           JPi
                                          BATE SAILED e-io-83 8-io-e: 6-it-si 8-10-83                6-14-81    8-12-83          6-16-B1     8-12-9: e-u-s:
    s                                       UKITS       PPB        PPB           PPE      PPB         PPB        PF8                m         m            m

    VO.AT.'LES

    ACETONE
    BENZENE                                                              790      2290     4400                        78          13000          42&:1 is::
    BR2«::iCHLW3!!ETHANE                                                                       2BO

    CARB3K BISULFIDE
    CH1.CRC8ENZEHE                                                                              73                                                 27C            2C
    CHLOR2ETHASE                                                          24                    47                                                                 4
    CH:genr[jc.                                                          610                   760                                                  21
    D!CHLO*3ETHAS;.!,1-                                                            230         650                                   200            77            «:
    OICH.aRCETHftME.1,2-                                                 48?     3C20C                     50          74          33800          sice :c-/.
    DICH:OROETHYLENE,TRANM,2-                                                                   43                                      60          4!            79
    BICHLflPBPW'ANE.J,2-
    DICHLOR3PF.:?EN£,1.3-                                                                                                                                          7
    ETHYLBENZENE                                                         630       810     4400                            69       5720          2600        EiC
    KTONE-
    BETHYL4-,-2-PENTAN3NE                           .
    KTHtLENE CHLOF.'.SE                                              14??        !240?    39000            60              3fc     14i?C           9!?       «''.
    STYRENE                                                                                                            -
    TETRA:H:DP:ETHE«                                                                                                                 190                          T




«
    TOLUENE                                                   2      f ^AA
                                                                     *•<* *
                                                                                          73000                            IB      679D:'     4   ^fi*r
                                                                                                                                                  • »• V
                                                                                                                                                             05' '
                                                                                                                                                              •> 1

            HLB'OETH»N£,1,1.1-                                                                  73
            MLOP.:ETHASE.1,1,2-
            y-
            n»u<ftfrflrTyv!   FliT
                   •» • •• * ULnL                                                                                                                                 14
     VINYL CHLORIDE                                                                             76
      VWLIDENE CH.O*:t£                                                                          .                                                                 2
    .IYLENES (TOTAL)                                                              4600                                             21830


    SEP!IV3LATILE£

                                                                                                                   •
    ANTHRACENE


    S^-S-CHiffiSETKTnETHftKl                                        6200C         42400   100000       T70f       1100? 276?C                     7«:c       r.::
    BIS!-2-CHLOR3ETH31Y)«ETHAN:
    B15(-2-CHLCF.3ETHrL)ETHE»                                       7500?         3400?    8300?       18300       570? 1410?                     65?: 3 e ::
    BSSC-ETHYLHElYLiPHTHALATE
i    ^YL^.N.rL HTH«.A.
                                               .
                                                                                                                                     30?
     B1-N-EJTYLPHTHAL£.T£
     Dl-N-OCTYL PHTHALATE
     D!:itOft38E«EKE.l.2-                                                                      370
     D!ZHLBF:3BENZENE.1.4-                                                                                                                                        10?
        BlETHYLf HTHf.LftTE          .'                                   B5                   350                                                   54            17
        FLyCRANTMENE
        FLUORENE
        BETHYLPHEN2L.4-
        MAFTHALENE                                            10                               140                                                                4"
^.^BAiryfiL'TuDf     ur
^•^•^•^•^•Lnnn > nl\tl»t

^•N:L                                                               12000         13900    12000                                    5800          450? 170?
GYRENE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 122 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                     1
                                                                                        DOM?;;;;: ; EN: HELLS
                                         SA-FLE LDC MB              MB      CP-I CP-B c-27 c-27\sciL c-2?                            T-TI
                                         SiSr^tE 1        1                  34           BH31         ll'M        BA913    BH28     BEI29
                                         COMRA:TOR       JRB        m        JRB           can          c&n         con        un     UR
                                         KTE S*.WiE5 B-10-E3. 12-10-64      8-12-63 5-23-B! 5-29-B5 5-2C-BS                 5-22-8! 5-23-E!
                                           UNITS       PPB       PPB          PF6     PPB     PPB     PPB                     PPB     PPB
            c^s:s
V:.J::.ES
ACTONS
BEKIEN;                                                   223C       1490     2470                                          IOC.1
BF.3'.::i:K.OF:C1.iTHASE                                   300                  94
BF.:«FOR«                                                                                                                                   2J
               r
CAFE:* tisu: iCE                                                                  ,

CH.:'.:HK:EN:                                                 4!                  76

CH.OF.r'O!*                                                72C                 190               6£J
I'*g.:Gr.;:Tn«E,l,l-                                       740                 1EC               95J
BICH.OF.2£THAKE,1,2-                                      450C                20DO              85CO          36
Bi:K.C-3ETHYLEK£,TRAKs-l,2-                                300                  45


nmiENlENE                                                 240C               1700                                                           2J
KTONiS
KTHYL4-,-2-PEK"AN:N-                                                                            83cc                        BE::            iJ
HETHYLEN: CH.DF1DE                                        5COC                    350
STYP.EN:                                                                                                                                    2J
TETRA:H.O«ETHE>i£                                                                                                                           2J
TO.UEKE                                                  35COC      2ic:: 34:::                    isc:
TR1CH.DP.3:THAN£,1,1,1-
TFilCHlSF.JETHANi, 1,1,2-                                                                                                                   3J
TP.ICHLORDETHYLENE                                                                21
VINYL CH.ORICE                                                94
VINYJE£N£ DLORIDE
IYLENES (TOTAL)

SEF.IV3LAT1LES

ACEN^HTHYLEKE

BENlOlllPYRENE
BIS(-2-CH:OP.3£TH:iY)£TH«iiI                         .   140000      5700     5BOOC
BIS(-2-CH:OP.3£TH3IY)H£THAN£
B15<-2-CHLOP.3ETHYL)ETHER                                56000       B900     270CC               BJ
B:S(2-ETHYLHEIYL)PHTHALATE                                                       45                    210J
BL'TYLHNIYLPKTKALATE                                                                                                 2»5i
CU«.£K£

BI-M-OCTY: PHTMALATE                                                                                                 220J


BIETHYLPrtTHALATE              • '                            210                  71
FLUOP.AKTHENE
FlUORENE
HETHYLP!1V:.,«-       -
MAPTHALENi                                                    210
PHENAKTHPINE
PHENOL                                                    5300                 2000       '-,

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 123 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                90Mi;t;:iEN' HELLS
                                   SA-.PLE LOC CP-2       CP-2   . CP-7 C-4A       C-22 C-22
                                   SAMPLE 1      33                BBI::            18
                                   CONTRACTOf     JRB      JRB      CDR     -«:     JRB    JRB
                                   DATE SABPlEt 8-12-6: 12-10-84 5-31-BJ 6-U-81 6-10-8: 12-10-84
                                       WITS        fft     PPB      PPB     PFB     PPB    PPB
3           Ct!*t2'JNIS

V3LATILES

ACETONE
BENZENE                                           24CC    2BOC             3770     1100     250


CARBON OJSL'!.F!DE
CK.OM?E«E«                                          21

cJiawrcp-"-"                                       164                               72
B1CH:OF.SEWNE,1,1-                                  78                      780      62
BICHLDR2ETHAN£,1,2-                                       !:?"            1J50C      65
D1CH;JR2EWLENE. TRANS- 1. ?-                                                200     200

BICHLO e 3PR2PEh£!l,3-
ETHYLBENJENE                                      HOC                      1770     2200
HTONES

                                                 irocc
STYRENE

 TOLUENE* "'                                     7i:::                    4'80C    1900?   110?
 TR1CH.OR2ETHAN£.!,1,1-
fcuOtOWETMANE,l,l,2-
BriCH' 0^2*^ "T* EM^
VI«ri CHLO(i:2E

 mreKDiSf"16                                                               724?

SE.-!IVDLAT1!.ES

ACENfl6HTHY!,EN£
ANTHRACENE
BEKlSdlPYSENE
IISi-2-CH.D»DETH2l»lETHAN£                      1400C?    6JOOC           lirOOO   47000   410C
B!S(-2-CHLOP.CETH2rY)RETHAN£             *


IIEt-2-CH;.Cfr;£tHYL)ETHEF                       7IC??   24"000     2eO    BS'?C   2iOOC    7700
BlE'2-ETHYLH£IYL)PKTHA;tTE                          14

 CU'.ENE

 BI-N-3CTYL PHTHALATE
                                                    27               8J               72

  D1ETHYIPK"HA:ATE         '                        30               2J               41
  FLU3RANTHI-NE                *
 >LUCREN£

  .1AFTHALEH!:                                                                        34
^PHENAMTHRSNE
IPHEN3L                                          22000    21000           10100       36
rpwjr:-*
 r
                   \
   •••••-              \
                                                                     6J

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 124 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                DOMNE^AJ! EKT MELLS
                               SABPLE LOC        Ml       Ml    C-24        CP-3 CP-3     C-7    C-7
                               SA'^LE 1                    36      15        32                  37
                               CONTRACTOR          MM:     JRE     JRB       JRE    JRB   MMC    JRE
                               BATE SAILED       6-16-BJ 8-12-83 8-12-83 M:-B: 12-10-84 6-U-BJ 8-12-83
                                  UNITS            PPE     PPE     PPB       PFE    PPB   PPB    PPi
     .        c:«::-s:s
VCLA7ILES

ACETONE
SEME*:                                                ?er-    4t:      35C    1700    490C        680    !*'•'.
BB"«"Tu nofurTHftH?                                                             97

CAFE:* BISL-.FJBE •
                                                                          *
CHLOfSHN'ENE
CHLOF.C1TH4N-
     tf
CH:o ; DP"                                                              4!     240                        *. .

BJCHLDWETHANE.l.l-                                 2C°:                 7C     12C             401       15C
BICHLORSETHA.SE.K2-                                                     32     300      56    7310      220C
B1CHLOR3EWIENE,TRANM,2-                                                 58     230             120        81
BICHLOfiOpf<0BA!(i,1.2-
BirH.OFCPF2eENE,l,3-
ETHYLBENIENE                                                  45t    1400      660            118'; 17C:
KTONES

KTHyiEHE'cHiayBE31-"                                                    14C     93     9?C    447C      1!?'.
STYRENE
TETFA>:D?.:ETH£HE
TO.'JEHE                                              370     6!(      400    62?C     Kf.   33:c.c     48:-::
TO^KTtt«:|;!;ri
VINYL CHLOFIDE
viNY.icEK'E CH:BF.:OE
JYLENESITCTAJ                                         11 A
                                                      * **
                                                                                              420C

SERIV3:AT]LES
                                             .


Affl|AOuTUVI tttf

AuTu&ft^ruf

B15!-2-CHL3 e OETK2lY)ETHAS:                                 38CTC    13?CC   1600C   2?00   545?: 3'cc:
jjc '-2-CH.DPIETKCIY : flETHA*<r      *

B!E!-2-CH.DP.S£THYL)£TH£f                                     4900    17000   9?oc t°o:      *.   VVt    •"»%•


B!S!2-ETHYLH£IYL)PHTHALATE
B'JTriBENZYLPHTMALATE
CU'ENE
Bl-^-B'JTYLPHTHALATE
BJ-N-OCTYL PHTHALATE
Jt'p- ()Pflt[N1[)(r 1 **-                                                         4
BICMLOP.SSEH£tt,l,4-                                                    190
BIETHYLFHTHALATE                                                         62      14                         A


FLUOP.ANTHENE                '
FLUOftENE
«ETHYLPHENOL,4-
 «A?THALE«E                                                              89       8
 PHENANTHP.ENE
 PHENOL                                                         62              260    790   13400       750C
 PYREME

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 125 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   /                                                        LIPMI UMFIU.


              /                                                    WLLS HITHIN ONTftlMfNT StSTCN                                                                  DOMGMOIDn B11S

 SWUNB LOCATION          C-M                                          R-*                                   R-l              R-3                   CP^9           C-ll               C-ll               C-2»
        y                                                                                R*

 Smf        NMCR             19                      11               me                  2J            MK                    24                   NBI7W          NONE                                   13
                        ii - -
 QMIAnClUR                                           Jm               UC                m                   UC                   m                 CON            UC                  m                 m
 MTESMUB                                            t-IO-U            ll-U-lt           I-I2-43         II-IHI               8-I2-4J               3-23-«            l-lt-OI         0-12-U            I-I2-M

 (HITS                        I/I                    •9/1
                                                                            t
                                                                                         I/I
                                                                                                                • 4
                                                                                                                              •I/I                 n/i                                •I/I              •I/I
                                  *


 UWIU0S                 I         IFt.NoU 1               IFt.NoU t         IFt.lbU 1           IFI.NoU 1         IFI.NoU 1          IFI.Noti 1          IFt.NoU I      IFt.NoU I          IFt.NoU 1          IFt.Not.
                                                                                                •                                  ,                                                                          •
                                  1       "~"«            1                                                                                                                               •

INETW                             1                       1                                1                                 .   1                      1                                1                   1
1                                 1                       1                                1                                      1                     1                                1                   1
IRUftNM                           IN, A.                  INA                   N          IN. ft.                    N           IN. A.            • 1                   N              IN. A.              IN. A.
iRNuimr                M0.20IN9                  K 0.201                        0 1(0.201                             0   M 0.201                 31 IU                   0        (0.201           1(0.201
IftRSENIC              M 0.011                   1(0.0(1                          M 0.01 IND                              1(0.011                 3     III,*                       0.0211          II 0.01 IND
IWRIIM                 1      IN, ft.            1       INA                    M 1         IN. ft.                   N   1 IN.A.              1711 1                      N             IN. A.     1         IN. A.
IKnUIlM                M0.05IND                  MO. ffll                       C 1(0.031                             E   MO. 051                0.1 IU                    C       (0.031           M0.03IND
ICMNIIM                10.013 1                  IIO.CII                        I M 0.011                             I    1(0.011                   4 IU                  1        0.0211          II 0.011
                                                                                                            '
fOlCIlM                           IN. a.         9        INA                   e          IN. ft.                    A           IN. A.         7070 1                    A             IN. A.     1          INA
IOMMIUI                   M 1                    1 O.M 1                        i    0.47 1                           L      0.331                  14 II                  L         3.1 1          10.38 1
ICWU                           IN, A.            1       INA                    8          IN. A.                     S           IN. A.             4 IU                  S             IN. A.     1     IN.A.
ICOnCR                   0.001                   MO. 021                            (0.021                                 (0.021                                                   0.131           M 0.021
                                                                                                                                                    •
IIRDN                          IN, A.            1       INA                    M           IN. ft.                   A           IN.A.                                    A             IN. A.     1          INA
                                                                                                                                                    •
III W                    0.0311                  1(0.0?!                        N    0.0X1                            N     0.0731                                         N        0.121           1(0.021
                                                                                                                                                    •
iwncsiiM                       IN. A.            1      IN. A.                  A           IN. A.                    A           IN. A,       143901                      A             IN. A.     1          INA
tmcncsE                        IN. ft.           1      It ft.                  I           IN. ft.                   L           IN. ft.           71                     L             IN. ft.    1         IN, ft.
INENCURV                (0.0011                  1(0.0011                       T 1(0. 001 IND                        1    (0.001 IND
                                                                                                                                                    •                      r       (0.0011          10.00101
INIWCL                   0.171                   1 0.0791                       I 1(0.051                             S     0.12 1           IIIOI                         9        0.30 1          10.032 1
ipowssn*                       IN. A.            1 IN.A.                        1 1 IN.A.                             1           IN.A.      1(1 1301 1                    1              INA       1      IK.N.
I9EUXK*                   till                   1 0.0141                       S U 0.01 IND                          s     0.0211                  I1                     S        O.OKSI          If 0,011
ISIIAW                   0.02SI                  M 0.011                             0.0111                                 0.0101                   ] IU                           0.0191          110.011
ISOOIW                         IN. A.            1      IN. A.                              IN. ft.                                IN. A.            • 1                                  IN. A,    1          IRA
ITHPLLIlfl              (0.101                   MO. 101                             0.10 1                                 0.12 1                   4 IU                          ( 0. 101         MO. 101
(TIN                            IN. ft,          1 IN.A.                                    IN.ft.                                IN.     ft.       |7 III,*                              IN. ft.             IN. ft.
ivmnoiin                        IN. ft.          1       IN. ft.                            IN. A.                                 IN. A.        ni     1                                 IN. A.              IN. ft.
line                       0.251                 1 O.OPBI                            O.OM»                                   2.1 1                    II                       •     0.901             0.0311
1                                1               1      1                                   1                                      1                    1                                I                   1
ICVMIDF.                 1 0.011                 110.011                            ( 0.011                                ( 0.011                  • 1                            ( 0.011            ( 0.011
HWNTLS                     0.061                  1 3.00 I                            1.05 1                                0.46 1                      IN. ft.                     0.?3 1            0.17 1
IK HTN1 SI IDS                   IN. A.           1 IN.A.                                    IN. A.                                IN.       ft.        IN. ft.                          IN. ft.             IN.ft.
                          1
                              '       1           1      i                                  1
                                                                                                •                                  t        •            t                               1                    •

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 126 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                    LIQMI LANDFILL

                                        tPMVIENT UOJLS                                                          WUS HIIMIN OXTfllWOT SWOI

 »mi« UEOTION            C-«A                                                   C-15          C-17                C-J             C-11            C-IOA                 C-IOA       C-«A


 SflMPUEMME*             27                 1                  12                7            me                  me                 me           me                    a               me
 OMIM.IM                 JW                m                   m                 m            m                   uc                 m                uc                                uc

 BAIE SAMPLE*        •-12-tl               •-IO-U          t-IO-U              »-io-ai        I-IO-4J            t- 11-01            I-IO-4J          (-II-OI           •-I2-4J

 win                     •I/I
                            .| . -
                                           pq/l      -         •1/1
                                                                            -
                                                                                 •1/1
                                                                                     i                                                  i'"            • I
                                                                                                                                                                    •I/I        -
                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                            •                                               1
 CONHHOS             •        iFt.Noif 1          IFt.Natt 1        IFI.Nott 1       IFt.fett 1      IFI.IMt 1          IFt.Nott I       IFt.NDtt I        IFt.NOtt •       IFt.feU i        IFI.IMr
                              a                 •


IICtflLS                      i                1                 1                 1                                                                                    1
I                             1                1                 1                 1                                                                                    1
IALIHINJI                     ill              I II              I II              I II                                   H                   N              N          I I  I                   N
IPHIIKXT         1(0.021                II0.20IW         K0.20IND          II0.20IW                                       0                   0              0    ( 0.20IW                       0
IMSENIC          10.01(1                M O.OIIW         H O.OIIW          110.011                                                                                 0.02)1
IVMIIM           i                ill   1        III             III       1        III                                   N   •               R              R          I I  I                   N
IKHnillM         1(0.031                H 0.081          1(0.031           II103IW                                        C                   C              C    10.051                         C
ICMMIM           110.011                KO.OIIW          110.011           1(0.011                                        r                   1              T     O.OUI                         T
IOUHM                             III   1        III     1       III       1         III                                  A                   A              A          I I  I                   A
ICWOtltH                 l.( 1          1 0.0351         1 0.37 1          1 0.21 1                    L                  L                   L              L      5.1 1                        L
ICOWU                             III   1        III     1       III       1         III               S                  S                   S              S          I I  I                   S
lOmi                 0.0471             1(0.021          1(0.021           1(0.021                                                                                 0.0501
HMM                               III   1        III     1       III       1         III                A                 A                   A              A-         I  I I
ILCAB                0.0711             1(0.021          1(0.021            1(0.021                     H                 N                                  H     O.OJ2I
                                                                                                                                              •
iwnesnn                           in    1        III     1       III        1        III                A                 A                   A              A          I  I I
INVOfCSE                          III   1        III     1       III        1        III                L                 L                   L              L          I  I I
neicuw           KO.OOII                KO.OOII          10.00101          1(0.0011                     f                 v                   T            f »    0.00111
Mian.            |( 0.031               l( 0.051         IO.OU 1            10.121                      S                 1                   S              C     0.11 1
ipornssnii       I                in    1          III   1        III       1        III                1                 1                   1              1          lit,
ISOfitltM        M O.OIIW               1(0.011          KIOIIW            1       IW                   S                 S                   B              S     0,0111
ISIlVfK          1(0.011                1(0.011          1(0.011            1(1.011                                                                                O.OISI
ISOOIW                   III            1          III   1        III       1        III                                                                                    III
inwillP              1.27 1             KO.OIIW          1(0.101            KO.OIIW                         _                                                      (0.101
INN                        III                    I I
                                                    I            III        1       III                                                                                     III
lURNROIIJN               IN. I                   I  I
                                                    I             III       1       III                                                                                     III
HOC                  0.111                 O.OKI            0.0251          1 0.0*61                                                                                    1.2 1
1                               1                 1              1          1       1                                                                                       1
icvmire           (o.oii w                1 O.OIIW         (0.011           KO.OIIW                                                                                ( 0.011
inrias           0.201                      0.171          o.ia i           i i.j i                                                                                o.n i
ircicnn SOLIDS           in                       I II          III         1 III                                                                                           in
                                                  1                  I     I         I

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 127 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                      IIPMI uvoiu.           ^^m                                                                                        ,       ,     '^^

                   i                                                                                 DMCRQDIENT (HIS

 SHUNS LOCRTIIM
              i
                             O-3               (JV-J
                                                                C-7                                  tP-f                                                                                       c-a
 SMUMMEI I
         I
                             3?                me               MX                 17                33                  IOC              NN779         NONE                  10                MME
               1
 OMTRncm      /              m                 m                uc                 m                 m                   m                ON                HUC                in               JW




 MTE 9MUB/ -                tVlMJ                           (-K-OI             l-IZ-43                               12-IOHM           V3I-03               (-l(-fll      l-IO-t]               IJ-IO-04

 wire / /                    •I/I                                                  I/I               •1/1
                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                                          •f/l                             n/i
 camttK                                                     i         in. N»I« 1        IFI.IMff 1          IFI.Not* 1       IFt.Natt •        IFt.Nott 1         IFt.NoU 1         IFI.Notv I       IFI.IMt
                                                                                                                                                                                    C



IICTILS                             1                                              1                      1                                                                     1
1                                   1                                              1                      1                                                                     1
lALUUMM                      Id. A.                    N                i          IN. A.             IN. A.                   N
                                                                                                                                          •                        N          IRA.                     N
IflNTINMT              ( 0.20IW                        0                0    (O.POI           KO.MI                            o          31 U                     0   II 0.201                        0
IMSOIIC                 0.0381                                                0.0131          II 0.011                                    1?                           U 0.011
ItMUM                        IN. A,                    M                N          IN. A,     1        IN. A.                           J>8                        N   1      IRA.                    N
IKnunM                 (0.031                          r                c    IO.OJINO         110.051                               l(0.4|                         E   II 0.05IND                     E
 ICRONIIM               0.01(1             '           t                T     0.0171            0.0311                              114.31                         T   II A.OII                       T
 IGRLCIUN                    IN. A.                    A                A          IN. A.             IN. A.                        IZ40M                          A          W.A.                    A
 IOMNIIM                 it 1                          I                L      ICI               I7.S 1                             1 477                          L      0.74 1                      L
 IOOM.T                      IN. A.                    9                S          IN. A.             IN. A.                        1(141                          S          IRA.                    S
•am*                    0.0431                                                A.IO 1            0.0581                                  •                                 O.OWI
MUM                          IN. A.                    fl               A          IN, A.             IRA.
                                                                                                                                        •
                                                                                                                                                                   A          IRA.                    A
1100                    0.0401                         »                N     0.0001            o.oni                                1140                          M    0.0*1                         N
INORCSIUI                    IN. A,                    0                A          IN.*.              IN. A.                         (?80                          A          IRA.                    A
IM»B*CSE                     IN. A.                    L                L          IN. A.             IN. A.                            •
                                                                                                                                                                   L          IRA.                    L
IKflQJRY               0.001(1                         t                »    10.001 INO        (O.OOIIND                                •
                                                                                                                                                                   T     10.001 INO                   T
nitra.                  0.0921                         C                %     0.11 I            0.19 1                                 394                         S      0.10 1                      S
IPOtflGSfUl                  IN. A,                    1                1          IN. A.             IRA.                           (44M)                         1           IRA.                   1
(SELDOM                ( 0.01 1KB                      S                S     0.19 1            O.OKI                                    •                         S   II 0.011                        S
ISIWW                   0.0111                                                0.0171            o.oeot                                   •                             « 0,011
ISOOItM                      IN. A.                                                IN, A.             IN. A.                                                           1        (Hit
                                                                                                                                         •
IIUUHN                 10.101                                                (0.101            1 0. 101                                   J III                        110.101
ITIN                         IN, A,                                                IN. A.             IRA.                               17 III,*                               IRA.        •
IWNflOllH                    IN.*.                                                 IN. A,            IN. A,                          1141 1                                     IRA.'
line                    •.S                                                   O.Z5 1            0.33 1                                   • 1                              0.111
1                                                                                  1                 1                                      1                                   1
ICYWIOE                    <O.OI                                             (0.011            ( 0.011                                   • 1                             1 0.011
inrNLS                      0.80                                              0.87 1            t.( 1                                          IN. A.                     0.79 1
ISU5POCO) SOLIDS                    N.A,                                           IN. ft.                IN. A.                               IRA.                             IRR
1                                                      '                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                   1                      t                                    1
1                      .

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 128 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                LIMII UMFIU.
                                                                                micmiofl HQiS
 9N1IN6 IOCATIW   C-ll                C-ll               OH                                       C-27               C-27          C-29               C-31

 SmiNJCFJ         me                  IOC                34                     NBB77I            mm                 HOC           NM800              NN773

 CDfllMJM             J»              JRJ                M                      an                CON                ON            CM                 CON

 Mitamo           I-IO-U          IMOHM              1-10*3                                                                       3-22-83

 IMIIS                                        •          if/I                   •I/I              •1/1                                                 •I/I

 CMUKB            I        IFt.Mt 1         IFI.Nolt •          IFt.ftrti   I        iri.Notv 1         IFI.Note e        IFt.tM* 1       IFt.NoU 1           IFI.Nott
                                                                t                                                                         •



INETALS                                                    1                                            1                              1                   1
1                                                          1                    •                       1                              1                   1
IRLIMIMJI                   N                 tf           IN.*.        1                       • 1                         N      • 1                  • 1
inn lion                    a                 0     (0.201          (331                        31 IU                       0       31 IU               31 IU
innate                                               0.0871             43 1                (1.91 1                                  3IU.I               3 IU.I
IKWIIM                      •                 N            IN. A,     1060                      i1                          N   1(921 1             (711 1
iKnunii                     E                 C     (0.031              10                     3.3 1                        E   1(0.31 1              0.3 IU
I0VMIIM                     r                 T      O.OUI             9.2                       4 IU                       T        4 IU                4 IU
ICflLCIM                    A                 A            IN. A.  (3800                    29000 1                         A    937001            131700 1
lOODIItM                    L                 L      31.0 1            108 1                  IK 1                          L      IK II           1(9.41 II
icawLf                      8                 1            IN. A.   (9.51                      4 IU                         s        4 IU                4 IU
ICOWI                                                0.20 1             •                      • 1                                    •                •
11*01                       N                              IN. A.       I                      • 1                          A         I                i
                                              •                                                                             N
IUAO                        N                 N      0.92 1                                    • 1                                  •                 •
                                                                        •
INnaCSIIM                   A                 II           IM.A, ' 17800                    1JMOJI                          A    (42001            1340
IMMHCSE                     I                 L            IN. A.      368                     • 1                          L       44               133
INERMY                      V                 T     0.00241                                    • 1                          V       I                f
                                                                        •
INIOtt                      1                 8       0.70 1           103                     • 1                          |    n             K8.91
irainssnii                  1                  1           IN. A.     3920                  (47(011                         1 (464011              1(279011
I9UNIW                      1                 8      0.0291             I                      • 1                          8    II                    •1
isnvn                                                 O.OWI            m.ll                    • 1                                  1 IU                3 IU
19001*                                                      IN. A. 1 1030001                   • 1                               303001              9310 1 '
IIHUIUI                                               0.24 1            10 IU                   3 IU                               10 IU                4 IU
ITIN                                                        IN.*.       17 IU.I                17 III,!                            17 IU.I             17 IU.I
IWHVItM                                                     IN. A.   (101 1                    72 1                                 4 IU                4 IU
I1INC                                                 1.3 1             91 1                   • 1                                 • 1                 • 1
 1                                                          1               1                     1                                   1                   1
 ICVIWIOE                                            (0.011             • 1                    • 1                                 • 1                 • 1
KUDOS                                                7.1 1                       MCA.             IN. A.                              IN. A,              IN. A.
ISUStWa SUDS                                             IN.*.                    IN. A.                IN. A.                        IN. A.              IN. A.
1                                _                       1                        1                     1                                 r                   i
 1=      :   !                                                                                                                            1    -      - - -1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 129 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                            1 »C!«' 2


                            •v;.           •vs.                                •v;.                •v:.
                              0;             e.                o:.             or.                 C34!.            es*:.
          :>=:.<•:         <see:          (see                 (OBC:           (sec;               I see.           (OK.         (•-•    !20C


»:?•:•:-.:«:!•••. £•••:«       1                 4           :..•        8...                    e..-             • >•           n.      f .

»:-:£»£                        i             17              O.t5        O.'S                    O.'S             S.'J           ts     .'S
£•••. I?*:-*-                  «             2C              O.'t        Ol>6                    0..6             C;«6          ...     ...
                               S                             01.5        01 -5                   Ol-i             Ot.«5         ..!     ••!
                                                                                                 01*2:                          .•i:
                              11             *e              Oil 11     o'.'-i                   Of IB          0..-8                   !•••'
TI::-.S« :•••{<£               4             13              o.«.       o.«*                     OL«.           01.4            .«.     .«.
'. '.••'•.•;•. 3»:r-»s£        i              1              Bl.>2       O..J                    Ov.«2            Ol.«2         ,«i     .»<
•.•.:-*>::-.j»:f-«k«           4             13              »L«4        0;«i                    ei.4             e.'.          .•-     .*•
                                                                                                                                        .,•
•.••:::-.:*:£••«••:            1              3              Ol><        Ol«'                    O.il             Ol't          .,•
•.;•:::-. s« :£••••>£          2              »              C.-J        o;>2                    C.-2             C.>2          ..:     .,:
•.••:::•.:«:£••!»•:            2              S              C..J        C;>2                    C.-2             S.«2          .•i     .«?
:::-.:«>£•••>.:               •'             3.              C.«"        C.«"                    e.«v             B;f •,        .«••    ..••
•.-•:::•««.£                   3             •;              C.-J        C.-3                    e>.*3            C.'3          .'3     .•:
»:r:<.i                       •.4            4?                4! J          4' t                  43 j              3> -        11      3: .
•£••-. :$:i.*-. »£•:«.£        4             :,              C.«-        :.*.                    0;*.             e.«.          ...     .«-
"£:»••«                        3             i:              e.o         e.*3                    0;>3             e.t3      •   .•:     ..;




                                                                        t. J    S.-3        t.-.
                k. t£»:>:s:                                             HCU; *: !!«::•.; k: ««:

                                                      MS.               MS.              MS.              Si!
                                    e..                                cw:.              o:.
                                looe.                                  (t»X.            («.•.'



                                                     .•t              O.«t             C.it          C.i:
                                                     li««             Ol««             Ci>9              :.•'
                                                     I..4}            O.'iJ            C...5         C.».!
                                                     5:: •             «:•             c 2
                                    j:                                                  '', :       .";.'
                                    n                )L*>3            Ss               •;.«.i       i.»-J
                                    '3           e
                                                                      C..U             0..1.              t..:.
                                                     11.15            Ol>15
                                                                                       £7*          c-'- 5
                                                     J.«?
                                                                      B.^-             -!! -;i!
                                                     ).«3S            Ol'SO            01.3:         :.o:
                                    20               >;.J5            01*20            e.«2:      ' :i«2:
                                    26:
                                     15              Jf5
                                                     »L>11             O'*11           ei«n              c-.'11


   pee • »«fj Mi llul>
   01 J. C>:.    • OtSflVK CWCtk-UMSk
   • • IUIIKJM v»vuf$ otJEirt: iir.t >::

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 130 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

LEGEND
•   LAKC 1UNFACC SAMPLE


                                                   Iff   0*CH**»«




      LAKE SURFACE HEADSPACE SAMPLE LOCATIONS AND NUMBERS

                          LIPARI LANDFILL, PITMAN, N.J.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 131 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

LEGEND


 •    LANOFILl AlH V | N T
      I f A C H A T E STMAM E M A N A T I N G
      mow BASE of LANOFai
      IMtAHKUCNT

 •^ W'SITC MONITOAIN6 WILL

  •   LEACMATE HEAOS'ACE SAM»LE




                                                ZONE I-LEA1

                                                     ZONE I-LEA3




                                                                     IV-LEA1
                                                                      V      \
                                                                       IV-
                                                                   ZONE JV-LEA3




            LEACHATE HEADSPACE AND AIR VENT
          GRAB SAMPLE LOCATIONS AND NUMBERS


                    LIPARI LANDFILL, PITMAN. N.J.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 132 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                     CDM      1987
Sample location          R-l       R-2         R-lA         R-4    R-S         1-4          R-7           R-8        R-»       R-10      R-ll      R-12    R-ll      R-l 4    R-16


Aluminum                 SIS        188          168     241      1400       1176)          140           S2S        S94          S96  7560         116     1260    1190)      469
Antianny                57U         570          STU      570      570         570          570           STU        570          STU   STU         STU      570      5 TO     5 TO
Araenic                  100        100          100      100      100         100          100           100        100          100    19         100       100     10O      100
Barium                 1125)     |196|          1610      450     142)         |B6|       1200)          181)       1)6)         121)   666        122)     |2)|     (52)     169)
Beryllium               4.90      4.90          4.90     4.90     4.90         4.90        4.90          4.90        4.90       4.90    4.90       4.90     4.90     4.90     4.90
Cadmium                 4.70      4.70            64     4.70
                                                            4.70              4.70         4.70          4.70          24       4.70    7.9        4.70     4.70     4. TO    4. TO
Calcium                soooo      6000         62000   S42009640            2)200         18500        116000      86100       10700 128000       16200    54100    15200    22000
Chtonium                7.§u      7.80            10     7.80
                                                            7.60               7.80        7.60          7.60          11          60   7.80       7.80        16       16      20
Cobalt            *      200       200           200      200200               2rtj         200           200         200         200   200         200       200     200      200
Copper                 |20|M      Him        140M     Him   HUM              HUM           Him           HUM        Him        |20|M   HUM        I24IM      11M      S6M     HUM
Cyanide                   10J      1U            •      •       •                 •          •             •          •              •     •                   •
Iron                   1)400     21600     184000   tOSOO  41500             12)00        74200          |59|       176        1160     169000      259     1680      124     1760
Lead                        •      SUM      1040J       •    SUM                 •            •           SUM . SUM               •      SUM        SUM      SUM      SUM      SUM
Magnesium             |12«0|      JS60      42600   14800 11250)             2290        12160)          4700       4700       |S08|  22400        4700     4700    12190)   (2090)
Manganese                179       16S       1240     446     111              257          911           100        100        112)     44S        100     111)        62       61
Mercury               0.161*    0.16UM     0.16UM. 0.16UM 0.16UM           0.16UN        0.16UM        0.16UM     0.16UM      0.16UM B.16UM      0.16UM   0.160M    0.16UM   0.16U*
Nickel                  2MJ        250          45    250    250               250          25U           250        250        (IB)    |2A|        250      250       250     DH
Potassium              5160     111 on)      9)60    5710   20«0              8110        12500         1S600       B110      (1100)  16000      |4141|     •2)0    I1540J   14140)
Selenium                Sun        lUM          SUM         SUM    SUM         SUM          SUM          SUM         SUN        SUM       SUM       SUM      SUM      SUM      SUM
Silver                1.10R          a            •           •       •          •            •            •           •      7.1UM      7.1UM   7.1UM
Sodium                 6140
                       100M
                                 n«oo• 112000•          4060
                                                           •
                                                                  4S10U
                                                                     •
                                                                              4S10
                                                                                 •
                                                                                         14810)
                                                                                              •
                                                                                                       41)00
                                                                                                            •
                                                                                                                   27400
                                                                                                                       •
                                                                                                                              24200     11)000   14700      1S80     7060    24700
Thallium                                                                                                                       10UH     100UM     10UM         *
Tin .                   160        160           160     16U       16U         16U          160           160        160        360       360      205       160      1)6       42
Vanadium                210        210          12)1     21U       21U         21U          210          210         21U       121)       |)6|     210      (28)      210      210
line                    21S        128         15)00     190       190          91           95          1VU         190        190       220       SI       190      190      190


tuple location         C-29     C-29 DO         •aaplc location      Oil         C-12       C-ll        C-lMu        C-14        0)9


Aluminum               1018        HIS          Aluminum             1210        1010        76)0         6550       41400       2160
Antimony                SOU         SOU         Antimony              STU         STU         STU          STU          STU       S70
Araenlc                  SU          SU         Araenlc               100         10U         100          100          100       100
Barium                I96IN        106N         Barium               191)        |18S|       199)         192)         421       169)
Beryllium               2UN         2UH         Beryllium            4.90         4.90       4.90         4.90         4.90      4.9O
Cadmium                   6            1        Cadmium              4.70         4.70       4.70         4.70          ».7      4.70
Calcium               •0)00       •H100         Calcium             19600       20400       10600        11400        9500      22000
Chromium                   27        6S         Chromium             7.80          18           41           14         268        20
Cobalt                   100        lou         Cobalt                 200        200          200         200          200       200
Copper                   100        100         Copper               HUM         HUM         HUM             27         ISM      Him
Cyanide                  100        100         Cyanide
Iron                    •285       •574         Iron                11200   22400     28100  26000 212000    1760
Lead                        •         •         Lead                     •        •        •      •   2)1J    SUM
                      14600)      10000                              8)80    1)100    15600  15800    7)00 12090)
Manganese/              '194        197         Manganese              17)    146       161    162     299     61
Mercury                 •.20       0.20         Mrrcury            0.16UM  0.16UM    0.160M 0.16UM  0.75M O.lftUM
Nickel                    100       100         Nickel                 250    250              25U1)   278   111)
                                                                                                     S180 141401
Potassium             (1600)     11600)         Potassium          (2060) |2060| 12060) 12060)
Selenium                  SU         SU         Selenium               SUM    SUM       SUM    SUM     SUM    SUM
Silver                    61        US          Silver                   •        •        •      •      •      •
Sodium                21700C     21900C         Sodium               S4SO   12600      9560   7490  62100   24700
Thallium                  SU          SU        Thallium                 •         •       •      •      •      *

Vanadium                 400        400         Tin                    16U      |)7|     160  (17)     160     42
 line                     26         70         Vanadium               210     210       210   210     117    21O
                                           —    x inc
                                                V  1*1^                19U     19U        j»     15    1)9    190
 3   Estimated value for •tenatlvely Identified coopound.            II The  result 1* greater than the Inttrumrrit djrtectlon limit, but
 M   Indicates spike sairple recovery w»s not within control limits,    less  thwt Uie detection limit i«juUed by Ute contract,
 U   Compound w»s analyzed foi but not detected. Detection limit     *  tMta  aid not r*i» O* quality enuiance ieq<jlrenrnta.
     repoitrd.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 133 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

LIPARI LANDFILL SITE
      PITMAN, NJ




  COMPREHENSIVE SAMPLING
  LIMITED SAMPLING
  WETLAND
  VATERBDDY
  PAVED ROAD
  DIRT ROAD

    *   305 METERS 1




                           KPA/F.RT   MARCH   1988

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 134 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

          ATTACHMENT C


QUALITATIVE SUMMARY OF COMPOUNDS

DETECTED IN THE ON-SITE LIPARI
LANDFILL AND IN OFF-SITE AREAS

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 135 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            QUALITATIVE SUMMARY OF COMPOUNDS DETECTED ON-SITE & OFF-SIVE LIPARJ AREAS



    TILES                   CK-SITE       OFF-SITE

                            COHANSEY      CNSY    »COD            h^RSH       CHNT BR       R RUN             ALCYON              RESIOEr.T:.-;

COMPOUND                    SOIL MAT      WAT     WAT       SOIL LEA AIR      SEP VOT      SEP WAT       SEP WAT AIR              AIR


 CHLORCME7H«CE                                                      X          X                                  X
•BRCMOMETHnNE
VINYL CHLORIDE                      X       X                       X
 CKLDROETrttNE                      X                               X                                X
METHYLENE CHLORIDE                  X      X       X          X     X          X     X      X        X    X       X                X
ACETONE                         X   X              X          X     X     X        X X      XX            X       X       X       X
 CARBON DISULFIDE               X                             X     X                                     X
 1 . l-DICHLDROETHENT                                               X     X                                                        X
 1 . 1-DICHLOROETHANE               X       X      X          X     X     X                          X                             X
 1 . 2-DICHLOSOETHENE           X   X       X      X          X     X
 CHLOROFORM                     X   X       X      X                X

                                X   X       X      X                X     X                                                        X
                                X   X              X                X          X     X               X    X
1.1.1-TRICHLOROETHASE           X   X              X                      X        X X      X                             X   X    X
CARBON TErRACHLORIDE                                                X     X
VINYL ACETATE
BRONODICHLOROMETHANE                X       X      X    .
1,2-DICHLOROPROPENE             X           X
cis-1,3-DICHLOROPROPENE             X
TRICHLQROETHE;E                 X   X       X                 X     X     X          X                                    X        X
DIBROMOCKLORCr-XrH=>NE
1,1.2-TR:CHLORQETKV:;E          X           X                             X                                                        X
                                X   X       X      X          X     X     X        X X      X        X    X       X                X
  a.-s-l, 3-TRJCHLOROE7HA.STF                                                                                     X
       DRT-1                                X
       rt.-2-PE:                X   X       X      X          X     X                                     X
       o>~                      X   X                               X     X                                               X        X
TETRACHLOTOETHEr^:           X      X       X                 X
1,1.2, 2-TERTRACHLOR^-£7Hi:Z
TOLUEN-E                     X      X      X       X          X     X     X        X X      X    X        X   X       X            X
CHLOROBENIZENE               X      X       X                 X     X     X
ETHYLBECENE                  X      X       X      X          X     X     X    X                     X                        X   X
STYPE^E                      X      X       X                             X                          X
XYLD^S                       X      X       X      X          X     X     X    X                                  X       X
2-CHLDROriyYL VINYL ETKZRR x
C3ALKYL BENZE                                                             X                                               X        X
CgALKANE                                                                  X
                                                                          X
CflALKASE                                                                 X                                               X
-REON-12


       KEf:
          iaiSY- Cohansey Aquifer                R RUN-Rabbit Run                        LEA-Leachate saziple
          KWOOD-Kirlcwocd Aquifer                ALCYON-Alcyon Lake                      AIR-Air sanple
          I^ViRSH-Chestnut Branch Marsh          CHNT BR-Chestnut branch stream
                                                 WAT-Water sample

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 136 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                QUALITATIVE SUMMARY OF COMPOUNDS DETECTED ON-SITE & PIT-SITE LIPARI AREAS


SSMI-VCLATILES                            OFF-SITE

                                          CNSY       KW3OD         MhRSH    CHOT BR   R BUN   ALCVDN      RESIDCr

COXPOCND                       SOIL WAT    WAT WAT           SOIL LEA AIR   SED WAT SED WAT SED WAT AIR      AI?


PHENOL                          X   X            X   X              X   X                 Z       X
bis (2-OiLORDETHYL) ETHER           X            X    X        X    V
                                                                    X   Y
                                                                        A    Y
                                                                             A

2-CHLOROPHENOL                  X
1 , 3-DICHLOROSENZENT:          X                             X
1 , 4-DICHLOROBE:ZENE           X   X       X
BEXZVL ALCOHX                   X   X                               X
1 , 2-DICHLDFOBENZESE           X   X       X                  X    X
2-METIWL PHENOL                 X   X                               X                         X
bis (2-CHLOROISOPROPVL)ETHER    X
4-WETWL PHENOL                  X   X                               X                 X       X
N-^TfOSO-DI-N-PROPYlAMINE       X
ffiXACHLQROETHANE
NITROSES'ZSS
                                                               X    X
2-N'ITRO PHENOL
2,4-DIMETHirL PHESOL            X                                   X            X
EH^30IC ACID                    X   X                         X     X        X   X    X   X
bis (2-CHLOROETHOXV)ETHA,NT         X       X        X        X     X            X    X   X
2,4-DICHLORDPHENOL                  X
1.2, 4-TRJCHLORO8ES2ENE         X
NAPHTHALENT                     X   X                         X    X    X             X   X
4-OJLOROA.N'ILISE               X   X                              X
HDACHLORM'JTADI EST
4-CHLORO-3-METHYL PHESOL        X
2->ET»fL NAPHTHALENE            X                             X     X

2.4, 6-TRICHLOROPHE:OL
2,4, 5-TRICHLOROPHENOL
2-CHLORaC^PHTHALENT

           PHTHALATE            X
                                X                             X
3-NITROASALINE
ACENAPHTHENE                                                  X             X    X    X
2 , 4-DINITRDPHENOL             X
4-NITRDPHDWL                    X                                                     X
DIBQTCFURAN                     X
2 , 4-DINITRSTOLyC.T            X
2. e-DINlTROTOLUDS
DIETHVL PHTHALATE                                                                     X
4-OiLOROPHENyL-PHENVLETHER
                                                                                      X
4-N1TRCANILINE
4. 6-DLVITRO-2-44ETOYLPHENOL
N-SITROSODI PHENYLAMINE                                       T
4-BRCM3PHDWL-PHES*YLETHER
HEXACHLOROBENZD,T                                             X
PEOTACHLOROPHENOL               X
PHDAVTHPENE                     X                             X                       X       X
AOTHRACENZ                      X                                                     X       X

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 137 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            QUALITATIVE SUMMARY OF COMPOUNDS DETECTED ON-SITE & OFF-SITE LIPARI AREAS
              /

SEMI-VOLATILES             ON-SITE     OFF-SITE

       /                   OOHANSEY    CNSY   KWOOO        MARSH        CHNT BR         R RUN       ALCYON   RESIDENTIAL

COMPOUND                   SOIL WAT     WAT   WAT       SOIL \FJ\ AIR   SED WAT SFJ) WAT SED WAT AIR           AIR



DI-N-BUTYL PHTHALATE          X   X      x                x   x             X       X    X    X      X   X
FLOURANTHENE                  X                           x   x             X       X   X            X
PYRENE                        X                           X   X             X            X           X
BIJTYLBENZYL PHTHALATE        X   X            x                            X                   X
3, 3'-DICHLORDBENZENE
B ENZO ( a ) ANTHRACENE       X                           X                 X            X           X
BIS ( 2-ETHYLHEXYL) PHTHALATE X          x     x          X   X             X       X    X    X      X   X
CHRYSENE                      X                           X                 X       X   X            X
DI-N-OCTYL PHTHALATE          X                x          X   X             X                        X
BENZO(b)FLOURANTHENE          X                           X                 X                        X
BENZO(k ) FLOURANTHENE        X                           X                 X                        X
RENZO( a) PYRENE              X   X                                         x •          x           X
INDENO( 1 , 2 , 3-od ) PYRENE                             X                 X                        X
DIBENZO( a,h ) ANTHRACENE                                                                            X
BENZO(gf h. i ) PERYLENE                                  X                 X                        X




INORGANIC

ARSENIC                       X   X      X     X          X   X             X                   X    X   X
BARIUM                        X   X      X     X          X                 X X               X      X   X
BERYLLIIM                     X          X     X              X             X                X X     X   X
CADMIUM                       X   X      X     X          X    X            X       X    X    X      X   X
CHRCMIIM                      X   X      x     x    •     X   X         .       X   X    X    X      X   X
COPPER                        X   X      X     X          X    X            X       X    X    X      X   X
LEAD                          X   X      X     X          X   X             X       X    X    X      X   X
MERCURY                       X   X      X     X          X    X            X                X X     X   X
NICKEL                        X   X      X     X          X    X            X       X    X    X      X   X

SELFNI1M                          X      X     X                            X X                 X    X   X
SILVER                        X   X      X     X               X                    X           X    X   X

THALIIM                                  X     X                            X

VANADHW                       X   X      X     X          X    X            X       X    X    X      X   X
                                                                            X       X    X      X    X   X
y.FNT                         X   X      X     X          X    X

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 138 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  ATTACHMENT D


GEOLOGIC PROFILES




                    \\

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 139 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

\   GEOLOGIC CROSS SECTIONS

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 140 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  Uppw ColMnin Stntf



                 cu               toow Co»<«n««y Sanl




                 I            I KukMIOd S«nd

                 I. ' •'     II
                 I         , • I Mamtquan Fo>ni«lioni


                 I   : : : I V«c*mao« ^O'^al'Om


       •SkmyMM




                                             ChoUnm Bianch




Section A-A°

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 141 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                            I        I lowvf
X

                                                                                                            \£<fcf\ lt|rt"*°*1Cll»

                                                                                                            I        I Muitwood Sand




                                                                                                                                                    V
                                                                                                                                                        140




                                                                                                                                                        IM




                                                                                                                         ChciIrM Bund)
                                                                                                                                                        100

                                                                                                                                       Oil   K.|«




                                                                                                                                                        to




                                                                                                                                                        10
                                            TM>Mgf.«K.iViiX£v>XUUVJi\^Viiiix^Ai-*^              ?>wKv\

                                 ::•:::::::::                                        :•:•:::::::•


                                                                                     ,..•-. ~-~
                                                                      •sHflf-.-f-                   ht'Hi
                                                               Trf >""
    'T* tT* ijvsi* ^S1^ 2f:^J
    ^"**   ••   ^i» '. ."-i/* W^il
                                                        rHrlv
    j£^m* r^ *-*~ i—"»^*




                                                                  Section B-B*

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 142 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

            I         IAluwium ar.d M.vsh St<fcm«nli

            I ..".... ,*n
            I        -.ill Uppw Coftanuy Sand
            !• •     .••j

            I          I lOOWt CoKWItty Sand



            f--   j^f I ""k«oo<» City


            j         I K«liMxxt Sand


            I*    , 1 1 Uan»qu*n Fo»nj|ioni


            I         I Vmc*nlo«m f O'mjliofil




    Smtlh
     C
                                                       c-




1
I

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 143 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Northtasl
   O1




     100

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 144 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                AHjvium K.tt M.V


                                                                                Uw    Co»>»ni»» Sand


                                                                                IO<WK Co*<an<4y Sand




Southwest                                                                                                       Northeast
    E

                                                                        1       M
                                                                            "    0"M««IO«H"tl.1vf\»* FonnaMnf
 1M-




       > • - . . . . . - • • • • r ! w •.'.".
       "'".'•'• " • • v-'.'-' ' '*'-i\ -i- '••• *-•
       rrt-r i (1 i-» , V>, , i >vi-< ., . »!T f- n •'




                                                                                                                     •20




                                                         Section E-Ef

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 145 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       S«9    li"l
                                                              I     ^J




                                                                         t:.>-   F-.-J: 3-1




Southwest                                               Northeast
       F                                                    F1

            Slurry Wall

    120-,                                                   r120
                          Mjrth Ana


    100-                              Chtttnui Branch        100
                                         14


     80-                                                     83




E    60.




     40-
                                                             "I

    20-                                                     r20




      o-




                      Section F-F'
                                              \
                                                  \.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 146 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         ATTACHMENT E


PROPOSED REMEDIAL ACTION PLA'I
