LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: Record of Decision, Monitor Devices/Intercircuits, Inc. Site, Operable Unit Two - Soils, Wall
Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey, prepared by
U.S. EPA, Region 2, September 29, 2006.
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/103723
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: a72b4ad058ba224b71e426db8f1d3660f8178a0f18e57ef536ea60543ddc87b7
Source PDF pages: 53
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                SDMS Dtx5ument



                                                   103723



            RECORD OF DECISION

 Monitor Devices/Intercircuits, Inc. Site

         Operable Unit Two - Soils

Wall Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey




United States Environmental Protection Agency
                  Region II

               September 2006




                                                500001

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                      DECLARATION STATEMENT

                         RECORD OF DECISION


SITE NAME AND LOCATION

Monitor Devices/Intercircuits, Inc. (EPA ID# NJD980529408)
Wall Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey

STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

This decision document presents the Selected Remedy to address
soils for the second operable unit at the Monitor
Devices/Intercircuits, Inc. Superfund Site, in Wall Township,
Monmouth County, New Jersey. The Selected Remedy was chosen in
accordance with the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA), as amended, and to the
extent practicable, the National Oil and Hazardous Substances
Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP). This decision is based on the
Administrative Record file for the site.

The State of New Jersey, at this time, has deferred in concurring
with EPA's decision in selecting the no further action remedy for
soils at the site (see Appendix IV).

DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY

The lead agency has determined that no action is necessary to
address soils at the site in order to protect public health or
welfare or the environment.

DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

Part 1: Statutory Recjuirements

No remedial action is necessary to be protective of human health
and the environment.

Part 2: Statutory Preference for Treatment

The statutory preference for treatment is not necessary since no
remedy is required to protect human health and the environment.




                                                         500002

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Part 3: Five-Year Review Requirements

Because this remedy will not result in hazardous substances,
pollutants, or contaminants remaining on-site above levels that
allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, Five-Year
reviews of the soils will not be necessary.

  AUTHORIZING SIGNATURE




      (kk-jji}^..^                                 4iA {r^ (o
  George Pavlou, Director                           l
  Emergency and Remedial                             Date
  Response Division
  EPA - Region II




                                                            500003

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

             Decision Summary
                   Soils
           Monitor Devices Site,
 Wall Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey




United States Environmental Protection Agency
                  Region II
               September 2 006




                                                500004

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                        TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                          PAGE
SITE NAME, LOCATION AND BRIEF DESCRIPTION                      1
SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES                        1
HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION                          3
SCOPE AND ROLE OF OPERABLE UNIT                                3
SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS                                4
CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES            6
SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS                                          6
DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES                       .9

APPENDICES
APPENDIX I     FIGURES
APPENDIX II    TABLES
APPENDIX III   ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX
APPENDIX IV    STATE LETTER
APPENDIX V     RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY




                                                      500005

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE NAME. LOCATION AND BRIEF DESCRIPTION
The Monitor Devices site is located in Wall Township, Monmouth
County, New Jersey. The former facility occupies two acres in
the industrial park of the Allaire Airport (also known as the
Monmouth County Airport) off Route 34 (see Figure 1). Monitor
Devices formerly occupied Building 25 in the industrial park,
which is located along the airport access road at the
intersection of George and Edward Streets. Building 25 is
currently occupied by a local business and used as a repair and
storage facility. The area surrounding the site and the Monmouth
County Airport is zoned for mixed commercial and light industrial
use, with residential zoning nearby as well. Several industrial
parks, light industry, commercial properties and undeveloped
areas border the airport to the south and west. The airport and
commercial park are currently active.

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES
Monitor Devices, Inc., operated in Building 25 from 1977 to 1980.
The Monitor Devices operation primarily involved the manufacture
and assembly of printed circuit boards used by companies in the
computer industry.

As part of the manufacturing process, circuit panels were plated
with copper, lead, nickel, gold, and tin. The various plating
processes required both electrolysis and electroplating lines.
Effluent from the electrolysis and electroplating lines was
directed to three pipes that discharged to the rear of the
building. The pipes discharged rinse waters from the nickel-gold
plating and electrolysis, rinse water from the copper and lead
electroplating line,-and alkaline washing solution. Volatile
organic compounds (VOCs) such as trichloroethylene (TCE) were
used as solvents and cleaners in a variety of facility
operations.

A complaint against Monitor Devices was filed with the Monmouth
County Department of Health (MCDH) in January 1980. In response
to the complaint, the MCDH visited the Monitor Devices facility
and observed discolored effluent from discharge pipes. Sampling
identified elevated levels of copper, lead, and mercury in the
effluent and in the stained soils.

In early 1980, site inspections by EPA and the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) noted effluent
pipes discharging wastewater directly onto the ground, at rates
of as much as two gallons per minute. Wastewater that was not
percolating into the ground was observed to be flowing around the
building and along an access road. A small dam had been
constructed to control the migration of manufacturing effluent,

                                                       500006

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

resulting in a small unlined pond.   Drums of acetone, isopropyl
alcohol and a variety of acids were also stored at the site,
apparently to be used as part of the facility operations.

NJDEP determined that Monitor Devices never possessed the
required permits to discharge wastewater. In May 1980, NJDEP
issued a Notice of Civil Administrative Penalty Assessment and an
Administrative Order to. Monitor Devices. The order required the
cessation of all wastewater discharge, the installation of
monitoring wells, and groundwater sampling. Except for payment
of $1,500 and installation of three monitoring wells, Monitor
Devices failed to comply with the Administrative Order
requirements, particularly the installation of a groundwater
recovery and decontamination system. In 1985, Monitor Devices
and its president were named in a six-count indictment by a
Monmouth County Grand Jury for unlawful release, criminal
mischief, and illegal discharge of pollutants in violation of New
Jersey Water Pollution Act of 1977. The indictment resulted in a
guilty plea and the agreement to pay $100,000 towards the clean-
up of the site. The plea agreement was not complied with. In
 1988 Monitor Devices went bankrupt and the State of New Jersey
decided to take no further action against the company or its
president. The business started up again as Intercircuits, Inc.,
at the Lakewood Industrial Park in Lakewood, New Jersey, in 1988.
 Intercircuits, Inc., went bankrupt in 1988.

The Monitor Devices site was proposed for inclusion on the
National Priorities List (NPL) in April 1985, and formally placed
on the NPL on June 1, 1986. NJDEP initiated an Remedial
Investigation and Feasibility Study (RI/FS); however, after
completing a phase of field investigations, NJDEP requested that
EPA assume responsibility for the site.
After several phases of soil and groundwater studies, EPA's
environmental consultant completed field investigations in 2004,
and prepared a RI Report summarizing the results. In August
2005, a FS Report was completed for the site. Based on
discussions with NJDEP, EPA decided to produce two separate
Records of Decision (RODs) for the site, one for groundwater and
one for soils. On September 30, 2005 EPA issued an Operable Unit
One (OUl) ROD for groundwater contamination at the site.    The
selected remedy called for enhanced bioremediation of the VOC
plume. EPA has initiated the remedial design for the OUl remedy,
which is expected to take two years to complete.

The Operable Unit Two (0U2) ROD for soils was deferred pending a
further review of the soil data by EPA and NJDEP. This review
resulted in a revision of the soil section of the 2005 RI Report


                                                      500007

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

to include additional information, such as historical data from a
1987 NJDEP Report. This data was used a guide for soil sampling
and the placement of groundwater monitoring wells during EPA's
field work, but had not been included in the RI Report. The
analytical results from these earlier samples are included in a
revision of the 2 005 RI Report resulting in the Revised Final
Remedial Investigation Report (2006 RI Report), which was used as
the basis for the development of EPA's Proposed Plan. All of
these documents are included in the Administrative Record for the
site.

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

On August 23, 2006, EPA released the Proposed Plan and supporting
documentation for the groundwater remedy to the public for
comment. EPA made these documents available to the public in the
administrative record repositories maintained at the EPA Region
II office (290 Broadway, New York, New York 10007), the Wall
Public Library (2700 Allaire Road, Wall, New Jersey 07719). EPA
published a notice of availability involving these documents in
the Asbury Park' Press newspaper, and opened a public comment
period on the documents from August 23, 2006 to September 22,
2006.

On August 30, 2006, EPA held a public meeting at the Wall Public
Branch Library, to inform local officials and interested citizens
about the Superfund process, to review the planned remedial
activities at the site, and to respond to any questions from area
residents and other attendees.

No comment was received or recorded at the public meeting or
during the public comment period. See Responsiveness Summary
(Appendix V ) .

SCOPE AND ROLE OF OPERABLE UNIT

As previously mentioned, in 2005, EPA made the determination to
bifurcate the ROD into two operable units, OUl to address
groundwater contamination and 0U2 to address soil contamination.
A ROD for OUl was signed on September 30, 2005. 0U2 is the
subject of this ROD addressing soil contamination at the site.
This is the final remedy planned for the site.




                                                         500008

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS


Soil

NJDEP'S initial field investigations in 1987 identified
contaminants near the discharge area around Building 25. VOCs
such as TCE and methylene chloride were found above the soil-
specific screening criteria. ("Screening criteria" are selected
during site investigations to evaluate contaminants detected in
various media, such as soil or groundwater, at a site.) TCE was
found at 1,800 parts per million(1,800 ppm) and methylene
chloride at 6.5 ppm in soils. Other VOCs such as 1,1,1-
trichloroethane were detected below the screening criteria.
Semi-volatile organic compounds (SVOCs) were sporadically
detected in the shallow soils below the soil-specific screening
criteria. Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) were detected in
surface soils up to at 22 ppm.   For inorganic analytes, only
arsenic and chromium were found slightly above the soil
screening criteria. EPA used this data to target its soil
investigations for soil sampling performed in several phases in
1998 and 2001.

The EPA RI indicated the following:
EPA sampled surface soils (within the first two feet of the
ground surface) and subsurface soils to investigate soil
contamination. The soil investigation initially focused on the
area surrounding Building 25; however, groundwater sampling
suggested a possible source area near Building 62-C of the
industrial park (see Figure 1), and additional soil sampling was
also performed there. Samples were analyzed for metals, VOCs,
semi-volatile organic compounds, PCBs and pesticides.

A total of 37 surface samples were collected around Building 25.
Table 1 shows the most frequently detected contaminants in
surface and subsurface soils and their levels in comparison with
the screening criteria that was used for these compounds. Only
one of the surface samples equaled/exceeded its respective soil
screening criteria. Arsenic was found at 2.2 ppm within the
vicinity of Building 25. The RI identified 2.2 ppm arsenic as a
background value for arsenic at the site and, consequently, it
was considered the de facto screening criteria for the site, over
the lower published value of 1.6 ppm.




                                                       500009

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

A total of 29 subsurface samples were collected around Building
25, at depths between 8-10 feet, 16-18 feet and 48-50 feet below
the ground surface. All contaminants found in the subsurface
soils were below the screening criteria for surface soils in the
vicinity of Building 25. However, arsenic was found at one
location at 2.9 ppm., 8-10 feet below surface next to Building
62-C.

After finding high levels of VOCs in groundwater monitoring well
MW17A, the RI took further soil samples near Building 62-C, which
is located adjacent to the groundwater monitoring well, to see if
it was potentially the source of such contamination. The
sampling around Building 62-C consisted of three borings, with
soils collected at between 0 to 0.5 foot, 8 to 10 feet, 16 to 18
feet and 48 to 50 feet below ground surface. Arsenic was
detected in the subsurface soils at 2.9 ppm within the 8 to 10
foot sampling interval around Building 62-C. This value is only
slightly higher than the 2.2 ppm screening criteria for surface
soils. However, based on the results of the human health risk
assessment, discussed below, arsenic should not pose a threat to
human health.

Results from the soil sampling indicated that no organic
compounds or metals were detected in soils above the site-
specific soil screening criteria, with the exception of arsenic
in two samples. Arsenic is not believed to be associated with
former Monitor Devices operations, and may be attributable to
background soil concentrations. Based on data collected during
the RI, site soils are not currently a source of contamination to
the groundwater. Results from the soil sampling did not identify
any "principal threat wastes" at the site.

Site-wide Groxmdwater Contamination

Groundwater contamination was addressed in the OUl ROD for
groundwater. A detailed groundwater investigation can be found
in the RI Report (2005), in the administrative record.

Surface Water and Sediment

The RI also collected surface soil and sediment samples from a
small marshy area found approximately 2,000 feet south-southeast
of Building 25. It is a small ponded area at the end of the
airport runway. During the RI, it was unclear whether this
ponded area was a groundwater discharge point, and whether the
groundwater contaminant plume might have transported contaminants
to this area. The RI concluded that it was perched water,
probably runoff from the runway, and that it was not in contact
with the groundwater. While some measurable contaminants were

                                5
                                                       500010

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

found in this area, such as lead and hexavalent chromium, none of
it is believed to be site-related and the concentrations are
below the site-specific screening criteria.

CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES

Site Uses: Building 25, the probable original source of the
contamination at the site, is currently used as a storage
facility. Zoning in the area includes mixed residential,
commercial, and light industrial uses. The site area includes
the industrial park that is part of the Monmouth County (Allaire)
Airport, and neighboring commercial-use properties on Route 34.
Several industrial parks, light industry, and commercial
properties are located to the east, along Route 34, and to the
north. Commercial and residential properties and undeveloped
areas border the airport.

The airport and the industrial park are privately owned; however,
Monmouth County has plans to acquire the property and the
airport. Acquisition by Monmouth County is not expected to
change the land use in the affected area, though future
development consistent with the zoning appears likely.

Ground and Surface Water Uses: Groundwater underlying the site
is considered Class IIA, a source of potable water; however, the
Kirkwood-Cohansey aquifer is not currently used as a source of
potable water in the area. Residents and businesses are supplied
by municipal water. One of Wall Township's municipal wells is
hydraulically downgradient of the site (approximately one mile),
but it is screened in the deeper Englishtown aquifer system, and
does not appear to be threatened by site contamination.

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS
Risk Assessment Addendum

A human health risk assessment (HHRA) was performed in 2005 to
determine the non-cancer hazards and cancer risks associated with
exposure to contaminated surface soil from the Monitor Devices
site (CDM, 2005). Since the zoning of the site is industrial,
the HHRA evaluated the following receptor's exposure to the
surface soil: site worker, adolescent trespasser and construction
worker. The residential exposure pathway was not evaluated since
the site is zoned for industrial use and the township plans on
maintaining the zoning as industrial. Based on the initial
screening of all constituents detected, arsenic, chromium VI and
total chromium were the only constituents that were retained and
quantitatively evaluated (2005 CDM - RAGS Part D Table 2). The



                                                       500011

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

screening criteria used in the 2005 HHRA were the Region 9
Preliminary Remediation Goals, which are based on an industrial
exposure pathway. The HHRA concluded that the constituents
detected in the soil do not pose a human health risk to the
receptors evaluated (e.g. site worker, adolescent trespasser and
the construction worker).

In 2 006, EPA prepared an addendum to the 2005 HHRA, The
objective of the risk assessment addendum is to determine whether
the constituents identified in the 2005 HHRA pose a significant
human health risk under a residential exposure pathway.

In the 2005 HHRA, the maximum concentrations of the chemicals
detected were compared to screening criteria, which are based on
an industrial exposure pathway. The 2006 addendum did not screen
all the chemicals detected in the 2005 HHRA against their
respective residential risk based criteria. Any additional
chemicals that would potentially be retained by screening against
residential risk based criteria would not contribute
significantly to the overall risk at the site. Therefore, in
order to determine the cancer risks and hazards associated with a
residential exposure to the surface soil at Building 25, the
constituents that were retained and quantitatively evaluated in
the 2005 HHRA (e.g. arsenic, chromium VI and total chromium) are
the only constituents that were addressed in this risk assessment
addendum.

As part of the 2005 HHRA, the exposure point concentration (EPC),
which is a statistical value calculated on the arithmetic mean
concentration for a contaminant based on the distribution of the
data set, was calculated for arsenic, total chromium and chromium
VI. EPCs are used to calculate the cancer risks and non-cancer
hazards associated with site related contamination. The
methodology used to calculate the EPCs for the constituents of
potential concern (COPCs) can be located on page 4-6 of the 2005
HHRA. The calculated EPCs for the COPCs are documented in
Table 2.

In order to calculate the risks and hazards associated with the
constituents at the site, EPCs for the COPCs were compared to
their respective risk based criteria. Region 9 Preliminary
Remediation Goals - residential (PRGs). The PRGs are a human
health risk based value that is equivalent to a cancer risk of
1x10'* or a non-cancer threshold of 1. The hazard index assumes
an exposure below which it is unlikely even for sensitive
populations to experience adverse health effects. If the hazard
index exceeds 1, there may be a concern for potential non-cancer
effects. Generally, the greater the hazard index above the



                                                      500012

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

threshold value of 1, the greater the level of concern. Cancer
risks are estimated as an incremental probability of an
individual developing cancer over time. An excess lifetime
cancer risk of 1x10"* (one in million), represents the
incremental probability that an individual will develop cancer as
a result of exposure to a carcinogenic chemical over a 70 year
lifetime under specified conditions. The criteria are based on a
residential receptor's direct exposure (via ingestion, inhalation
of particulates and dermal contact) to the surface soil and uses
an age-adjusted approach that takes into account the higher daily
rates of soil ingestion in children as well as longer duration of
exposure that is anticipated for a long term resident over a 30-
year period. Table 3 presents the risk based criteria that are
used in this assessment to estimate the risk to constituents in
the soil.

As part of this streamlined risk assessment, exposure to surface
soil within the area of Building 25 under the residential
exposure pathway was evaluated for potential human health risks
and hazards (See Table 4).
Since cancer is the more sensitive endpoint for all COPCs
evaluated, only cancer risks were estimated. The cancer risk was
estimated for each chemical by calculating a ratio between the
site specific concentration (EPC) and the risk based
concentration (PRG - residential).

The cancer risks associated with exposure to the COPCs are
summarized on Table 3. Based on the EPC, total chromium and
arsenic are the only constituents identified as contributors to
risks associated with exposure to surface soil in the area of
Building 25. The cancer risk associated with chromium VI,
7x10"^, is below the cancer risk range. Chromium VI was retained
and quantitatively evaluated in the 2005 HHRA since it is
classified as a known human carcinogen, not because it exceeded
its respective risk based criteria. All known human carcinogens,
regardless whether the maximum detected concentration exceeds its
respective risk-based criteria, are retained and quantitatively
evaluated.

In general, current Superfund guidelines for acceptable exposures
are a lifetime excess cancer risk in the range of 1x10"* to
1x10'*. The total cancer risk associated with exposure to the
constituents in the surface soil is 4x10"*, which is within EPA's
acceptable cancer risk range. This streamlined risk assessment
has determined that the concentrations of constituents detected
in the surface soil within the area of Building 25 do not pose a
human health risk to residential receptors. Any additional

                                8
                                                      500013

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

contaminants that would have been retained from a risk based
screen using residential criteria are not likely to significantly
change the risk estimates.

Ecological Risks

A four-Step process is utilized for assessing site-related
ecological risks for a reasonable maximum exposure scenario:
Problem F o r m u l a t i o n - a qualitative evaluation of contaminant
release, migration, and fate; identification of contaminants of
concern, receptors, exposure pathways, and known ecological
effects of the contaminants; and selection of endpoints for
further study. Exposure Assessment - a quantitative evaluation
of contaminant release, migration, and fate; characterization of
exposure pathways and receptors; and measurement or estimation of
exposure point concentrations.          Ecological Effects Assessment           -
literature reviews, field studies, and toxicity tests, linking
contaminant concentrations to effects on ecological receptors.
R i s k C h a r a c t e r i z a t i o n - measurement or estimation of both current
and future adverse effects.

An ecological risk characterization was performed for the Monitor
Devices site in 1998 and re-evaluated in 2004. A soil evaluation
indicated no adverse impact.

DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES

The Proposed Plan for the Monitor Devices sites was released for
public comment on August 23, 2006. The comment period closed on
September 22, 2006.
The Proposed Plan identified that no further action was needed to
address soil contamination at the site. Upon review of all
comments submitted, EPA determined that no significant changes to
the Selected Remedy, as it was presented in the Proposed Plan.




                                                                       500014

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX I




FIGURES




             500015

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

500016

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX   II




  TABLES




                500017

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              TABLE - 1
                                MOST FREQUENTL Y DETECTED
                                     SOIL CONTAMINANTS
                                ( Remeciial Investigation Report - 2005)
Contaminants                          Maximum Concentration in                       Site-Specific
                                            Surface Soils                      Soil Screening Criteria*
                                          (parts per million)                     (parts per million)


Volatile Organic Compounds
Tetrachloroethylene (PCE)             0.029                              I
Trichloroethylene (TCE)               0.011                              0.11

2-Butanone                            0.003                              50
Methylene Chloride                    0.073                              1
Carbon Disulfide                      0.001                              120
Semi-volatile Organic
Compounds
 Pyrene                               0.36                               100
 Diethylphthalate                     0.37                               50
 Butylbenzylphthalate                 0.035                              100
 Fluoranthene                         0.036                              100

 Pesticides/PCBs
 PCS (Aroclor 1260)                   0.062                              0.74

 4,4'- DDE (pesticide)                0.03                               7

 4,4' - DDT (pesticide)               0.11                               7

 Inorganic Analytes
 Aluminum                              5,790                             92,000

 Arsenic                              2.2 & 2.9*                         1.6

 Copper                                99.9                              600

 Lead                                  36.6                              600

 Mercury                               0.11                              270

 Chromium                             267                                450

 Beryllium                             0.38                              2
* - Subsurface sample
* - See Remedial Investigation Report for source of site-specific soil screening criteria.

                                                                                           500018

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

r                                                                  TABLE 2



                                            Summary of Chemicals of Concern and
                                         Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
Scenario Timeframe; Future
Medium:             Soil
Kxposure Medium:    Soil

                                          Concentration                                                     Exposure
                                                                                              Exposure
                                            Detected             Concen-      Frequency                       Point
    Exposure       Chemical of                                                                  Point
                                                                 tration          of                        Concen-              Statistic
      Point         Concern                                                                   Concen-
                                                                  Lnits       Detection                      tration
                                          Min         Max                                      tration
                                                                                                              Units

    Surface      Arsenic                  0.82         1.8        mg/kg           9/15            I.I         mg/kg             Student's t
    Soil
                 Chromium (total)         3.6          267        mg/kg           15/15          200          mg/kg          99% Chebyshev

                 Chromium VI               11          36          mg/kg          3/13                        mg/kg          95% Chebyshev




    Key



    mg/kg; milligram/kilogram
    95% Chebyshev. 95% Upper Confidence Limit - assuming a lognormal distribution
    99^4 Chebyshev: 99% Upper Confidence Limit - assuming a lognonnal distribution
    Student's t: 95% Upper Confidence Limit - assuming a normal distribution


               Summary of Chemicals of Concern and Medium-Speciflc Exposure Point Concentrations
    The table presents the chemicals of concern (COPCs) and exposure point concentration (EPC) for each of the COPCs detected above their
    respective Region 9 Preliminary Remediation Goals (PRO). The PRG screening levels are equivalent to a cancer risk of 1 x 10'* or an HI =
    0.1. The EPC was calculated using Pro-UCL, Version 3.0. The EPC was used to estimate the human health risk and hazard associated with
    the exposure pathways identified in the risk assessment addendum. The table includes the range of concentrations detected for each COPC,
    as well as the frequency of detection (I.e., (he number of times the chemical was detected In the samples collected at the site in 1998), the
    exposure point concentration (EPC), and how the EPC was derived (i.e. statistic).




                                                                                                                                  500019

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                 TABLE 3
                                                    Risk Characterization Summary
                  Scenario Timeframe:          Future
                  Receptor Population:         Resident
                  Receptor Age:                Adult and child

                                    Exposure                             Chemical of Potential
                     Medium                         Exposure Point                                Exposure Routes Total
                                    Medium                                Concern (COPC)

                  Soil            Soil           Surface Soil          Arsenic                          3x10-6

                                                                       Chromium(total)                   1 X 10-6

                                                                       Chromium VI                      7 X 10-«

                                                                 Industrial Total Cancer Risk =         4x10-6




                                         Summary of Risit Characterization - Carcinogens

The table presents risk estimates for the significant routes of exposure. These risk estimates are based on a
reasonable maximum exposure and were developed by taking into account various health protective assumptions
for the residential scenario with regard to the frequency and duration of the receptors exposure to soil, as well as
the toxicity of the COPCs. The total risk from direct exposure to soil to the resident (adult and child) is estimated
to be 4 x 10-6, which is within NCPs risk range. The risk level indicate that if no action were taken, a resident
(total risk for the aduh and child) would have an increased probability of 4 in 1,000,000 of developing cancer due
to site-related exposure to COPCs.




                                                                                                                          500020

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                    TABLE 4
                                                       SELECTION OF EXPOSURE PATHWAYS

                                                               MONITOR DEVICES




     Scenario   Medium   Exposure        Exposure         Receptor      Receptor        Exposure     i    Type of         Rationale for Selection or Exclusion
    Timeframe            Medium            Point         Populatwn        Age            Route            Analysis               of Exposure Pathway


     Future      Soil      Soil         Surface Soil      Resident   Adult (>18 years   Ingestion        Qualatative   Exposure pattiway may be complete in the
                                                                            old)                                              future if land use changes.

                                        BuiWIng 25                                      Inhalation       Qualatative   Exposure pathway may be complete in the
                                                                                                                              future if land use changes.

                                                                                         Dermal          Qualatath/e   Exposure pathway may be complete in the
                                                                                                                              future If land use changes.

1    Future      Soil      Soil         Surface Soil      Resident   Child (>6 years    Ingestion        Qualatative   Exposure pathway may t>e complete in the
                                                                           oM)                                                future if land use changes.

                                        Buikling 25                                     Inhalation       Qualatative   Exposure pathway may be complete in the
                                                                                                                              future if land use changes.

                                                                                        Dermal           Qualatative   Exposure pathway may be complete in the
                                                                                                                              future if land use changes.
                                    •




                                                                                                                                   500021

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       APPENDIX III




ADMINISTRATIVE   RECORD INDEX




                                500022

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     MONITOR DEVICES SUPERFUND SITE
                             OPERABLE UNIT 2
                       ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD FILE
                           INDEX OF DOCUMENTS




3.0     REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION

3.4     Remedial Investigation Reports

P.      300001 -   Report: Revised Final Remedial Investigation
        300257     Report, Monitor Devices Site. Wall Township, New
                   Jersey. Volume I, RI Report, Tables and Figures,
                   prepared by CDM Federal Programs Corporation,
                   prepared for U.S. EPA, Region 2, July 3, 2006.




Note:        The. Administracive Record for Monitor .De-/ices Superfund
             Site Operatle Jni:: .1 is incorpcraced iato this
             Admini3tra;;ive Record by reference.


                                                            500023

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 APPENDIX   IV




STATE   LETTER




                 500024

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

3cr-cr»-c;v3Wti li:i2    FROM:REMEDIATION MGT i. RE 609 984 6514                                T0:91£l£6374429            PtE'?




                                                     BixAt of Nfut 3rrsri|
                                           DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
JOK S. COHZINE                                                                                                        USA p. JACICSO
   a»vernor                                                                                                            Commixsiauu-


              Mr. George Pavlou, Director
              Emergency and Remedial Response Division
              United States Environmental Protection Agency
              Region IT
              290 Broadway
              New York, NY 10007-1866

              Re:       Monitor Devices Superfimd Site                                        SEP 2 7 oW^
                        Record of Decision

              Dear Mr. Pavlou:

              The New Jersey Department of Environmental Ih'otection (Department) has reviewed the
              "Decision Summary, Soils, Monitor Devices Site, Wall Township, Monmouth County,
              New Jersey" prepared by the U S . EnvironmentaJ Protection Agency (USEPA) Region 17
              in September 2006 and defers concurrence with the selected No Action remedy for soils
              at this lime. NJDEP believes there is insufficient data about one area of the site where
              elevated levels of polychlorinated biphcnyl (PCB) contamination were found during past
              soil investigation wort:.

              NJDEP will work with USEPA to implement additional sampling necessary to further
              delineate any PCB contamination in Uie one location in question and any required
              remedial actions before concurring with the recommended No Action aitemative.

              NJDEP appreciates the opportunity to participate in the decision making process to select
              an appropriate remedy and is looking forward to future cooperation with USEPA to
              implement the selected remedy.

              If you have any questions, please call Edward Pumam, Assistant Director of the
              Remedial Response Element, at 609-984-3078.

                                                             Sincerely,

                                                        c^^/^
                                                             Irene Kropp, Assistant Commissioner
                                                             Site Remediation arnl Waste Management Program

              C:        Edward Putnam, Assistant Director, Remedial Response Element, NJDEP
                        Carole Petersen, Chief, New Jersey Remediation Branch, USEPA

                                                                                                                  500025


                            Nexi Jtinty ft An Equal Opportunity Empityrr •   Prmud on ktcyeM faptr and HtcyclMt

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     APPENDIX




RESPONSIVENESS   SUMMARY




                           500026

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          APPENDIX V
                    RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY
                     Monitor Devices Site
                  Wall Township, New Jersey

INTRODUCTION
This Responsiveness Summary provides a summary of the public's
comments and concerns regarding the Proposed Plan for the
Monitor Devices site, and EPA's responses to those comments.
At the time of the public comment period, EPA proposed a
preferred alternative for remediating groundwater. All
comments summarized in this document have been considered in
EPA's final decision for the selection of remedial
alternatives for the site.

This Responsiveness Summary is divided into the following
sections:

  I. BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS: This
  section provides the history of community involvement and
  interests regarding the Monitor Devices site.
  II.     COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY OF MAJOR QUESTIONS, COMMENTS,
  CONCERNS AND RESPONSES: This section contains summaries of
  oral comments received by EPA at the public meeting, EPA's
  responses to these comments, as well as responses to written
  comments received during the public comment period.

The last section of this Responsiveness Summary includes
attachments, which document public participation in the remedy
selection process for this site. They are as follows:

  Attachment A contains the Proposed Plan that was distributed
  to the public for review and comment;

  Attachment B contains the public notices that appeared in
  the Asbury Park Press; and

  Attachment C contains the transcripts of the public meeting.
EPA received no written comments during the public comment
period.

I. BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS

Early in the RI/FS, EPA met with residents and local interest
groups to learn about the concerns of the community. EPA has
also met Wall Township officials on several occasions to

                                                        500027

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

discuss the site, including the Township's plans for future
land use of the site and neighboring airport properties.
On August 23, 2006, EPA released the Proposed Plan and
supporting documentation for the soil remedy to the public for
comment. EPA made these documents available to the public in
the administrative record repositories maintained at the EPA
Region II office (2 90 Broadway, New York, New York) and the
Wall Township Public Library (2700 Allaire Road, Wall, New
Jersey 07719). EPA published a notice of availability
involving these documents in the Asbury Park Press newspaper,
and opened a public comment period on the documents from
August 23, 2006 to September 22, 2006. On August 30, 2006,
EPA held a public meeting at the Wall Township Library to
inform local officials and interested residents about the
Superfund process, to present the preferred remedial
alternatives for the site, solicit oral comment, and respond
to any questions.

II.   COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY OF MAJOR QUESTIONS. COMMENTS.
      CONCERNS. AND RESPONSES

PART 1: Verbal Comments

This section summarizes comments received from the public
during the public comment period along with EPA's responses.
A public meeting was held August 30, 2006, at 6:00 p.m. at the
Wall Township Public Library, 2700 Allaire Road^ Wall, New
Jersey. Following a brief presentation of the investigation
findings, EPA presented the Proposed Plan and preferred
alternatives for the site, received comments from meeting
participants, and responded to questions regarding the
remedial alternatives under consideration.

No comment or questions was asked at the public meeting.

PART 1: Written Comments
No written comment was received from the public during the
public comment period.




                                                        500028

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ATTACHMENT A




PROPOSED PLAN




                500029

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Superfund Program                                                      U.S. Environmental Protection
Proposed Plan                                                          Agency, Region II   ^^"^^^-"^
                                                                                                       i                UJ

MONITOR DEVICES, INC/INTERCIRCUITS, INC.                                                                                O

OPERABLE UNIT - 2 (FOR SOILS)
August 2006




 EPA ANNOUNCES PROPOSED PLAN
This Proposed Plan describes the U.S. Environmental              the Administrative Record file for the site. EPA and
Protection Agency's (EPA's) proposal for addressing              NJDEP encourage the public to review these
soils at the Monitor Devices, Inc./lnterciruits, Inc.,           documents to gain a more comprehensive
Superfund site, commonly referred to as the Monitor              understanding of the site and Superfund activities
Devices site, and provides the rationale for that                that have been conducted at the site.
preference. The Monitor Devices site was placed on the
National Priorities List (NPL) of Superfund sites in
1986. Groundwater at the site is contaminated with a
variety of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), and EPA
and the New Jersey Department of Environmental                     Dates to remember:
                                                                   MARK YOUR CALENDAR
Protection (NJDEP) selected a remedy for the
groundwater in September 2005. EPA's studies of the                PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD:
soils have not identified any areas of soil contamination          August 23 - September 22, 2006
that would pose an unacceptable current or future risk to          U.S. EPA will accept written comments on the
                                                                   Proposed Plan during the public comment period.
human health or the environment; therefore, EPA is
recommending no action for the soils.                              PUBLIC MEETING:
                                                                   August 30, 2006, 6:00 pm
This Proposed Plan summarizes the data considered in               U.S. EPA will hold a public meeting to explain the
                                                                   Proposed Plan and all of the alternatives presented in
making this no action recommendation. This document                the Feasibility Study. Oral and written comments wil)
is issued by EPA, the lead agency for site activities.             also be accepted at the meeting. The meeting will be
EPA, in consultation with NJDEP, the support agency                held at the Wall Public Library Branch. 2700 Allaire
for site activities, will select the final remedy for the site     Road, Wall Township, New Jersey.
after reviewing and considering all information                    For more information, see the Administrative
submitted during a 30-day public comment period.                   Record at the following locations:
EPA, in consultation with NJDEP, may modify the
preferred aitemative or select another response action             U.S. EPA Records Center, Region II
                                                                   290 Broadway, 18" Floor.
presented in this Proposed Plan based on new                       New Yorit, New York 10007-1866
information or public comments. Therefore, the public              (212)-637-4308
is encouraged to review and comment on aU the                      Hours: Monday-Friday - 9 am to 5 pm
information presented in this Proposed Plan.
                                                                   Wail Public Library Branch
                                                                   2700 Allaire Road,
EPA is issuing this Proposed Plan as part of its                   Wall, New Jersey 07719
community relations program under section 117(a) of                (732) 449-8877
the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA, or
Superfund). This Proposed Plan summarizes
information that can be found in greater detail in the
Remedial Investigation Report (RI) and the Feasibility
Study Report (FS), and other documents contained in
                                                                                                      500030

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE DESCRIPTION

The Monitor Devices site is located in Wall Township,           be used as part of the facility operations.
Monmouth County, New Jersey. The former facility
occupies two acres in the industrial park section of the        NJDEP determined that Monitor Devices never
Monmouth County Airport (also known as the Allaire              possessed the required permits to discharge
Airport) off Route 34 (see Figure 1). Monitor Devices           wastewater, and in May 1980, assessed a penalty and
formerly occupied Building 25 in the industrial park,           issued an administrative order to the company. The
which is located along the airport access road at the           order required the cessation of all wastewater
intersection of George and Edward Streets. Building 25          discharge, the installation of monitoring wells, and
is currently used as a repair and storage facility. The area    groundwater sampling. The company never fully
surrounding the site and the Monmouth County Airport is         complied with this order. In 1980, Monitor Devices
zoned for mixed residential, commercial, and light              changed its name to Intercircuits, Inc., and moved its
industrial use. Several industrial parks, light industry,       operation to Lakewood, New Jersey. Monitor
and commercial properties and undeveloped areas border          Devices/Intercircuits declared bankruptcy in 1988
the airport to the south and west. The airport and              and eventually went out of business.
commercial park are currently active. It is anticipated
that for the foreseeable future, the property will continue     The Monitor Devices site was proposed for inclusion
to be used for light industrial and commercial purposes.        on the National Priorities List (NPL) in April 1985,
                                                                and formally placed on the NPL on June 1, 1986.
SITE HISTORY                                                    NJDEP initiated an RI/FS field investigation;
                                                                however, after completing a phase of the field
Monitor Devices, Inc. operated in Building 25 from 1977         investigation work, NJDEP requested that EPA
to 1980. The Monitor Devices operation primarily                assume responsibility for the site.
involved the manufacture and assembly of printed circuit
boards used by companies in the computer industry.              After several phases of soil and groundwater studies,
                                                                EPA's environmental consultant completed field
As part of the manufacturing process, circuit panels were       investigations in 2004, and prepared a RI Report
plated with copper, lead, nickel, gold, and tin. The            summarizing the results. In August 2005, a FS
various plating processes required both electrolysis and        Report was completed for the site, assessing soil and
electroplating lines. Effluent from the electrolysis and        groundwater; however, NJDEP requested further
electroplating lines was directed to three pipes that           time to review the soil data, and EPA elected to move
discharged to the rear of the building. The pipes               forward with a remedy for the groundwater
discharged rinse waters from the nickel-gold plating and        contamination only.
electrolysis, rinse water from the copper and lead
electroplating line, and alkaline washing solution.             In August 2005, EPA, with NJDEP concurrence,
Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) such as                       released a Proposed Plan for Operable Unit 1 (OUl),
trichloroethylene (TCE) were used as solvents and               the groundwater. After an opportunity for public
cleaners in a variety of facility operations.                   comment, on September 30, 2005, EPA issued a
                                                                Record of Decision for OUl. The selected remedy
 In early 1980, site inspections by the Monmouth County         calls for enhanced bioremediation of the VOC plume.
 Department of Health, NJDEP and EPA noted effluent             EPA has initiated the remedial design for the OU1
 pipes discharging wastewater directly onto the ground.         remedy, which is expected to take approximately two
 Sampling identified elevated levels of copper, lead, and       years to complete.
 mercury in the effluent and in stained soils. Wastewater
 that was not percolating into the ground was observed to       After further evaluation, EPA concluded that the
 be flowing around the building and along an access road.       existing soil data adequately represents site
 A small dam had been constructed to control the                conditions, which has resulted in the issuance of this
 migration of manufacturing effluent, resuhing in a small       Proposed Plan for 0U2. The results of the 2005 RI
 unlined pond. Drums of acetone, isopropyl alcohol and a        report are discussed below, and formed the basis for
 variety of acids were also stored at the site, apparently to   the development of this Proposed Plan.


                                                                                                    500031

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                     500032
SITE CHARACTERISTICS

NJDEP's initial field investigations in 1987 identified         However, based on the results of the human health
contaminants near the discharge area around Building 25.        risk assessment, discussed below, arsenic should not
VOCs such as TCE and methylene chloride were found              pose a threat to human health.
above the soil-specific screening criteria. ("Screening
criteria" are selected during site investigations to evaluate   The RI also collected surface soil and sediment
contaminants detected in various media, such as soil or         samples from a small marshy area found
groundwater, at a site.) TCE was found at 1,800 parts per       approximately 2,000 feet south-southeast of Building
million (1,800 ppm) and methylene chloride at 6.5 ppm           25. It is a small ponded area at the end of the airport
in soils. Other VOCs such as 1,1,1-trichloroethane were         runway. During the RI, it was unclear whether this
detected below the screening criteria. Semi-volatile            ponded area was a groundwater discharge point, and
organic compounds (SVOCs) were sporadically detected            whether the groundwater contaminant plume might
in the shallow soils below the soil-specific screening          have transported contaminants to this area. The RI
criteria. Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) was detected         concluded that it was perched water, probably runoff
 in surface soils at 22 and 8.3 ppm. For inorganic              from the runway, and that it was not in contact with
analytes, only arsenic and chromium were found slightly         the groundwater. While some measurable
 above the soil screening criteria. EPA used this data to       contaminants were found in this area, such as lead
 target its soil investigations for soil sampling performed     and hexavalent chromium, none of it is believed to be
 in several phases in 1998 and 2001.                            site-related and the concentrations are below the site-
                                                                specific screening criteria.
The EPA RI indicated the following:
                                                                Results from the soil sampling indicated that no
Soils                                                           organic compounds or metals were detected in soils
                                                                abovie the site-specific soil screening criteria, with
EPA sampled surface soils (within the first two feet of         the exception of arsenic in two samples. Arsenic is
the ground surface) and subsurface soils to investigate         not believed to be associated with former Monitor
soil contamination. The soil investigation initially            Devices operations, and may be attributable to
focused on the area surrounding Building 25; however,           background soil concentrations. Based on data
groundwater sampling suggested a possible source area           collected during the RI, site soils are not currently a
near Building 62-C of the industrial park (see Figure 1),       source of contamination to the groundwater. Results
and additional soil sampling was also performed there.          from the soil sampling did not identify any "principal
Samples were analyzed for metals, VOCs, semi-volatile           threat wastes" at the site. (See explanation of
organic compounds, PCBs and pesticides.                         Principal Threats, below).

A total of 37 surface samples were collected around
Building 25. Arsenic was the only chemical that
exceeded its respective screening criteria. Table 1                          WHAT IS A "PRINCIPAL THREAT"?
shows the most frequently detected contaminants and
                                                                   The NCP establishes an expectation that EPA will use
their levels in comparison with the screening criteria that        treatment to address the principal threats posed by a site
was used for these compounds.                                      wherever practicable (NCP Section 300.430(a)(1)(iii)(A)).
                                                                   The "principal threat" concept is applied to the
                                                                   characterization of "source materials" at a Superfund site.
 A total of 29 subsurface samples were collected around            A source material is material that includes or contains
 Building 25, at depths between 8-10 feet, 16-18 feet and          hazardous substances, pollutants or contaminants that
                                                                   act as a reservoir for migration of contamination to
 48-50 feet below the ground surface. All the                      groundwater, surface water or air, or acts as a source for
 contaminants found in the subsurface soils were below             direct exposure. Contaminated groundwater generally is
                                                                   not considered to be a source material; however, Non-
 the screening criteria.                                           Aqueous Phase Liquids (NAPLs) in groundwater may be
                                                                   viewed as source material. Principal threat wastes are
                                                                   those source materials considered to be highly toxic or
 The RI samples collected around Building 62-C consisted           highly mobile that generally cannot be reliably contained,
 of three borings, with soils collected at between 0 to 0.5        or would present a significant risk to human health or the
 foot, 8 to 10 feet, 16 to 18 feet and 48 to 50 feet below         environment should exposure occur. The decision to treat
                                                                   these wastes is made on a site-specific basis through a
 ground surface. Arsenic was detected in the subsurface            detailed analysis of the alternatives using the nine
 soils at 2.9 ppm within the 8 to 10 foot sampling interval         remedy selection criteria This analysis provides a basis
                                                                   for making a statutory finding that the remedy employs
 around Building 62-C. This value is only slightly higher          treatment as a principal element.
 than the 2.2 ppm screening criteria for surface soils.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ENFORCEMENT

Ba.sed on the findings of County, State and Federal       of Building 25 under a residential (unrestricted use)
inspections, the NJDEP levied a financial penalty and     exposure scenario. The purpose of this addendum
administrative order in May 1980 for unpermitted          was to evaluate whether institutional controls such as
discharges. Except for payment of $1,500 and              a deed notice would be necessary to limit the future
installation of three monitoring wells. Monitor Devices   land uses. The addendum focused on those
failed to comply with the order, particularly the         chemicals that were retained and quantitatively
installation of a groundwater recovery and                evaluated in the 2005 HHRA. It was determined that
decontamination system. In 1985, Monitor Devices and      any additional chemicals would not contribute
its president were named in a six-count indictment by a   significantly to the overall risk if the maximum
Monmouth County Grand Jury for unlawful release,          detected concentrations of chemicals detected in the
criminal mischief, and illegal discharge of pollutants in surface soil were compared to their respective
violation of New Jersey Water Pollution Act of 1977.      residential risk-based criteria. Therefore, the only
The indictment resulted in a guilty plea and the          constituents that were evaluated as part of the
 agreement to pay $100,000 towards the cleanup of the     addendum were arsenic, total chromium and
 site. The plea agreement was not complied with; in 1988, chromium VI, Based on EPA's risk evaluation, the
 Monitor Devices went bankrupt and the State of new       total cancer risk associated with a residential
 Jersey decided to take no further action against the      exposure to total chromium, chromium VI and
 company or its president.                                 arsenic in the surface soil in the area of Building 25
                                                           is 4 x 10"*, which is within EPA's acceptable risk
 In 1988, EPA notified Monitor Devices and the property    range.
owner, the Wall-Herald Corporation, of their potential
liability for cleanup costs under CERCLA. When              The HHRA (including the July 2006 addendum)
initiating the RI/FS, EPA concluded that the potentially    concluded that the surface soils within the area of
responsible parties (PRPs) appeared to have insufficient    Building 25 do not pose an unacceptable risk to
resources and/or environmental expertise to perform the     human health.
RI/FS. EPA has used federal funds to perform the RI/FS
and to initiate the remedial design of the OUl              CONCLUSION
groundwater remedy.
                                                            Based on the data collected from 1998 and 2001 and
SCOPE AND ROLE OF THE ACTION                                the conclusion of the HHRA, the soil does not need
                                                            to be remediated and is not currently a source of
EPA addressed groundwater at this site in the first         contamination to the groundwater and, therefore, no
operable unit. This second operable unit to address soils   further action is necessary for these soils.
is the final remedy planned for the site.
                                                            State/Support Agency Acceptance
 SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS
                                                            The State of New Jersey is still evaluating EPA's
 A human health risk assessment (HHRA) was performed        preferred aitemative in this Proposed Plan.
 in 2005 to determine the non-cancer hazards and cancer
 risks associated with exposure to contaminated surface     COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
 soil from the Monitor Devices site. Since the zoning of
 the site is industrial, the HHRA evaluated the following   EPA provided information regarding the cleanup of
 receptors exposure to the surface soil; site worker,       the Monitor Devices site to the public through public
 adolescent trespasser and construction worker. The         meetings, the Administrative Record file for the sites,
 HHRA concluded that the constituents detected in the       and announcements published in the Asbury Park
 soil do not pose a human health risk to the receptors      Press newspaper. EPA encourages the public to gain
 evaluated.                                                 a more comprehensive understanding of the sites and
                                                            the Superfund activities that have been conducted
 In July 2006, EPA prepared an addendum to the 2005         there.
 HHRA that evaluated exposure to surface soil in the area


                                                                                             500033

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   The dates for the public comment period, the date,
WHAT IS RISK AND HOW IS IT CALCULATED?
                                                                   location and time of the public meeting, and the
                                                                   locations of the Administrative Record files, are
A Superfund baseline human health risk assessment is an            provided on the front page of this Proposed Plan.
analysis of the potential adverse health effects caused by         EPA Region 2 has designated a public liaison as a
hazardous substance releases from a site in the absence of
any actions to control or mitigate these under current- and        point-of-contact for the community concerns and
future-land uses. A four-step process is utilized for assessing    questions about the federal Superfund program in
site-related human health risks for reasonable maximum             New York, New Jersey, Puerto Rico, and the U.S.
exposure scenarios.
                                                                   Virgin Islands. To support this effort, the Agency
Hazard Identirication: In this step, the contaminants of           has established a 24-hour, toll-free number that the
concern at the site in various media (I.e., soil, groundwater,
surface water, and air) are identified based on such factors as
                                                                   public can call to request information, express their
toxicity, frequency of occurrence, and fate and transport of the   concerns, or register complaints about Superfund.
contaminants in the environment, concentrations of the
contaminants in specific media, mobility, persistence, and
bioaccumulation.

Exposure Assessment: In this step, the different exposure
pathways through which people might be exposed to the
contaminants identified in the previous step are evaluated.
Examples of exposure pathways include Incidental ingestion
of and dermal contact with contaminated soil. Factors
relating to the exposure assessment include, but are not            For further information on tlie Monitor Devices site, please
limited to, the concentrations that people might be exposed to      contact:
and the potential frequency and duration of exposure. Using
these factors, a "reasonable maximum exposure" scenario,                Nigel Robinson                  Natalie Loney
which portrays the highest level of human exposure that couW
reasonably be expected to occur, is calculated.
                                                                        Remedial Project                Community Relations
                                                                        Manager                         Coordinator
Toxicity Assessment: In this step, the types of adverse health          (212)637-4394                   (212)637-3639
effects associated with chemical exposures, and the
relationship between magnitude of exposure (dose) and
severity of adverse effects (response) are determined.                                    U.S. EPA
Potential health effects are chemical-specific and may include
the risk of developing cancer over a lifetime or other non-                       290 Broadway 19* Floor.
cancer health effects, such as changes in the normal                           New York, New York 10007-1866
functions of organs within the body (e.g., changes in the
effectiveness of the immune system). Some chemicals are
capable of causing both cancer and non-cancer health                  The public liaison for EPA*s Region 2 is:
effects.

 Risl< Characterizetion: This step summarizes and combines                             George H. Zachos
 exposure information and toxicity assessments to provide a                          Regional Public Liaison
 quantitative assessment of site risks. Exposures are                                Toll-free (888) 283-7626
 evaluated based on the potential risk of developing cancer
 and the potential for non-cancer health hazards. The
                                                                                          (732)321-6621
 likelihood of an individual developing cancer Is expressed as
 a probability. For example, a 10~* cancer risk means a                               U.S. EPA Region 2
 "one-in-ten-thousand excess cancer risk"; or one additional
 cancer may be seen In a population of 10,000 people as a
                                                                               2890 Woodbridge Avenue, MS-211
 result of exposure to site contaminants under the conditions                   Edison, New Jersey 08837-3679
 explained in the Exposure Assessment. Current Superfund
 guidelines for acceptable exposures are an individual lifetime
 excess cancer risk in the range of 10"* to 10"* (corresponding
 to a one-in-ten-thousand to a one-in-a-million excess cancer
 risk). For non-cancer health effects, a "hazard index" (HI) is
 calculated. An HI represents the sum of the individual
 exposure levels compared to their corresponding reference
 doses. The key concept for a non-cancer HI is that a
 "threshold level" (measured as an HI of less than 1) exists
  below which non-cancer health effects


     ;::-::«.:&-iiS4-*feii%r;?r^V>.-L-^^Ji;'j




                                                                                                        500034

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  TABLE - 1
                                     MOST FREQUENTL Y DETECTED
                                         SOIL CONTAMINANTS
                                     ( Remedial Investigation Report - 2005)

Contaminants                                Maximum Concentration in                         Site-Specific
                                                  Surface Soils                        Soil Screening Criteria*
                                                (parts per million)                       (parts per million)


 Volatile Organic Compounds
Tetrachloroethylene (PCE)                 0.029                                 1
Trichloroethylene (TCE)                   0.011                                 0.11
 2-Butanone                               0.003                                 50
 Methylene Chloride                       0.073                                 1
Carbon Disulfide                          0.001                                 120

Semi-volatile Organic Compounds

 Pyrene                                   0.36                                  100

 Diethylphthalate                         0.37                                  50
 Butylbenzylphthalate                     0.035                                 100

 Fluoranthene                             0.036                                 100

 Pesticides/PCBs
 PCB (Aroclor 1260)                       0.062                                 0.74

 4,4'- DDE (pesticide)                    0.03                                  7
 4,4' - DDT (pesticide)                   0.11                                  7

 Inorganic Analytes

 Aluminum                                  5,790                                92,000

 Arsenic                                  2.2 & 2.9*                            1.6

 Copper                                   99.9                                  600
 Lead                                     36.6                                  600

 Mercury                                  0.11                                  270

 Chromium                                 267                                   450

 Beryllium                                0.38                                  2
* - Subsurface sample
" - See Remedial Investigation Report for source of site-specific soil screening criteria.
                                                                                                   500035

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ATTACHMENT B




PUBLIC NOTICE




                500036

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  PAGE l u • w w w . a p p . c o m                                                                                                                                                                       ASBURY PARK PRESS      WtDNtl.i:M

                                                                                                             LOCAL NEWS

• K i i ^ j j i i Transgender teacher applies at Pinelands
         By NANCY S H K U t
              .STAIT NtHITUI
                                                                    :t^ChtR: Had sex-change
    ASBURY P.\RK - A funJ-
                                                                  operation more than a year ago                                                 WHAfS NEXT
  raiser to help Loch .U-.iour                                                                                                              'Oetlef Kent, superin-
  resident Sophie i'libli pay                                                                                                               •tendent of the Pine-
                                                           By TRISTAN J . SCMWOGOI             ii^ehed for comment Tuesday                   lands Regional School
  back a home eqtiity loan she                                 M.W.UIAWKIN BUHEAli
  took out to pay ' - . ' i j f-ea in a                                                        iiftemoon. She is a retiiwl mcd-              District, will make a
  decade-old fi;:.''.i foi public                                                              iial marktiting executive who                 recommendation to
  beach accesf v.:jl be held
                                                          U T T L E EGG HAKBOB - Ijoijan substitute teaching in local                        the Boaril of Educa-
                                                      The tran.sKPnder .'^ub.stilute tllstricts after moving to southern                     tion before Its Sept.
  from 6 to 8 p.m. Thursday at                                                                                                               2 8 meeting on
  the Red Fusion bar. Cookman                         Inacher liir«l to work ;it Ihc i'U>- * iti-iin County several years aga
                                                      fncnt.iry S4'h<i»l tn ^-^nh•sw(^^«l                                                    tvliether to hire Uly
  .\venue and Bond S t r e e t                                                                     M.-lksh .substituted for the Ea-          McBeth as a substi-
                                                      l);u> luiw :i|)iiliod tf> \t;H4i in the
     Bubis. 83. borrt)wed at^iinitt                                                            jji-swiimt l^neUnds ;ind Little               tute teacher.
                                                      IMiti'LuMis Itiittitnal .S4-tiiMt] Dtf
  *he equity in her Ocean Pl.icp                                                                luiu llartnH- sirhool ilistricts be-
                                                      fht-t. the ili-Htnct snini-iiiii'iMlinit iiHv uiHh'n^tiiu: .1 .s<\x4'li;in*p op-
  home to help pay h e r logal                        nmlinnwj Tifcralay,                      e n ! imi nutnMhjm.'iyfara^x
  bills, which s h e say^
  amounted to about S2OO.0OO                               Di-lkif Kcm. the ('iniH.u«b He-        l.isi winter, llie blaKleswood          tttivi.^ls I lwiP7^l that i^versiiig
  over the 10 years.                                  ^.'ioiuU stipi'hntendent .'^lid Ijly .si-ijiiiii IkKinl'M dnciskni to n-hire       die d n Liion lo rehire .McBeth in
      Scheduled speakers at the                       Mclloth was iiilfirviewed Tiiwrtiy Mrlli'lh .13 .1 substitute limited              .'he wnkc <it ."uirh criticism wouU
  fundraiser will include Tim                         by a (llstrkx :is.sistaiit principal (oatniH-niy in the Iowa with                  be iti^-niiiiniUon. Ttie board
  DilUngham, executive direc-                         l i r a job as a substitute t e a d i a . some paniiLt .-u'MUing that srliool      : tuck lo its (lei.-lsion to rehire her.
  'or of the Littoral Society,                        Kern will make a njcommraida- officials were ixpiising their chB-                      Last .srhool year, McBeth
  and Ralph Coscia and Ed Sii^                        tioD to the Board of Education be- dren to a (umplii:ated issue btifcre            Liugbt fur one day in Eagleswood
  chio uf Citizens Right to Ac-                       fore its Si'Pt 28 meeting oo fncy were ready.                                      Tiwnship Elementary School,                lajr McBadi ( M l ) , 72, b • satatHBto i M c t M r wlie l i a * I
  cess Beaches. Local talk show                       whether to hire bO".                                                               according to the district                  hired <e work'at Hie i l s m s e t w y sckoel la Eagleswood,
                                                                                                  Meanwhile, transgender rights
  host Maureen Nevin, .in orga-                                                                                                                                                     pness n u Phoro?
                                                           McBeth, 72. could not be
  nizer ol the e v e n t will broad-
  •-.ast part of t h e fimdraiser on
  her talk show. Asbury Radio,                        ON TNC WEB: Visit our Web
  on WYGO (B8.1-FM).                                  ^ite, wwv.app.cora* and click
      Tickets, available at the                       on tfils story for a link to the
  door, cost (20.                                     P i n e l a n d s R e g l o i u J School
                                                      District




1
            EPA is hosting a Public Meeting for the
               Monitor Devices Superftind Site
       The U.S. EnvtroiiincDtal Protcaion Agency invites vou to
       jticod a public meciin^ to di-scusa the Proposed Plao to
       addrcvi soil cuniumifuiitm M the Nliiaiior Devices SupcrtumI site
       in \^^fl liiwavhip. Nc* Jersey.
       Tbc rm--cting utU be held al the ^ ^ I Public Lihrai) at:
                                  27MAllatnR0ad
                             Wud Tmrn^hfp, Nrw Jenny
                           im WediKsday, August 3d, 26M
                                       ul 6:00 PM
        lit rafucM :t rtipy of the Proposed Plan you can, e-mail Natalia
       [.tiiicy, t'uniinunity Imolveincnt Coordinator
                                loni^.iiata»ef&>|ia.gBff
       .« tall Nulalier (212) 637-3639 or loti-frct al 1-SUO-346-50W or
       \Mt HPA'.s website:

         I1»e public riimineni pt'riiHi for thi* rii-[?«»sfd Pl;in .'uns frrm
        \^Klnt^^tilr(. AiiiusI 23, 2^4, to bilila^ Hvyttm\trT 2Z, 200^. .\U
        n r i i i c n i.iiinMci:l\ yhi'itW !».• r-v'Ms'.i t « ;
                        \i:!ri ki>hin<M«i RcniwiiMi Pir*irr* Uirtraor
                           1 '..S'. ('.n^imamrmti fTutn li;io A;:i-JK-y
                                       iW hn^.Jv'-;, I Hh n.»»r
                                       NewV.Hi,.Ml [i»0«rT-IS66
        Or ycufcUn•: XJ:'! VUUI" t-utnoijaij UJ.
                             robintonjiigtkff f Da.Epr




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      500037

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      ATTACHMENT C




PUBLIC MEETING TRANSCRIPT




                            500038

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                    500039


1
2             ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
3
 4                           PUBLIC MEETING
 5       MONITOR DEVICES, INC/INTERCIRCUITS, INC
 6                             SUPERFUND SITE
 7                  WALL TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY
 8
 9
10                                6:10p.m.
                                  August 30, 2006
11
                                  Wall Township Public Library
12                                2700 Allaire Road
                                  Wall Township, New Jersey
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20   Reported by:
21             Charleane M. Heading, RPR
22
23
24
25



                                     FINK & CARNEY
                         REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
            39 West 37th Street, 6th Roor. New York, N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   500040




1

2
     A P P E A R A N C E S
3

4               NATALIE LONEY,
                    Community Relations Coordinator
5                   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
6
                NIGEL ROBINSON,
7                   Project Manager
                    U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
 8
 9               JULIE M C P H E R S O N ,
                     Risk Assessor
10                   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
11
                ALI RAHMANI,
12                  Project Engineer, CDM
13
                SHARON BUDNEY,
14                  RI Task Leader, CDM
15
16
17
18
19
20                                       oOo

21

22

23

24

25



                                     HNK& CARNEY
                          REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
             39 West 37th Street, 6th Roor. New York, N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            500041



1                        Public Meeting
2                         MS. LONEY:            Good afternoon,
3           everyone.           My name is Natalie Loney.
4           I'm with the Environmental Protection
5           Agency.          I'm a Community Involvement
 6          Coordinator assigned to the Monitor
 7          Devices Superfund site.
 8                         This evening we are here to
 9          present to you EPA's Proposed Remedial
10          Action Plan to address contamination
11          at the Monitor Devices site.
12                         Just by way of setting up some
13          ground rules for this evening, we're
14          going to do our full presentation,
15          myself followed by Nigel Robinson who
16          is the Remedial Project Manager for
17          the site and we ask that you hold all
18          questions until after the
19          presentation.
20                         I just want to go over the
21          Superfund remedial process, where the
22          site started and where we are today.
23                        This is a general overview of
24          the Superfund process, how a site gets
25          listed and what stage in this



                              FINK & CARNEY
                  REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
     39 West 37th Street, 6th Roor. New York. N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         500042



1                        Public Meeting
2           continuum we're actually along.
3                          Site discovery obviously is
4           when a site is first identified as
5           having a problem.                   Initially, there's
 6          a preliminary assessment and a site
 7           inspection to determine if the site
 8          poses a threat that qualifies it to be
 9           a Superfund site.
10                         Once that process is
11          completed, it goes through something
12          we call the hazard ranking system and
13          that ranking system determines whether
14          or not a response action is needed at
15          the site.
16                         Once it has gone through that
17          HRS, it is ranked and it's listed, if
18          it scores high enough, on the
19          Superfund list.

20                         Once a site makes it on to the

21          Superfund list, we go through a
22          process called the remedial
23          i n v e s t i g a t i o n and the f e a s i b i l i t y
24          study.
25                         These two studies look at the



                              FINK & CARNEY
                  REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
     39 West 37th Street, 6th Roor. New York. N.Y. 10018 (212) 869-1500

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           500043



1                        Public Meeting
2           nature and extent of contamination at
3           the site and the feasibility study
4            looks at options that would be
5            feasible for addressing contamination
6            at the site.
7                          We've completed all of these,
 8           all of these activities at the Monitor
 9           Devices site and now we've come to the
10          point where we're proposing a plan to
11          address the contamination at the site,
12          something we call the Proposed
13          Remedial Action Plan.
14                         Copies of the Remedial Action
15          Plan are available at the back of the
16          room.        In addition, you can request
17          them via e-mail.                 I can e-mail them
18          out to you if you need to get a copy
19          of it.
20                        At the completion of the
21          presentation and the comment period,
22          there's a 30 day comment period where
23          you can submit comments either verbal
24          tonight or you can e-mail or mail your
25          comments to, to us.                   Our e-mail



                              FINK & CARNEY
                  REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
     39 West 37ih Street. 6th Roor, New York, N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           500044         __



1                         Public Meeting

2            addresses as well as our office

3            address is also available.

4                           At the end of that 3 0 days,

 5           once we've received those comments, we

 6           put them together in a document, the

 7           Record of Decision, which also

 8            includes the responsiveness summary

 9            and that entire document comes, that's

10           where we actually present what we

11           believe is, we've made our final

12           decision as to what remedy we're going

13           to use to address the contamination at

14           any particular site.

15                          Post ROD, we go into remedial

16           design where we actually design the

17           remedy and construction, where we

18           actually build the remedy.

19                          The final stage or phase at a

20           Superfund site is operation and

21           maintenance where the actual remedy

22           has been implemented, it's operating

23-          and maintained, and hopefully at some

24           point in time, once the contamination

25           has been addressed and the site is



                               RNK & CARNEY
                   REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
      39 West 37th Street. 6th Roor. New York, N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             500045


1                        Public Meeting
2           deemed clean, we, there may be a
3           delisting where the site is now
4           removed from the Superfund, the
5           Superfund list and it can be returned
 6          to some positive use in the community.
 7                         I'm going to turn over the
 8           floor to Nigel Robinson who will move
 9           forward in talking about the Remedial
10          Action Plan.
11                         MR. ROBINSON:              Thank you,
12          Natalie.
13                         I want to thank everyone for
14          coming and last year, about the same
15          time, a little bit later, we were
16          here.        We did a similar presentation
17          and that was for the groundwater
18          portion of the site.                    The soils
19          weren't addressed at that time and so
20          this Proposed Plan is to address the
21          soils at the site.
22                         Here we have a slide that
23          shows the location of the site and as
24          you see, it's within the Airport

^5          property and it's not, it's located



                              FINK & CARNEY
                  REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
     39 West 37th Street, 6th Roor, New York, N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                500046



1                        Public Meeting
2           very close to Route 34.
 3                         Okay.        That's a brief
 4           description of the site and also you
 5           can find more details on the site in
 6           the Proposed Plan.
 7                         The site occupies 2 acres in
 8           the industrial park section of
 9           Monmouth County, also known as Allaire
10          Airport, and Monitor Devices formerly
11           occupied Building 25 which is located
12           at intersection of George and Edward
13          Streets.
14                         The history of the site goes
15          back to 1977 when Monitor Devices
16           started operating.                  They operated
17          until 1980 and they manufactured and
18          assembled printed circuit boards.
19                         Circuit panels were plated
20          with copper, lead, nickel, gold and
21          tin and apparently effluent from the
22          electrolysis and the electroplating
23          processes through lines were
24          discharged onto the ground at the rear
25          of the building.



                              FINK & CARNEY
                  REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
     39 West 37th Street. 6th Roor, New York. N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                  500047




1                        Public Meeting
2                          In June 1986, after previous
3           investigation by New Jersey DEP and
4           EPA, the site was placed on the
5           National Priorities List.
 6                         On September 30, 2 005, EPA
7            issued a Record of Decision, just what
 8          Natalie was talking about when she
 9           showed you the entire process.
10                         The selected remedy that EPA
11          chose called for enhanced
12          bioremediation of the volatile organic
13          compound plume in the groundwater or
14          groundwater plume.
15                         Remedial design for OUl
16          groundwater is currently in progress,
17          Groundwater remedy is expected to be
18          implemented in two years.
19                        And for our RI/FS

20          investigation, we did surface and

21          subsurface soil sampling.                        We did
22          groundwater screening at 63 locations.
23          We installed a total of 31 monitoring
24          wells and we did 6 rounds of
25          groundwater           sampling.




                              FINK & CARNEY
                  REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
     39 West 37th Street. 6th Roor, New York, N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              500048


                                                                         10
1                       Public Meeting
2                         For the soil investigation,
3          EPA initially focused on sampling

4          around Building 25 and the background

5          areas.         In all, 37 surface soil

6          samples, zero to 2 feet below ground

7          surface, were taken.                     2 9 subsurface

8          soil samples, meaning that they were

 9         deeper than 2 feet below ground

10         surface, were taken.

11                        For groundwater, groundwater
12         sampling suggested a possible source
13         area near Building 62-C and additional
14         sampling, soil sampling was performed.
15                        Three surface soil samples
16         were taken, zero to half a foot below
17         ground surface, and six subsurface
18          samples were taken, 2 feet below
19         ground level.
20                        Here we see a map or a diagram
21          of the site.             You see Monitor Devices'
22          building and all of the sampling
23          locations around the building and then
24          a little bit further down, you'll see
25          Building 62-C where we took those, we



                              RNK & CARNEY
                  REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
     39 West 37th Street, 6th Roor. New York. N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                500049



                                                                         11
1                        Public Meeting
2           took samples from three locations.
3                          Okay.       The result from the
4           soil sampling.               We found VOCs which is
5           volatile organic compounds, SVOCs
 6          which is semi-volatile organic
 7          compounds, pesticides and PCBs were
 8          detected below site-specific soil
 9           screening criteria.                   Arsenic was
10          detected above site specific soil
11          screening criteria but also detected
12          in the background samples and that
13          gives us reason to believe that it's
14          not site related.
15                         Investigations performed to
16          date have not identified areas of soil
17          contamination that pose a direct
18          contact risk or that is currently a
19          source of groundwater contamination.
20                         Here's a summary of the soil
21          risks.
22                         The site itself is zoned as
23          industrial.             The human health risk
24          assessment that was performed in 2005
25          as a part of the, the groundwater, the



                              FINK & CARNEY
                  REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
     39 West 37th Street, 6th Roor, New York. N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              500050


                                                                         12
1                       Public Meeting

2          groundwater RI/FS and then what is

3          referred to as the HHRA, we evaluated

4           the part of the HHRA where we

5           evaluated the following receptors

 6          exposure to surface soil:                        Site

7           worker, adolescent trespassers,

 8          construction worker.

 9                        The HHRA concluded soil does
10          not pose a human health risk to the
11          receptors that were evaluated,
12                         EPA prepared an addendum to
13          the 2005 HHRA in July 2006.
14                        We evaluated exposure to
15          surface soil in the area of Building
16          25 under a residential exposure
17          scenario.
18                         Previously, the HHRA that we
19          did last year, we did a, we evaluated
20          on the commercial exposure scenario.
21          This time we decided to do it on the
22          residential scenario which is more
23          stringent.            The addendum focused on
24          chemicals retained and quantitatively
25          evaluated in the 2005 HHRA.



                              FINK & CARNEY
                  REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
     39 West 37th Street, 6th Roor, New York, N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                 500051


                                                                               13
1                            Public Meeting
2                             Constituents evaluated in the
3               addendum to the HHRA were arsenic and
4               total and hexavalent, total chromium
5               and hexavalent chromium.
 6                             The HHRA concluded that the
 7              total cancer risk associated with a
 8              residential scenario for arsenic,
 9              total for arsenic, for total, for
10              chromium both total and hexavalent is
11              4 times 10 to the minus 6.                         This risk
12              is within EPA acceptable risk range.
13                            And here are the conclusions
14              of the evaluation that we did, RI/FS
15              and the soil evaluation and the
16   ^          additional work that we did under the
17              addendum.
18                            The HHRA including the
19              July 2006 addendum concludes that
20              surface soil is within the area, that
21              surface soil within the area of
22              Building 25 do not pose an
23              unacceptable risk to human health.
24                            Data collected from 1998 and
25              2001 -- okay.              Data collected from



                                  FINK & CARNEY
                      REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
         39 West 37th Street. 6th Roor, New York, N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                 500052


                                                                             14
1                        Public Meeting
2           1998 and 2001 and conclusion of the
3           HHRA, the soil is not a source of
4           contamination to groundwater.
 5                         Based on these, no further
 6           action is necessary for soils at the
 7           site
 8                         So this concludes our
 9           presentation and anybody has any
10          questions, go ahead and ask,
11                          (Pause)
12                         MR. ROBINSON:              Okay.        I guess
13          there's no questions so this concludes
14          the presentation and the meeting,
15                          (Time noted:            6:25 p.m.)
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25



                              FINK & CARNEY
                  REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
     39 West 37th Street, 6th Roor. New York, N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     ,                                                                        500053


                                                                                       15
1                                    Public Meeting

2                                         C E R T I F I C A T E

3        STATE OF NEW YORK           )

4                                    ) ss.

5        COUNTY OF NEW YORK )

 6                                       I, Charleane M. Heading, a

7                       Registered Professional Reporter and

 8                      Notary Public of the State of New

 9                      York, do hereby certify that the

10                      foregoing Public Meeting, taken at the

11                      time and place aforesaid, is a true

12                      and correct transcription of my

13                      shorthand notes.

14                                       I further certify that I am

15                      neither counsel for nor related to any

16                      party to said action, nor in any wise

17                      interested in the result or outcome

18                      thereof.

19                                       IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have

20                      hereunto set my hand this 5th day of

21                      September, 2006.

22
                                                                   // .rv. /
23

24                                       Charleane M, Heading, RPR




                                          RNK & CARNEY
                              REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
                 39 West 37th Street, 6th Roor. New York, N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500
