LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: Record of Decision, Monitor Devices/Intercircuits, Inc. Site, Operable Unit One - Groundwater, Wall
Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey, prepared by
U.S. EPA, Region 2, September 30, 2005.
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/103720
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: e94736aab89e806f7ed37f0cac85cec7c03771004d24faf056a04019da0dfa35
Source PDF pages: 125
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                SDMS Document


                                                  llillll
                                                  103720




             RECORD OF DECISION

  Monitor Devices/Intercircuits, Inc. Site

       Operable Unit One - Groundwater
 Wall Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey




United States Environmental Protection Agency
                 Region II
               September 2005




                                                500001

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         DECLARATION STATEMENT

                          RECORD OF DECISION

SITE NAME AND LOCATION

Monitor Devices/Intercircuits, Inc. Site (EPA ID# Njp980529408)
Wall Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey
Operable Unit 1 - Groundwater
STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

This decision document presents the Selected Remedy for
contaminated groundwater at the Monitor Devices/Intercircuits,
Inc. site, in Wall Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey. The
Selected Remedy was chosen in accordance with the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA),
as amended, and to the extent practicable, the National Oil and
Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP). This
decision is based on the Administrative Record file for the site.

The State of New Jersey concurs with the Selected Remedy.
ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE

The response action selected in this Record Of Decision (ROD) is
necessary to protect public health or welfare or the environment
from actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from
the site into the environment.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY

The response action addresses groundwater contamination at the
site. A Remedial Investigation of soil contamination has been
performed; however, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and
the State of New Jersey are still evaluating the nature and
extent of soil contamination that may be associated with the
site.

The Selected Remedy described in this document involves the i n
s i t u bioremediation of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in the
groundwater. The major components of the selected response
measure include:
•    I n s i t u treatment of VOC contaminants in the groundwater
     through enhanced bioremediation;
•    Establishing groundwater recirculation loops, as necessary,
     involving extraction of contaminated groundwater within the
     10 part per billion portion of the plume, followed by on-

                                                             500002

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     site reinjection of groundwater and amendments, to support
     i n s i t u bioremediation;

•    Long-term monitoring; and

•    Institutional controls, such as the implementation of a
     Classification Exemption Area to restrict the use of
     groundwater within the area until the aquifer is restored.
DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

Part 1: Statutory Reguirexnexits

The Selected Remedy is protective of human health and the
environment, complies with Federal and State requirements that
are applicable or relevant and appropriate to the remedial
actions to the extent practicable, and is cost-effective. EPA
has determined that the Selected Remedy represents the maximum
extent to which permanent solutions and treatment technologies
can be utilized in a practicable manner at the site.

Part 2: Statutory Preference for Treatment

The Selected Remedy meets the statutory preference for the use of
remedies that involve treatment as a principal element.

Part 3: Five-Year Review Requirements
Because this remedy will not result in hazardous substances,
pollutants, or contaminants remaining on-site above levels that
allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, but may take
more than five years to attain the remedial action objectives and
cleanup levels for the groundwater, a policy review may be
conducted within five years of construction completion for the
Site to ensure that the remedy is, or will be, protective of
human health and the environment.


ROD DATA CERTIFICATION CHECKLIST
The following information is included in the Decision Summary
section of this ROD. Additional information can be found in the
Administrative Record file for the two sites.
•   Chemicals of concern and their respective concentrations may
    be found in the "Site Characteristics" section.
•   Baseline risk represented by the chemicals of concern may be
    found in the "Summary of Site Risks" section.

                                   -2-

                                                       500003

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  A discussion of cleanup levels for chemicals of concern may
  be found in the "Remedial Action Objectives" section,

  A discussion of source materials constituting principal
  threats may be found in the "Principal Threat Waste"
  section.
   Current and reasonably-anticipated future land use
   assumptions are discussed in the "Current and Potential
   Future Site and Resource Uses" section.

  A discussion of potential land use that will be available at
  the sites as a result of the Selected Remedy is discussed in
  the "Remedial Action Objectives" section.
   Estimated capital, annual operation and maintenance (O&M),
   and total present worth costs are discussed in the
   "Description of Alternatives" section.
  Key factors that led to selecting the remedies (i.e., how
  the Selected Remedy provides the best balance of tradeoffs
  with respect to the balancing and modifying criteria,
  highlighting criteria key to the decisions) may be found in
  the "Comparative Analysis of Alternatives" and "Statutory
  Determinations" sections.




               {_', ^•*~'^ _
George Pavlou, Director
                                                  \i?^h
Emergency and Remedial                             Date
Response Division
EPA - Region II




                               •3-
                                                     500004

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

            Decision Summary
               Groundwater

          Monitor Devices Site,

wall Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey




United States Environmental Protection Agency
                  Region II
               September 2005




                                                500005

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                           TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                             PAGE
SITE NAME, LOCATION AND BRIEF DESCRIPTION                         1
SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES                           1
HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION . . . . . . . .             3
SCOPE AND ROLE OF OPERABLE UNIT                                   3
SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS                                   3
CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES . . . . . .    7
SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS                                              7
REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES                                        17
DESCRIPTION OF ALTERNATIVES                                       18
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES                              22
PRINCIP/U^ THREAT WASTE                                           27
SELECTED REMEDY                                                   27
STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS                                     . 28
DOCUMENTATION OP SIGNIFICANT CHANGES     .                        32
APPENDICES
APPENDIX I     FIGURES
APPENDIX II    TABLES
APPENDIX III   ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX
APPENDIX IV    STATE LETTER
APPENDIX V     RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY




                                                           500006

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE NAME. LOCATION AND BRIEF DESCRIPTION

The Monitor Devices site is located in Wall Township, Monmouth
County, New Jersey. The former facility occupies two acres in
the industrial park of the Allaire Airport (also known as the
Monmouth County Airport) off Route 34 (see Figure 1). Monitor
Devices formerly occupied Building 25 in the industrial park,
which is located along the airport access road at the
intersection of George and Edward Streets. Building 25 is
currently occupied by a local business and used as a repair and
storage facility. The area surrounding the site and the Monmouth
County Airport is zoned for mixed commercial and light industrial
use, with residential zoning nearby as well. Several industrial
parks, light industry, commercial properties and undeveloped
areas border the airport to the south and west. The airport and
commercial park are currently active.

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES

Monitor Devices, Inc., operated in Building 25 from 1977 to 1980.
The Monitor Devices operation primarily involved the manufacture
and assembly of printed circuit boards used by companies in the
computer industry.

As part of the manufacturing process, circuit panels were plated
with copper, lead, nickel, gold, and tin. The various plating
processes required both electrolysis and electroplating lines.
Effluent from the electrolysis and electroplating lines was
directed to three pipes that discharged to the rear of the
building. The pipes discharged rinse waters from the nickel-gold
plating and electrolysis, rinse water from the copper and lead
electroplating line, and alkaline washing solution. Volatile
organic compounds (VOCs) such as trichloroethylene (TCE) were
used as solvents and cleaners in a variety of facility
operations.

A complaint against Monitor Devices was filed with the Monmouth
County Department of Health (MCDH) in January 1980. In response
to the complaint, the MCDH visited the Monitor Devices facility
and observed discolored effluent from discharge pipes. Sampling
identified elevated levels of copper, lead, and mercury in the
effluent and in the stained soils.
In early.1980, site inspections by EPA and the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) noted effluent
pipes discharging wastewater directly onto the ground, at rates
of as much as two gallons per minute. Wastewater that was not
percolating into the ground was observed to be flowing around the
building and along an access road. A small dam had been
constructed to control the migration of manufacturing effluent,
resulting in a small unlined pond.   Drums of acetone, isopropyl


                                                      500007

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

alcohol and a variety of acids were also stored at the site,
apparently to be used as part of the facility operations.
NJDEP determined that Monitor Devices never possessed the
required permits to discharge wastewater. In May 1980, NJDEP
issued a Notice of Civil Administrative Penalty Assessment and an
Administrative Order to Monitor Devices. The order required the
cessation of all wastewater discharge, the installation of
monitoring wells, and groundwater sampling. Except for payment
of $1,500 and installation of three monitoring wells. Monitor
Devices failed to comply with the Administrative Order
requirements, particularly the installation of a groundwater
recovery and decontamination system. In 1985, Monitor Devices
and its president were named in a six-count indictment by a
Monmouth County Grand Jury for unlawful release, criminal
mischief, and illegal discharge of pollutants in violation of New
Jersey Water Pollution Act of 1977. The indictment resulted in a
guilty plea and the agreement to pay $100,000 towards the clean-
up of the site. The plea agreement was not complied with. In
1988 Monitor Devices went bankrupt and the State of New Jersey
decided to take no further action against the company or its
president. The business started up again as Intercircuits, Inc.,
at the Lakewood Industrial Park in Lakewood, New Jersey, in 1988.
Intercircuits, Inc., went bankrupt in 1988.

The Monitor Devices site was proposed for inclusion on the
National Priorities List (NPL) in April 1985, and formally placed
on the NPL on June 1, 1986. NJDEP initiated an RI/FS field
investigation; however, after completing a phase of field
investigations, NJDEP requested that EPA assume responsibility
for the site.
After several phases of soil and groundwater studies, EPA's
environmental consultant completed field investigations in 2004,
and prepared a RI Report summarizing the results. In August
2005, a FS Report was completed for the site.

The results of the 2005 RI report pertaining to groundwater is
discussed below, and forrned the basis for the development of the
FS report and EPA's Proposed Plan. All of these documents are
included in the Administrative Record for the sites.
EPA and NJDEP are still evaluating the soil data to determine if
the nature and extent of the soil contamination has been
adequately characterized.




                                                        500008

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
On August 24, 2005, EPA released the Proposed Plan and supporting
documentation for the groundwater remedy to the public for
comment. EPA made these documents available to the public in the
administrative record repositories maintained at the EPA Region
II office (290 Broadway, New York, New York 10007), the Wall
Public Library (2700 Allaire Road, Wall, New Jersey 07719) . EPA
published a notice of availability involving these documents in
the Asbury Park Press newspaper, and opened a public comment
period on the documents from August 24, 2005 to September 23,
2005.

On September 7, 2004, EPA held a public meeting'at the Wall
Public Branch Library, to inform local officials and interested
citizens about the Superfund process, to review the planned
remedial activities at the site, and to respond to any questions
from area residents and other attendees.

Responses.to the comments received at the public meeting and in
writing during the public comment period are included in the
Responsiveness Summary (see Appendix V ) .

SCOPE AND ROLE OF OPERABLE UNIT

EPA is addressing groundwater at this site in this first operable
unit. • EPA and NJDEP are still evaluating the nature and extent
of soil contamination that may be associated with the site which
will be addressed in a second operable unit remedy.

SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS

Soil
The RI investigated the site for soil contamination. Generally,
the RI did not find areas of soil contamination and, particular
to this Record of Decision (ROD), did not identify any areas of
soil contamination that might act as a source of groundwater
contamination. Soil investigations focused around Building 25
and, for reasons discussed below, around Building 62C. The
details of the soil investigation performed to date can be found
in the RI Report in the administrative record. As previously
mentioned, EPA and NJDEP are still evaluating the soil data to
determine if the nature and extent of the soil contamination has
been adequately characterized.




                                                      500009

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Site-wide Gro\indwater Contamination
Groundwater beneath the site flows toward the east with a
southeastern component. A topographic ridge (high) occupied by
the airport to the west of the site probably acts as a small-
scale groundwater divide and shallow groundwater likely flows
radially away from the center of this ridge.

The unconfined Kirkwood-Cohansey aquifer, in which site
contamination is migrating, is an unconfined unit composed of
interbedded sand, silt and gravel. It is approximately 45 to 70
feet thick at the site. Below the Kirkwood-Cohansey, though
separated from it by confining layers, is the Englishtown aquifer
system.

Wall Township's municipal wells are between 460 and 730 feet deep
and draw their water from the Mount Laurel and Englishtown
aquifers. Based on groundwater flow towards the east/southeast,
a Wall Township public supply well on Route 34 is hydraulically
downgradient of the site. However, because it is screened in the
deeper Englishtown aquifer and not the Kirkwood-Cohansey, in
which site contamination is migrating, this supply well has
significant confining layers between its productive interval and
the overlying Kirkwood-Cohansey, and is not within the expected
migration path of the contamination. Its is highly unlikely that
the Englishtown Aquifer can be impacted by contamination from the
site (see Figure 2). The Wall Township Water Department reports
no violations in its most recent (2004) annual drinking water
quality report, and samples collected from the Route 34 supply
well by EPA confirm the absence of VOC contamination in the water
supply.

Throughout the groundwater investigation, eight organic compounds
exceeded the site-specific groundwater screening criteria;
however, of the eight compounds, carbon tetrachloride was only
detected in one groundwater sampling round at levels exceeding
the site-specific screening criteria, and methylene chloride is
believed to be a laboratory contaminant and not associated with
the site. The remaining VOCs found were:
    1,1-Dichloroethylene (1,1-DCE)
    1,2-dichloroethane (1,2-DCA)
    1,1,1-trichloroethane (1,1,1-TCA)
    1,1,2-TCA
    Trichloroethylene (TCE)
    Tetrachloroethylene (PCE)

In the most recent (2004) sampling events, the highest
concentrations of these compounds, TCE at 320 parts per billion


                                                        500010

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 (320 ppb) and 1,1-DCE at 470 ppb, were detected in MW-17A,
located approximately 175 feet downgradient of Building 62-C.
The highest concentration of PCE, 8.2 ppb, was detected in
MWD-4S. No organic compounds were detected in wells MW-llS and
MW-llD, which are considered site background wells. In addition,
no organic compounds were detected in the side-gradient wells
AMW-5 and AMW-6.

All semi-volatile organics were detected below the site-specific
screening criteria with the exception of bis(2-ethylhexyl)-
phthalate, which was detected in one well during one sampling
round, and is believed to be a laboratory contaminant. No
pesticides or polychlorinated biphenyls were detected in any of
the site monitoring wells.

In the 2 004 sampling events, nine inorganic analytes exceeded the
site-specific groundwater screening criteria, including aluminum,
arsenic, cadmium, chromium, hexavalent chromium, copper, iron,
manganese, vanadium, cyanide and thallium.    Metals contamination
is localized to wells near Building 25, and does not indicate any
downgradient migration. These metals included chromium at 404
ppb, hexavalent chromium at 190 ppb, and copper at 3,400 ppb.

A VOC plume attributable to the site is approximately 2,800 feet
long along its primary axis (from northwest to southeast) from
the Monitor Devices building to within 800 feet of the
intersection of Route 34 and Hurley Pond Road and approximately
1,500 feet wide. Groundwater screening and monitoring well
sample results have shown that the groundwater contaminant plume
is descending slightly in elevation as it progresses
hydraulically downgradient, indicating the presence of a slight
downward vertical gradient. Along the main axis of the plume,
the depth of the plume appears to begin approximately 125 feet
above mean sea level (msl) near the Monitor Devices building and
migrates down to 30-35 feet above msl near Building 62-C, (see
Figure 3 ) .

The groundwater flows toward the east, with a slight southern
component; however, the groundwater contaminant plume appears to
trend in a more southerly direction than would be suggested by
the groundwater gradients. This contradiction (between the
groundwater flow patterns and the apparent contaminant migration
patterns) led EPA to believe that other sources may exist, such
as in the area of Building 62-C. Soil sampling around Building
62-C, a maintenance building associated with the airport, did not
show a source emanating from that location.

The very high groundwater contaminant concentrations in the area
of Building 62-C are either the result of an as-yet-unidentified



                                                          500011

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

second release or the result of a slug of groundwater
contamination that was discharged during the Monitor Devices
operation, and its center has migrated as far as Building 62-C.
The high groundwater contamination may indicate a potential
secondary source that may have resulted from past airport
operations (see Figure 3). The Kirkwood-Cohansey aquifer is
composed of interbedded sand, silt and gravel layers, and at
approximately 30 to 35 feet above msl in the area of Building 62C
a silt and interbedded silty gravel layer is present that was
detected during the installation of monitoring wells MW-17C and
MW-19C. The presence of discontinuous layers of silts and clays
in the aquifer in this same area may also contribute to this
contamination pattern.

During the RI, groundwater samples were collected to evaluate the
degree to which contamination might be naturally attenuating,
through biodegradation or other conditions naturally present in
the aquifer. There was little evidence that natural attenuation
of the VOC contaminants is occurring at levels that would warrant
consideration of "monitored natural attenuation" as a remedial
strategy.

Based on groundwater flow towards the east/southeast, the Route
34 public supply well is hydraulically downgradient of the site.
However, it is screened in the deeper Englishtown Aquifer System,
not the unconfined Kirkwood-Cohansey Aquifer, in which site
contamination is migrating. Therefore, the Route 34 public
supply well has significant confining layers between its
productive interval and the overlying Kirkwood-Cohansey Aquifer
and therefore is not within the expected migration path of the
contamination. Its is highly unlikely that the Englishtown
Aquifer has been impacted by contamination from the site.
Samples collected from the Route 34 supply well confirm the
absence of VOC contamination in the water supply.

Surface Water and Sediment

A small pond, located at the southeast edge of an airport runway
and side-gradient from the area of groundwater contamination, was
evaluated for potential surface water or sediment contamination
from the site. No VOCs or other organic compounds were detected
in the surface water or sediment. Several pesticides not
associated with the site were detected in a sediment sample below
site-specific screening criteria for the sediment sample. Based
on the elevation of the pond, along with surface water and
sediment samples taken from it, it does not appear that the
groundwater discharges to this body of water.




                                                         500012

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES

Site Uses: Building 25, the probable original source of the
contamination at the site, is currently used as a storage
facility. Zoning in the area includes mixed residential,
commercial, and light industrial uses. The site area includes
the industrial park that is part of the Monmouth County (Allaire)
Airport, and neighboring commercial-use properties on Route 34,
Several industrial parks, light industry, and commercial
properties are located to the east, along Route 34, and to the
north. Commercial and residential properties and undeveloped
areas border the airport.

The airport and the industrial park are privately owned; however,
Monmouth County has plans to acquire the property and the
airport. Acquisition by Monmouth County is not expected to
change the land use in the affected area.

Ground and Surface Hater Uses: Groundwater underlying the site
is considered Class IIA, a source of potable water; however, the
Kirkwood-Cohansey aquifer is not currently used as a source of
potable water in the area. Residents and businesses are supplied
by municipal water. One of Wall Township's municipal wells is
hydraulically downgradient of the site (approximately one mile),
but it is screened in the deeper Englishtown aquifer system, and
does not appear to be threatened by site contamination.
SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS
Risk ABsesBment

The focus of the human health risk (HHRA) assessment is to
evaluate risks from exposure to the contaminated groundwater,
surface water and sediment. The sediment and surface water
samples were collected from a small on-site pond. The purpose of
the risk assessment is to identify potential cancer risks and
non-cancer health hazards at the site assuming that no further
remedial action is taken. An assessment was performed to
evaluate current and future cancer risks and non-cancer health
hazards based on the most recent sampling data, which were
collected and analyzed in 2004.

A four-step risk assessment process is utilized for assessing
site-related cancer risks and non-cancer health hazards for a
reasonable maximum exposed individual: Hazard
Identification-Identification of Chemicals of Potential Concern,
Data Collection and Evaluation, Exposure Assessment, Toxicity
Assessment and Risk Characterization. Hazard




                                                         500013

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Identification-Identification of Chemicals of Concern identifies
the contaminants of concern at the site based on several factors
such as toxicity, frequency of occurrence and concentration.
Exposure Assessment estimates the magnitude of actual and or
potential human exposures, the frequency and duration of these
exposures and the exposure pathways. Toxicity Assessment
determines the types of adverse health effects (cancer and
non-cancer) associated with chemical exposures, and the
relationship between the magnitude of exposure and severity of
adverse effects. Risk Characterization summarizes and combines
outputs of the exposure and toxicity assessments to provide a
quantitative assessment of site related cancer risks and
non-cancer health hazards and addresses the uncertainties.

Hazard Identification/Identification of Chezolcals of Potential
Concern

The analytical data report, which included samples taken from
2004, was used to determine the chemicals of potential concern
 (COPCs)in the groundwater, surface water and sediment. Data used
in the risk assessment has met all appropriate QA/QC requirements
and is appropriate for use in this risk assessment. The maximum
detected concentrations of each chemical were compared to their
respective risk-based screening criteria. The criteria used for
comparison are the USEPA Region 9 Preliminary Remediation Goals
 (PRG) table (USEPA, 2004), the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection Groundwater Quality Standards
 (NJDEPGWQS), New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Drinking Water Quality Standard (NJDEPDWQS) and the National
Drinking Water Standards (Maximum Contaminant Levels - MCLs).
The PRG values are human health risk based criteria that
represent a cancer risk of one in a million and a Hazard Quotient
of 1.0. The non-cancer hazard PRGs have been adjusted to 0.1 to
take into account potential exposures to multiple chemicals.
NJDEPGWQS, NJDEPDWS and MCLs are the highest level of contaminant
that is allowed in drinking water. These criteria are
promulgated standards that apply to public water systems and are
intended to protect human health by limiting the levels of
contaminants in drinking water. The chemicals that exceeded
their respective screening criteria were retained as COPCs. If a
chemical's concentration was detected below the PRG value, then
that specific chemical was determined to be at a concentration
that is unlikely to cause adverse health effects. Group A
carcinogens were also retained for analysis regardless of whether
they exceeded the PRG screening or not.

An exposure point concentration (EPC) was calculated for each
chemical exceeding the PRG value. The EPC is the 95 percent
                                8


                                                        500014

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Upper Confidence Limit (UCL) on the mean or the maximum detected
concentration when the 95 percent UCL exceeds the maximum
detected concentration in an environmental medium. The EPC is
calculated using Pro-UCL 3.0. If the analytical results
indicated a non-detect for a chemical/ a value of half of the
detection limit was used when calculating the 95 percent UCL for
that chemical. The EPC is calculated assuming an RME individual
is equally exposed to the media within all portions of the site
over the time frame of the risk assessment. Appendix II, Table 1
presents the chemicals of concern for each media evaluated and
their respective EPCs.

Exposure Assessment

The Monitor Devices site is zoned and developed for industrial
use. The most likely current and future receptors are site
workers and trespassers. Current and future site workers may be
exposed to contaminants in groundwater. Currently the site
workers are not in direct contact with the groundwater since the
site is supplied with drinking water from the municipal water
supply system. However, chemicals may potentially migrate
through the subsurface into buildings through vapor intrusion.
Workers may be exposed to site-related contaminants via indoor
air. Site workers may also be exposed to surface water and
sediment from the onsite pond via incidental ingestion and dermal
contact. Although site workers are not in direct contact with
groundwater, exposure to contaminants in groundwater via may
occur if a well is installed in the future.

Analytical results have shown that the groundwater plume has
migrated downgradient from the property boundary. The town
zoning designates the surrounding areas for office/research.
This designation allows for the development that includes
corporate office parks, campuses, hotels and conference centers.
The closest residential zone is 3,000 feet east of the site,
though there are residents closer than that to the site. While
off-site residents are not expected to come in direct contact
with site contaminants, these receptors may install private wells
in the future that draw on the contaminated water from the site.
Future residential adults and children may be exposed to site
related contamination in groundwater via ingestion, dermal
contact, inhalation of volatiles while showering. Because the
groundwater migrates downward as it moves towards the residential
area, there is no potential for vapor intrusion due to the
presence of noncontaminated water above the contaminated plume.

There are three exposure pathways associated with groundwater
exposure to the future residential adult and child: ingestion of




                                                         500015

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

drinking water, inhalation of volatiles while showering and
dermal absorption while showering.

Since the site is zoned for industrial use, the designation
allows for the development of a child daycare center. Future
daycare children (ages 0-6) may be exposed to contaminants in
groundwater via ingestion if a well is installed on the site in
the future.

Appendix II, Table 2 provides the conceptual site model for the
risk assessment.

Toxicity Assessment

Toxicity data for the COPCs were obtained from IRIS (Integrated
Risk Information System). This EPA consensus database provides
cancer and non-cancer toxicity information. In the absence of
data from IRIS, Superfund Health Risk Technical Support Center -
National Center for Environmental Assessment (STSC-NCEA) was
contacted for provisional toxicity data.

Appendix II, Table 3 provides data on the non-cancer health
effects for the COPCs. The toxicity values presented are the
oral reference dose (RfD) and inhalation reference concentration
 (RfC) and the associated non-cancer health endpoints for the RfD
and RfC for each COPC.

Appendix II, Table 4 provides data on the cancer weight of
evidence for COPCs and the associated dose/response information
 (i.e. cancer slope factors, etc.). The weight of evidence is
used to characterize the extent to which the available human
epidemiology and animal data indicate that an agent may cause
cancer in humans. The weight of evidence for each chemical is
categorized into the following groups: (A) Human carcinogen; <B1)
Probable Human Carcinogen - Limited Human Data; (B2) Probable
Human Carcinogen - Sufficient Animal Data - Inadequate or No
Human Data; (C) Possible Human Carcinogen; (D) Not Classifiable
as a Human Carcinogen and (E) Evidence of a chemical is not a
carcinogen in humans. In general, cancer slope factors were
available for 1,1,-DCE, TCE, PCE, arsenic and carbon
tetrachloride.

Risk Characterization

The following section discusses the results of the non-cancer
health hazards and the cancer risks assessment for each RME
individual. Cancer risk and non-cancer hazards for the exposure
pathways are presented in Appendix II, Table 5 and 6.
                                10


                                                          500016

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Cancer Risk - Quantitative

For carcinogens, cancer risks are generally expressed as the
incremental probability of an individual developing cancer over a
lifetime as a result of exposure to the carcinogen. Excess
lifetime cancer risk is calculated from the following equation:
Risk = CDI * Slf

Where     risk = a unitless probability of an individual's
developing cancer
          CDI = chronic daily intake averaged over 70 years
(mg/kg-day)
          Slf = slope factor, expressed as (mg/kg-day)-1
These risks are probabilities that usually are expressed in
scientific notation. An excess lifetime cancer risk of 1 x 10-6
indicates that an individual experiencing the reasonable maximum
exposure estimated has a 1 in 1,000,000 chance of developing
cancer as a result of site-related exposure. The NCP defines the
acceptable risk range for site related exposures as one in 10,000
(10-4) to one in a million (10-6). The on-site and off-site
cancer risks are summarized by exposure scenario.

O n - s i t e Risks
Site Worker - Current/Future
The total cancer risk' (1.9 x 10"*) is slightly above the NCP's
acceptable risk range due to inhalation of TCE from vapor
intrusion.
Site Worker - Future
The total cancer risk (3.2 x 10"*) is above the NCP's acceptable
risk range due to inhalation of TCE from vapor intrusion and
ingestion of TCE and arsenic in tap water.
Child - Future Day-Care
The total cancer risk (1.5 x 10"*) is slightly above the NCP's
acceptable risk range is due to TCE and arsenic in the tap water.


O f f - s i t e Risks
Adult - Residential
The total cancer risk (6 x 10**) is above the NCP's acceptable
risk range is due to TCE and 1,1-DCE in the tap water.



                                11


                                                          500017

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Child - Residential
The total cancer risk (1 x 10"^) is above the NCP's acceptable
risk range is due to TCE and 1,1-DCE in the tap water.
Non-cancer Hazard - Quantitative

The potential for non-carcinogenic effects is evaluated by
comparing an exposure level over a specified time period (i.e.
lifetime) with a reference dose (RfD) derived for a similar
exposure period. The RfD is an estimate (with uncertainty
spanning perhaps an order of magnitude) of a daily exposure to
the human population (including sensitive subgroups) that is "
likely to be without appreciable risk of deleterious effects
during a lifetime. The ratio of exposure to toxicity is called a
hazard quotient (HQ). An HQ less than 1.0 indicates that a
receptor's dose of a single contaminant is less than the RfD, and
that toxic non-carcinogenic effects from that chemical are
unlikely.

The Hazard Index (HI) . is generated by adding the HQs for all
chemicals of concern that effect the same target organ or act
through the same mechanism of action within a medium or across
all media to which a given individual may reasonably be exposed.
An HI less than 1.0 indicates that, based on the sum of all HQs
from different contaminants and exposure routes, toxic
non-carcinogenic effects from all contaminants are unlikely. An
HI greater than 1.0 indicates that a site related exposure may
present a hazard to human health. The HQ is calculated as
follows:

Non-Cancer = CDI/RfD
Where     CDI = chronic daily intake
          RfD = reference dose

CDI and RfD are expressed in the same units and represent the
same exposure period (i.e. chronic, subchronic or short-term).
On-site and off-site non-cancer summarized below by exposure
scenario.

On-site Risk
Site Worker - Current/Future
The sum of the hazard quotients for the site worker is 2, which
is slightly above EPA's non-hazard index of 1. The His based on
individual health endpoints do not exceed the threshold of 1.



                               12

                                                           500018

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Site Worker - Future
The sum of the hazard quotients for the site worker is 5, which
is above EPA's non-hazard index of 1. The His based on
individual health endpoints are kidney (4), liver (2), and fetus
(2), primarily due to TCE.

Child - Future DavCare
The sum of the hazard quotients for the future child attending
daycare is 13, which is above EPA's non-hazard index of 1, The
His based on individual health endpoints are kidney (10), liver
(10), and fetus (10), primarily due to TCE.
O f f - s i t e Risks

Adult - Residential
The sum of the hazard quotients for the residential adult is 8,
which is above EPA's non-hazard index of 1. The His based on
individual health endpoints are kidney (6), liver (7), and fetus
(6), primarily due to TCE.
Child - Residential
The sum of the hazard cjuotients for the residential child is 19,
which is above EPA's non-hazard index of 1. The His based on
individual health endpoints are kidney (15), liver (15), fetus
(15), skin (1) and Gl tract (2), primarily due to TCE, arsenic
and copper.

Uncertainty
It is important to identify the uncertainties associated with the
assumptions to place the risk estimates in proper perspective.
The primary uncertainties associated with this risk assessment
include environmental data analysis, exposure assumptions and
toxicity assumptions.

Environmental I?ata
Uncertainty is always involved in the estimation of chemical
concentrations. Errors in the analytical data may stem from
errors inherent in sampling and/or laboratory procedures. One of
the most effective methods of minimizing procedural or systematic
error is to subject the data to a strict quality control review.
This quality control review procedure helps to eliminate many
laboratory errors. However, even with all the data vigorously
validated, it must be realized that error is inherent in all
laboratory procedures.

Additional uncertainty is associated with chemicals reported in
samples at concentrations below the reported quantitation limits,
                               13


                                                         500019

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

but still included in the analysis. These values are estimated
and may result in the over-estimation or under estimation of
risks.

Exposure Parameter Estimation
There are two major areas of uncertainty affecting exposure
parameter estimation. The first relates to estimation of EPCs.
The second relates to parameter values used to estimate chemical
intake (e.g. ingestion rate, exposure frequency).
A large source of uncertainty in this risk assessment is
associated with modeling indoor air concentrations from vapor
intrusion from groundwater below on-site buildings. Some
modeling uncertainty was limited through the use of site-specific
information (i.e. depth to groundwater, soil type, building size)
in the Johnson and Ettinger vapor intrusion model. Building size
was based on the smallest on-site building (i.e. the lowest air
volume), which may over-estimate concentrations in larger
buildings. Maximum detected concentrations in shallow screening
samples were used in the model and assumed to persist throughout
the exposure duration of 25 years, which is likely to over-
estimate risks because concentrations vary over the area and are
expected to decrease over time as the plume attenuates.

The approach used to calculate exposure point concentrations for
other media may over-estimate potential exposures and thus risks.
In accordance with EPA guidance (1989), when at least 10 samples
were collected, the exposure point concentration for a specific
chemical in a particular medium was based on the 95 percent UCL
on the mean, or the maximum detected concentration, whichever was
less. Since the 95 percent UCL can be highly unstable from a
mathematical standpoint, and is strongly influenced by the sample
size and the variability of the chemical concentrations, the
approach to estimating exposure point concentrations can result
in the default use of the maximum detected concentration. For
most chemicals, the 95 percent UCL did not exceed the maximum
detected concentration. Arsenic is the only chemical where the
maximum detected concentration was used to quantitatively
estimate risks. While use of maximum concentrations for arsenic
results in conservative risk estimates for groundwater exposure,
the source of uncertainty did not strongly influence the results
of the risk assessment for most of the COPCs.

Only one sediment and surface water samples were collected from
the small pond on site so the measured concentrations were used
to directly estimate risks for the onsite workers exposure.
Exposure point concentrations based on a single sample are


                                14

                                                           500020

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

uncertain and the risks may be over-estimated or under-estimated.
When calculating exposure point concentrations from sampling
data, one half the reported detection limits for non-detect
samples were included in the calculation of the 95 percent UCL.
Any approach dealing with non-detected chemical concentrations is
associated with some uncertainty. This is because the non-detect
result does not indicate whether the chemical is absent from the
medium, present a concentration just above zero or present at a
concentration just below the detection limit. For chemicals that
were infrequently detected (e.g. several chemicals in
groundwater, including TCE and 1,1-DCE), many of the values used
to estimate the exposure point concentrations were based on
detection limits. However, detection limits for the COPCs were
generally toward the lower end of detected concentrations, so the
95 percent UCLs were minimally influenced by the detection
limits.

The exposure parameters values used are also uncertain. For
example, assumptions were made for the exposure time, frequency
and duration of potential chemical exposures as well as for the
quantity of material ingested, inhaled or absorbed. In general,
assumptions were made based on a reasonable maximum exposure and,
in most cases, values were specified by either EPA Region 2 or
general EPA guidance documents. In the case of the dermal
absorption factor, chemical-specific values based on EPA guidance
are not available for the VOCs and most inorganic chemicals.
Dermal risk associated with these chemicals cannot be
quantitatively evaluated for risk assessment, which introduces
some uncertainty in total risk and total hazard estimates.

Toxicity
General uncertainties in toxicity assessment stems from a lack of
toxicity data for chemicals of potential concern. In addition,
there are uncertainties due to the use of animal studies,
calculation of cancer risks based on less than life-time exposure
data, and synergistic and antagonistic interactions among
chemicals in order to develop toxicity values. There are also
uncertainties in extrapolating from animal to human for both
carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic effects.

Risk Characterization
There is also uncertainty in assessing the risks associated with
a mixture of chemicals. In this assessment, the effects of
exposure to each contaminant present has initially been
considered separately. However, these substances occur together
at the site, and individuals may be exposed to mixtures of the
chemicals. Prediction of how these chemicals will interact must

                               15


                                                         500021

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

be based on an understanding of the mechanisms of such
interactions. Individual compounds may interact chemically in
the body, yielding a new toxic component or causing different
effects at different target organs. Suitable data are not
currently available to rigorously characterize the effects of
chemical mixtures. Consequently, as recommended by EPA (1989),
chemicals present at the site were assumed to act additively, and
potential health risks were evaluated by summing excess lifetime
cancer risks and calculating hazard indices for non-cancer health
effects.

This approach to assessing risk associated with mixtures of
chemicals assumes that there are no synergistic or antagonistic
interactions among the chemicals and that all chemicals have the
same toxic endpoint and mechanisms of action. To the extent that
these assumptions are incorrect, the actual risks could be
over-estimated or under-estimated.
Uncertainty was also introduced to the risk characterization,
when site-specific background concentrations of COPCs were not
considered in the risk calculation, especially for arsenic, a
Group A carcinogen. At the Monitor Devices site, for the
groundwater estimates, the arsenic background concentration (4.3
ppb) is about 65 percent of the arsenic EPC (6.7 ppb).
Consequently, the actual site-specific risk is over-estimated.

As a result of the uncertainties described above, this assessment
should not be construed as presenting absolute risks or hazards.
Rather, it is a conservative analysis intended to indicate the
potential for adverse impacts to occur based on reasonable
maximum and central tendency exposures.


Conclusion
Estimated risks to trespassers and to construction workers were
well below thresholds of concern for both cancer risks and non-
cancer hazards. However, potential risks to current and future
workers, future onsite daycare children and offsite residents
exceeded thresholds of concern, primarily due to the
contamination in the groundwater. Concentrations detected in
sediment and surface water were not associated with risks above
thresholds of concern.
Based on EPA's HHRA, surface water and sediments (from a small
pond on the airport property) do not pose a risk to human health.



                               16
                                                          500022

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Ecological Risks

A four-step process is utilized for assessing site-related
ecological risks for a reasonable maximum exposure scenario:
Problem F o r m u l a t i o n - a qualitative evaluation of contaminant
release, migration, and fate; identification of contaminants of
concern, receptors, exposure pathways, and known ecological
effects of the contaminants; and selection of endpoints for
further study. Exposure Assessment - a quantitative evaluation
of contaminant release, migration, and fate; characterization of
exposure pathways and receptors; and measurement or estimation of
exposure point concentrations. E c o l o g i c a l E f f e c t s Assessment -
literature reviews, field studies, and toxicity tests, linking
contaminant concentrations to effects on ecological receptors.
R i s k C h a r a c t e r i z a t i o n - measurement or estimation of both current
and future adverse effects.

An ecological risk characterization was performed for the Monitor
Devices site in 1998 and re-evaluated in 2004. A groundwater
evaluation indicated very little potential to adversely affect
aquatic life due to the limited possibilities of groundwater
reaching the surface. No further consideration of groundwater
was warranted in the Ecological Risk Assessment.

REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES

Remedial action objectives are specific goals to protect human
health and the environment. These objectives are based on
available information and standards such as applicable or
relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs) and risk-based
levels established in the risk assessment.
The following remedial action objectives for contaminated
groundwater address the human health risks and environmental
concerns at the Monitor Devices site:
•    Prevent or minimize potential current and future human
     exposures including ingestion and dermal contact with
     groundwater that presents a significant risk to public
     health and the environment;
•    Minimize the potential for off-site migration of
     contaminated groundwater; and
•    Restore the groundwater to drinking water standards within a
     reasonable time frame.



                                        17

                                                                         500023

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Residents are currently connected to the municipal water system;
however, if contaminated groundwater is used as drinking water in
the future, significant health risks would exist. In addition,
if the contaminated groundwater were used in industrial processes
within the area, significant human health risks may exist. Thus,
remedial actions must minimize the potential for human exposure
to contaminated groundwater.

Appendix II, Table 7   lists the contaminants of concern found in
groundwater at the site, and their respective Cleanup Criteria or
Standards, in this case the drinking water standards (MCLs) or
Ground Water Quality Criteria (GWQS). Cleanup Criteria were
selected that would both reduce the risk associated with exposure
to contaminants to an acceptable level and ensure minimal
migration of contaminants off the site. The metals chromium,
hexavalent chromium and copper were identified as contaminants of
potential concern; however, because these metals were not
identified as risk drivers and were localized to only one well
cluster, EPA is not proposing Cleanup Criteria for these metals.
A groundwater monitoring program will be implemented to monitor
for these metals. Should monitoring results indicate an increase
in metal contamination, EPA would evaluate the need for such
remediation.

DESCRIPTION OF ALTERNATIVES

The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act (CERCLA) requires that each remedial alternative be
protective of human health and the environment, be cost-
effective, comply with other statutory laws, and utilize
permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies and
resource recovery technologies to the maximum extent practicable.
In addition, the statute includes a preference for the use of
treatment as a principal element for the reduction of toxicity,
mobility or volume of hazardous substances.

Each groundwater remediation alternative would be coupled with
institutional controls to limit the potential exposure of the
public to the groundwater contamination until the groundwater is
cleaned up. Institutional Controls, such as New Jersey's
Classification Exception Area (CEA), typically are restrictions
placed to minimize human exposure and continue monitoring to
track contaminant migration (i.e., long-term monitoring).
Institutional controls are generally used in conjunction with
other remedial technologies.




                               18
                                                            500024

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Remedial alternatives for the Monitor Devices site are presented
below. The time frames below for construction do not include the
time for remedial design or the time to procure contracts.

Alternative 1:            No Action

Estimated C a p i t a l C o s t :                             $0
E s t i m a t e d Annual O p e r a t i o n &
        M a i n t e n a n c e (OSM) C o s t :                 $0
E s t i m a t e d P r e s e n t Worth C o s t :               $0
E s t i m a t e d C o n s t r u c t i o n Time frame: None
Regulations governing the Superfund program expect that the "no
action" alternative be evaluated generally to establish a
baseline for coitparison. Under this alternative, EPA would take
no action at the site to prevent exposure to contaminated
groundwater. Institutional controls would not be implemented to
restrict future groundwater use.

Alternative 2: Institutional Controls/Long-term Monitoring

Estimated C a p i t a l C o s t :                       $37,000
E s t i m a t e d Annual O&M C o s t :                  $71,000
E s t i m a t e d P r e s e n t Worth C o s t :        $975,000
Alternative 2 relies on institutional controls, such as a
classification exception area (CEA), to prevent future use of
contaminated groundwater within the boundaries of the site, and a
groundwater monitoring program would be established to evaluate
the groundwater contamination over time. Under the groundwater
monitoring program, groundwater conditions would be monitored
periodically (e.g., quarterly, semi-annually or annually)..

Long-term monitoring activities would include periodic
groundwater sampling from some of the 47 site monitoring wells
and the public supply well downgradient to the contaminant plume
for VOC analysis. In addition, groundwater samples would be
collected periodically from several monitoring wells for metals
analysis. Because this remedy will not result in hazardous
substances, pollutants, or contaminants remaining on-site above
levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure,
but may take more than five years to attain the remedial action
objectives and cleanup levels for the groundwater, a policy
review may be conducted within five years of construction
completion for the Site to ensure that the remedy is, or will be,
protective of human health and the environment. For costing
purposes, it is assumed the alternative would be performed for
the 30 years.

                                                  19

                                                                   500025

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 3 - Groundwater Collection and Treatment

Estimated C a p i t a l C o s t :                      $1,261,000
E s t i m a t e d Annual O&M C o s t :                  $ 314,000
E s t i m a t e d P r e s e n t Worth C o s t :        $5,400,000

The objective of Alternative 3 is to remediate the contaminated
groundwater plume through groundwater pumping and treatment.
Treatment of extracted groundwater would involve a combination of
filtration and air stripping. Based on the estimated air
emissions from the air stripper, vapor phase treatment would not
be necessary,

A number of different combinations of groundwater extraction
wells and treated water discharge options were evaluated,
including discharge to surface water and reinjection (see
Feasibility Study Report), For cost-estimating purposes for this
ROD, this Alternative assumed a series of extraction wells that
would capture the 10 ppb TCE plume, requiring a pumping rate of
280 gallons per minute (280 gpm). Alternative 3 also assumes
that treated water would be discharged to a storm water catch
basin associated with the airport. The Feasibility Study Report
contains a detailed evaluation of the other options of
discharging to surface water or through reinjection to
groundwater, and any of discharge options could be implemented
under this alternative.

This alternative also includes institutional controls such as
groundwater use restrictions and periodic groundwater monitoring
to track the migration of the plume and to verify the
effectiveness of this alternative. It is estimated that this
system would be need to be operated for 25 years, and that the
groundwater would be restored to drinking water standards in
approximately 30 years.

Because this remedy will not result in hazardous substances,
pollutants, or contaminants remaining on-site above levels that
allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, but may take
more than five years to attain the remedial action objectives and
cleanup levels for the groundwater, a policy review may be
conducted within five years of construction completion for the
Site to ensure that the remedy is, or will be, protective of
human health and the environment.




                                                  20
                                                                    500026

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative          4: Enhanced Groundwater Bioremediation

Estimated C a p i t a l C o s t :                      $2,510,000
E s t i m a t e d Annual O&M C o s t :                  $ 880,000
E s t i m a t e d P r e s e n t Worth C o s t :        $7,250,000

This alternative involves enhanced bioremediation for destruction
of contaminants, through groundwater extraction followed by the
reinjection of water and nutrients or other chemical amendments
into the contaminated aquifer. It would be implemented by
installing and operating multiple two-well recirculation loops
oriented parallel to the direction of groundwater flow. The
downgradient well in each loop would be used for groundwater
extraction, and the upgradient well would be used for injection
of groundwater and bioremediation amendments. The reinjection of
amendments with groundwater into the aquifer would encourage i n
s i t u bioremediation within the aquifer, thereby accelerating the
rate of aquifer recovery.

Bioremediation would be implemented by stimulating microbes in
the aquifer that would then destroy the VOCs, through one of two
mechanisms, aerobic co-metabolism or enhanced anaerobic
bioremediation (EAB). The selection of the bioremediation
approach to be implemented would be based on the outcome of
bench-scale treatability studies during remedial design. In
terms of overall implementation, both bioremediation technologies
would be similar with the exception of the actual amendments to
be delivered to the subsurface. For aerobic co-metabolism, the
amendments would be oxygen and a primary substrate (e.g. methane,
propane, butane, or ammonia), while for EAB, the amendment would
be an electron donor such as lactate or whey powder.

Treatment of the extracted water may be necessary prior to
reinjection in order to satisfy regulatory requirements. It is
assumed, for cost-estimating purposes, that treatment would be
required and that it would be similar to the technologies
discussed in Alternative 3.
The feasibility study evaluated a number of different
combinations of groundwater recirculation loops. For cost-
estimating purposes, this alternative assumed 16 recirculation
loops to capture and treat the 10 ppb plume. The recirculation
loops would be operated in-a pulse mode in which they would
extract, treat, and inject groundwater along with bioremediation
amendments periodically. The recirculation loops would only be
operated during a bioremediation amendment injection event.
While providing some measure of hydraulic control, the goal of

                                                  21

                                                                    500027

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

the recirculation loops is primarily to introduce and distribute
the groundwater amendments that will support bioremediation.

This alternative also includes institutional controls such as
groundwater use restrictions and periodic groundwater monitoring
to track the migration of the plume and to verify the
effectiveness of this alternative. It is estimated that this
system would be operated for seven to 10 years to actively
restore the aquifer. It is estimated that five to eight years of
monitoring would follow after completion of active operations, in
order to confirm that the site has been restored.

Because this remedy will not result in hazardous substances,
pollutants, or contaminants remaining on-site above levels that
allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, but may take
more than five years to attain the remedial action objectives and
cleanup levels for the groundwater, a policy review may be
conducted within five years of construction completion for the
Site to ensure that the remedy is, or will be, protective of
human health and the environment.


COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES
In selecting a remedy, EPA considered the factors set out in
CERCLA §121, 42 U.S.C. §9621, by conducting a detailed analysis
of the viable remedial response measures pursuant to the NCP, 40
CFR §300.430(e)(9) and OSWER Directive 9355.3-01. The detailed
analysis consisted of an assessment of the individual response
measure against each of nine evaluation criteria and a
comparative analysis focusing upon the relative performance of
each response measure against the criteria.

Threshold C r i t e r i a - The f i r s t two c r i t e r i a a r e knovm. a s
"''threshold c r i t e r i a " because they a r e t h e minimum requirements
t h a t each response measure must meet i n o r d e r t o be e l i g i b l e f o r
s e l e c t i o n a s a remedy.

1. Overall Protection of H\]man Health and the Environment
Overall p r o t e c t i o n of human h e a l t h and t h e environment addresses
whether each a l t e r n a t i v e p r o v i d e s adequate p r o t e c t i o n of human
h e a l t h and the environment and d e s c r i b e s how r i s k s posed through
each exposure pathway a r e e l i m i n a t e d , reduced, o r c o n t r o l l e d ,
through t r e a t m e n t , e n g i n e e r i n g c o n t r o l s , a n d / o r i n s t i t u t i o n a l
controls.



                                                   22
                                                                                                500028

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 The no action alternative is not considered protective because it
 does nothing to prevent exposure to contaminated groundwater in
 the future, which would result in unacceptable future risks.

The remaining alternatives are considered protective.
Alternative 2 (Institutional Controls and Monitoring) is
considered protective because it includes restrictions on the use
of groundwater and includes groundwater monitoring to ensure that
the plume does not migrate to areas that would result in human
exposure. Alternative 2 eliminates human contact. Alternatives
3 and 4 take differing approaches to remediating the groundwater
contamination, but are equally protective of human health.

2. Con^liauace with applicable or relevant and appropriate
requirements (ARARs)
Section 121(d) of CERCLA and NCP §300.430 (f) (1) ( i i ) (B) r e q u i r e
t h a t remedial a c t i o n s a t CERCLA s i t e s a t l e a s t a t t a i n l e g a l l y
a p p l i c a b l e o r r e l e v a n t and a p p r o p r i a t e Federal and S t a t e
requirements, standards, c r i t e r i a , and l i m i t a t i o n s which a r e
c o l l e c t i v e l y r e f e r r e d to as "ARARs," unless such ARARs a r e waived
under CERCLA s e c t i o n 121 (d) (4) .
Applicable requirements a r e those cleanup standards, standards of
c o n t r o l , and o t h e r s u b s t a n t i v e requirements, c r i t e r i a , or
l i m i t a t i o n s promulgated under Federal environmental o r S t a t e
environmental o r f a c i l i t y s i t i n g laws t h a t s p e c i f i c a l l y address a
hazardous substance, p o l l u t a n t , contaminant, remedial a c t i o n ,
l o c a t i o n , o r o t h e r circumstance found a t a CERCLA s i t e . Only
those S t a t e standards t h a t a r e i d e n t i f i e d by a s t a t e i n a timely
manner and t h a t a r e more s t r i n g e n t than Federal requirements may
be a p p l i c a b l e . Relevant and a p p r o p r i a t e requirements a r e those
cleanup s t a n d a r d s , standards of c o n t r o l , and o t h e r s u b s t a n t i v e
requirements, c r i t e r i a , o r l i m i t a t i o n s promulgated under Federal
environmental o r S t a t e environmental o r f a c i l i t y s i t i n g laws
t h a t , while n o t " a p p l i c a b l e " to a hazardous substance, p o l l u t a n t ,
contaminant, remedial a c t i o n , l o c a t i o n , o r o t h e r circumstance a t
a CERCLA s i t e address problems o r s i t u a t i o n s s u f f i c i e n t l y s i m i l a r
to those encountered a t the CERCLA s i t e t h a t t h e i r use i s w e l l -
s u i t e d to the p a r t i c u l a r s i t e . Only those S t a t e standards t h a t
a r e i d e n t i f i e d i n a timely manner and a r e more s t r i n g e n t than
Federal requirements may be r e l e v a n t and a p p r o p r i a t e .
Compliance with ARARs addresses whether a remedy w i l l meet a l l of
the a p p l i c a b l e o r r e l e v a n t and a p p r o p r i a t e requirements of o t h e r
Federal and S t a t e environmental statutes o r p r o v i d e s a b a s i s f o r
a.invoking waiver.


                                             23


                                                                                 500029

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The Cleanup Criteria or Standards (see Appendix II, Table 7) are
MCLs or groundwater quality standards and, therefore, ARARs.
Alternative 1 (No Action) would not meet ARARs. Alternative 2
 (Institutional Controls and Monitoring) is not expected to
achieve ARARs in a reasonable time frame due to limited natural
attenuation (dilution only) at the site. Alternative 3
(groundwater collection and treatment) may not meet the Cleanup
Criteria or Standards in the entire aquifer within a 25-year
treatment time frame but would substantially reduce contaminant
concentrations and achieve ARARs throughout most of the aquifer
within 30 years. Alternative 4 (enhanced bioremediation) would
likely meet the Cleanup Goals in 15 years.
Alternatives 2 through 4 would require institutional controls,
such as a CEA, to control use of the groundwater until
groundwater Cleanup Goals can be met.

Because the No Action and Monitoring alternatives (1 and 2) are
not expected to meet at least one of the threshold criteria
(Protection of Human Health and the Environment and Compliance
with ARARs), they were eliminated from consideration under the
remaining seven criteria.

A complete analysis of ARARs can be found in the FS Report.

Primary Balancing Criteria - The next five c r i t e r i a , c r i t e r i a 3
through 7, are known as "^primary balancing c r i t e r i a " . These
c r i t e r i a are factors with which tradeoffs between response
measures are assessed so that the best option will be chosen,
given s i t e - s p e c i f i c data and conditions.
3.   Long-term effectiveness and permanence
A similar degree of long-term effectiveness and permanence refers
to expected residual r i s k and the a b i l i t y of a remedy to maintain
r e l i a b l e protection of hirnian health and the enviroiwnent over
time, once clean-up levels have been met. This c r i t e r i o n
includes the consideration of residual r i s k that will remain on-
s i t e following remediation and the adequacy and r e l i a b i l i t y of
controls.
Alternatives 3 and 4 are considered permanent remedies. The
long-term effectiveness of these alternatives would be assessed
through routine groundwater monitoring and five-year reviews.
Alternative 4 ranks higher than Alternative 3 in long-term
effectiveness and permanence since it is estimated to restore the
aquifer to the cleanup standards in as little as half the time.


                                      24

                                                                       500030

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 4. Reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume
 Reduction of t o x i c i t y , m o b i l i t y , o r volume through treatment
 r e f e r s to the a n t i c i p a t e d performance of the treatment
 t e c h n o l o g i e s t h a t may be included as p a r t of a remedy.
Alternatives 3 and 4 would reduce the toxicity, mobility or
volume of the contaminants in groundwater through extraction and
treatment (for Alternative 3) or through enhanced bioremediation
in conjunction with pump and treat (for Alternative 4 ) .
Alternatives 3 and 4 offer a comparable level of improvement in
mobility, toxicity and volume reduction.


5. Short-Term Effectiveness
Short-term e f f e c t i v e n e s s addresses the p e r i o d of time needed t o
implement the remedy and any adverse impacts t h a t may be posed to
workers, the community and the environment during c o n s t r u c t i o n
and o p e r a t i o n of the remedy u n t i l cleanup l e v e l s a r e achieved.

Alternatives 3 and 4 have minimal impacts with respect to the
protection of workers, the community and the environment during
remedial construction.   Both the active alternatives involve
long-term operation of a treatment facility at the site, though
the size of the treatment facility is expected to be minimal.
Alternative 4 has potential worker or community impacts due to
the injection of various reagents into the aquifer, though the
primary concern would be in the management of drummed chemicals
at the treatment facility.

The short-term effectiveness with respect to the time until the
remedial action objectives are achieved is quickest for
Alternative 4 (enhanced bioremediation). For Alternative 3, it
is expected that MCLs in much of the groundwater could be
achieved in approximately 25 years. Alternative 4 will achieve
the remedial action objectives faster than Alternative 3,
approximately 15 years.

6. Iinplementability
Implementability a d d r e s s e s the t e c h n i c a l and a d m i n i s t r a t i v e
f e a s i b i l i t y of a remedy from design through c o n s t r u c t i o n and
o p e r a t i o n . F a c t o r s such a s a v a i l a b i l i t y of s e r v i c e s and
m a t e r i a l s , a d m i n i s t r a t i v e f e a s i b i l i t y , and c o o r d i n a t i o n with
o t h e r governmental e n t i t i e s a r e a l s o considered.

Alternatives 3 and 4 would be constructed using standard
construction equipment and services. The administrative
implementability of Alternative 3 (e.g, obtaining a New Jersey

                                                      25

                                                                                               500031

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) permit equivalent
for the discharge of treated water) could be time-critical. The
administrative implementability of Alternative 4 (e.g, obtaining
required permits for injection of bioremediation amendments)
would be more difficult and need to be further evaluated, but the
alternative is still considered implementable.

The primary technical implementability constraint is reinjection
of water, or in the case of Alternative 4, water and amendments
to promote bioremediation. Reinjection can be avoided for
Alternative 3 by discharging the treated water to local surface
water, but reinjection is an integral feature of Alternative 4.
A number of technical challenges, including well fouling and
shortcircuiting, are associated with reintroducing water into an
aquifer. These challenges can be managed but raise the level of
involvement required during operation and maintenance of the
system.

7. Cost
I n c l u d e s e s t i m a t e d c a p i t a l and O&M c o s t s , and n e t p r e s e n t worth
value of c a p i t a l and O&M c o s t s .
Alternative                         Cost
     1                              $0
     2                              $ 975,000
     3                              $5,400,000
     4                              $7,250,000

Modifying Criteria - The final two evaluation criteria, criteria
8 and 9, are called "modifying criteria" because new information
or comments from the state or the community on the Proposed Plan
may modify the preferred response measure or cause ainother
response measure to be considered.        ;

8. State acceptance
I n d i c a t e s whether based on i t s review of t h e RI/FS r e p o r t s and
the Proposed Plan, the s t a t e s u p p o r t s , opposes, a n d / o r has
i d e n t i f i e d any r e s e r v a t i o n s with t h e s e l e c t e d response measure.
The S t a t e of New J e r s e y concurs with EPA's S e l e c t e d Remedy.
9. Community acceptance
Summarizes the p u b l i c ' s g e n e r a l r e s p o n s e t o t h e response measures
d e s c r i b e d i n the Proposed Plan and t h e RI/FS r e p o r t s .          This
assessment i n c l u d e s d e t e r m i n i n g which of t h e response measures
the community s u p p o r t s , opposes, a n d / o r h a s r e s e r v a t i o n s about.


                                                26
                                                                                          500032

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

EPA solicited input from the community on the remedial response
measures proposed for the sites. Oral comments were recorded
from attendees of the public meeting. No written comments were
received from the public. The community was generally supportive
of EPA's Proposed Plan. Appendix V, The Responsiveness Summary,
addresses the oral comments received at the public meeting.

PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE

The NCP establishes an expectation that EPA will use treatment to
address the principal threats posed by a site wherever
practicable (NCP Section 300.430(a) (1) (iii) (A)) . The "principal
threat" concept is applied to the characterization of "source
materials" at a Superfund site. A source material is material
that includes or contains hazardous substances, pollutants or
contaminants that act as a reservoir for migration of
contamination to groundwater, surface water or air, or acts as a
source for direct exposure. Contaminated groundwater generally
is not considered to be a source material; however, Non-Aqueous
Phase Liquids (NAPLs) in groundwater may be viewed as source
material. Principal threat wastes are those source materials
considered to be highly toxic or highly mobile that generally
cannot be reliably contained, or would present a significant risk
to human health or the environment should exposure occur. The
decision to treat these wastes is made on a site-specific basis
through a detailed analysis of the alternatives using the nine
remedy selection criteria. This analysis provides a basis for
making a statutory finding that the remedy employs treatment as a
principal element.

Results from the soil sampling did not identify any "principal
threat wastes" that might be acting as a continuing source- of
either VOC or metals contamination to the groundwater, at the
site. EPA and NJDEP are still evaluating the soil data to
determine if the nature and extent of the soil contamination has
been adequately characterized.

SELECTED REMEDY

Based upon consideration of the results of the site
investigation, the requirements of CERCLA, the detailed analysis
of the response measures, and public comments, EPA has determined
that Alternative 4 is the appropriate remedy for addressing the
groundwater contamination at the Monitor Ibevices site, as it
satisfies the requirements of CERCLA §12ijand the NCP's nine
evaluation criteria for remedial alternatives, 40 CFR
§300.430(e)(9). Alternative 4 is comprised of the following
components:

                                27


                                                         500033

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

• I n s i t u treatment of VOC contaminants in the groundwater
  through enhanced bioremediation;

• Establishing groundwater recirculation loops, as necessary,
  involving extraction of contaminated groundwater within the 10
  ppb portion of the plume, followed by on-site reinjection of
  groundwater and amendments, to support i n s i t u bioremediation;
• Long-term monitoring; and
• Institutional controls, such as the implementation of a
  Classification Exemption Area to restrict the use of
  groundwater within the area.

EPA's selected Alternative 4 over the other alternatives because
it is expected to achieve substantial and long-term risk
reduction through treatment of the groundwater, and is expected
to eventually allow for the unrestricted use of the groundwater.
The Selected Remedy reduces the risk within a reasonable time
frame, and at a cost comparable to the other alternatives.

While the recirculation loop system described in Alternative 4 is
likely to provide a measure of hydraulic control on the plume,
the primary purpose of the extraction and reinjection system is
to speed the distribution of bioremediation amendments in the
aquifer, not to maintain active hydraulic control of the
contaminant plume. If, during remedial design, other mechanisms
for introducing and distributing the amendments within the
aquifer are identified, the implemented remedial action need not
contain a recirculation step.

Treatment of extracted water prior to groundwater reinjection may
prove necessary to satisfy a permit condition. Treatment of
extracted water prior to discharge is not a remedial component.
The Selected Remedy, Alternative 4, is believed to provide the
best balance of tradeoffs among the alternatives based on the
information available to EPA at this time.

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

As was previously noted, CERCLA §121(b)(1) mandates that a
remedial action must be protective of human, health and the
environment, cost-effective, and utilize permanent solutions and
alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery
technologies to the maximum extent practicable. Section
121(b)(1) also establishes a preference for remedial actions

                                 28
                                                             500034

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

which employ treatment to permanently and significantly reduce
the volume, toxicity or mobility of the hazardous substances,
pollutants, or contaminants at a site. CERCLA §121(d) further
specifies that a remedial action must attain a degree of cleanup
that satisfies ARARs under federal and state laws, unless a
waiver can be justified pursuant to CERCLA §121(d)(4),

Protection of Human Health and the Environment
The Selected Remedy, will be protective of human health and the
environment by treating contaminants in the ground water.
Organic contaminants will be degraded i n s i t u through enhanced
bioremediation, approximately in the zone of the 10 ppb VOC
plume. It is expected that the groundwater would meet the
Cleanup Standards within 15 years.

Preliminary data evaluation predicts that this alternative will
require approximately seven years of active operations in order
to meet the Cleanup Standards. Long-term monitoring will be
implemented following active operations in order to monitor the
groundwater quality to ensure that contaminants remain below
cleanup standards. In addition, institutional controls will be
implemented to prevent exposure to contaminated groundwater
during remediation.

Compliance with ARARs
Contaminant concentrations in the groundwater are expected to
decrease over time. It is anticipated that the Cleanup Standards
will be met within 15 years. Long-term groundwater monitoring
would be conducted to assess the degree of compliance achieved
over time.

A Stage lA Cultural Resources Survey was conducted for the site
and some portions of the project area have a high sensitivity for
the potential discovery of prehistoric archaeological sites. A
Stage IB Cultural Resources survey will be conducted during the
design phase to insure that the Selected Remedy does not impact
these areas.

The selected remedy will meet action-specific ARARs. NJDEP
and/or local permit equivalencies will potentially be required
for well installation, general construction, discharge of
extracted water to groundwater with or without treatment, and
off-gas discharge to ambient air (related to groundwater
treatment. A complete analysis of ARARs can be found in the FS
Report.


                                29

                                                          500035

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Cost Effectiveness

In the lead agency's judgment, the Selected Remedy is cost-
effective and represents a reasonable value for the money to be
spent. In making this determination, the following definition
was used: "A remedy shall be cost-effective if its costs are
proportional to its overall effectiveness." (NCP
§300.430(f) (1) (ii) (D)). EPA evaluated the "overall
effectiveness" of those alternatives that satisfied the threshold
criteria (i.e., were both protective of human health and the
environment and ARAR-compliant).    Overall effectiveness was
evaluated by assessing three of the five balancing criteria in
combination (long-term effectiveness and permanence; reduction in
toxicity, mobility, and volume through treatment; and short-term
effectiveness). Overall effectiveness was then compared to costs
to determine cost-effectiveness. EPA determined that the overall
effectiveness of Alternative 4 was substantially greater than
Alternative 3, even though it is projected to be more the more
costly of the two ($7.25 million compared to $5.4 million for
Alternative 3). EPA believes that Alternative 4 represents a
reasonable value for the money to be spent.

For a detailed cost summary of Alternative 4, see Appendix II,
Table 8, of this document.
Long-term Effectiveness and Permamence

The Selected Remedy provides long-term effectiveness and
permanence for the contaminated groundwater at the site. The
operation of the enhanced bioremediation treatment system will
restore the aquifer to the cleanup levels by destroying
contaminants i n s i t u . Groundwater monitoring will be
implemented to monitor the groundwater quality both during and
after the period of active remediation.

The Selected Remedy will provide adequate control of risk to
human health, as no exposures to groundwater are expected. The
i n s i t u bioremediation system should effectively treat the
contaminated plume using technologies that have been successfully
demonstrated at similar sites.

The long-term effectiveness of the Selected Remedy will be
assessed through routine groundwater monitoring and five-year
reviews.




                               30
                                                           500036

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Preference for Treatment as 1a Principal Element

The Selected Remedy meets EPA's statutory preference for the use
of remedies that involve treatment as a principal element. The
toxicity, mobility, and volume of the contaminants in the
groundwater would be reduced primarily by in-situ biodegradation,
and secondarily by the pump and treat system. The transformation
of contaminants to innocuous byproducts meets EPA's policy
preference for destructive technologies over those that merely
transfer contaminants to another media.

Short-term Effectiveness

Although a fairly significant amount of site work would be
required for this alternative, this type of construction is
routine, as installation of the recirculation wells, groundwater
treatment systems, and bioremediation amendment injection systems
are common. Therefore, the work will be performed without
significant risk to the community.

A seven to 10-year duration was assumed for O&M of the active
groundwater recirculation and bioremediation amendment
activities. An additional five to eight year duration was
assumed for long-term groundwater monitoring to assure that
remediation goals will be achieved.

Implementability
The Selected Remedy is technically and administratively
implementable. The Selected Remedy will be constructed and
implemented using conventional construction methods and
equipment. The technical feasibility of enhanced bioremediation
has been established at numerous other sites. Despite this,
bioremediation is still considered an innovative technology. As
such, EPA will conduct bench-scale testing prior to
implementation of the Selected Remedy. However, the processes
that govern degradation reactions are well understood and
therefore, no significant technical difficulties are anticipated.

In addition, no technical difficulties are anticipated for
installation and operation of the groundwater extraction and
treatment system (if needed).   Services and materials for
implementation of the Selected Remedy are readily available.

Five-Year Review Requirements
Because this remedy will not result in hazardous substances,
pollutants, or contaminants remaining on-site above levels that

                                31

                                                         500037

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, but may take
more than five years to attain the remedial action objectives and
cleanup levels for the groundwater, a policy review may be
conducted within five years of construction completion for the
Site to ensure that the remedy is, or will be, protective of
human health and the environment.

DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES

The Proposed Plan for the Monitor Devices sites was released for
public comment on August 24, 2005. The comment period closed on
September 23, 2004.
The Proposed. Plan identified A.lternative 4, as the preferred
alternative to address groundwater contamination at the site.
Upon review of all comments submitted, EPA determined that no
significant changes to the Selected Remedy, as it was presented
in the Proposed Plan.




                               32
                                                         500038

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX I




 FIGURES




             500039

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

FtiPjt   r\ni\^i\m   lu   frtv-icrt.lflhpfoiy (f n\ mntlo   IMn^-^ustfrtfwummflfy ft nTusf20O4 fttfl sl(*(Vx?l fn n < n t



                                                                                                                            f'^-^WT^iUyMton df Site In New Jereeyi 1 X 3 1


                                                                                                                                                           Monitor Devices Site |

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           •1         /THBASr


                                                                                                                                                     Oolf Course (projected f r o m n o r t h o f
                                                                                                                                                            MW-24 o n t o section)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                • *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CVJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ^
                                                                                                                                                          Hbtorfcslty w s l e f w a s p u m p e d f r o m a p o n d
                                                                                                                                                         In (he grouTwtwnlsr d i s c h a r g e z o n e l o t n l g a t e
                                                                                                                                                          the golf c o u r s e Today t w o p r o d u d i o n weds
                                                                                                                                                                 a r e u s e d for t r r l g s l i o n I n s t e a d




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,.^.    ••




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .-.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      b7 40




     30-


     20


     10-                                                                          MANASQUAN               AQUITARD
                                                                                            p S TO too FEET 7H(O0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               11
                           ENGLISHTOWN                     AQUIFER
                         'o!(lhl«*"M-*'»<'-^-'                           , W, ^ V«^«.v~afSmW|s!Si|»»i?Sf*i^fi^#"^


           UEaeWQ                                                                                          Notes
                                                                                                           1. Ttie upward hydraulic gradient depicted In conceptual model Is based on
                    Top of Water Tat)le                                                                    Conditions to tlie north of monitoring well MW-19 cluster and monitoring well MW-24
                                                                    NO      Non-Oelect
                                                                                                           2. The construction details of the golf course
                                                                                                           production well are assumed.
                                                                    /O— "   TCE Contours (ug/L)                                                                                                                                     Figure 2
                    Groundwater How Dliecllon                                                              3. Drawing Not to Scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Conceptual Site Model
tn                                                                          Water level elevation                                                                                                                         Monitor Devices Site
o           0.64    Trtchloroettieno (TCE) concentration, Maicti
                                                                   109.84   (feet msl) March 2004
o                   2004, mtcrograms per liter (ug/L)                                                                                                                                                               Wall Township, New Jersey
o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    —                       COM

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

             '   •   >




.—-^             i-




  )r > i i ^ ' I HuttevPond Roadr-, ',                \



           '^•; 5-v, V                /     /             _^-—^-v




   3.B TC6uiKjiHiiBwIn||iw»ii>»f »«iii>l«.lifciOBI•»•»•»
       NoH: ki lonia c n a t t w iKconcanHian oMaiin do not honor « • d i b

                                                                                       ; \.-;;--
       poitad bKaunIhe a j i t e o «<•• C T M M « • V K M C olonllcn ki


    B      Approxiniats location cf WMIVQ
           9Dtf caurM pURving wait                              A
           VfraxknaU goK c c u M lioinlBy                 300       WO    no      FM
   \                                                                                                                                                 r
                                •T-
. JS
   S -'.                                        --/       -^
LEGEND
.••.•Surtace«tofdfaina9edivid«.«Bma«                  •     J  S S m G W & ^ ' S t a i                                                Figure 3
    TCEaoujiica<iaBoncor*our. 1 ug/L                        « Existiin wcB tocaSom                           PotenOom^rtc Surfece and TCE Date
                                                                                                             75 to 100 Foot Bevation, Mtvch 2004
i V TCE isoconcantration corttiur. 10 ug/L                *                   T/c_i^—.                                        Monitor Devices Sits
/ / TCEIsoconcenfrationoonlour. lOOugA.                                       A ^ S!S!I?»ioi«.Bo.to.                   W a l Township, Mew Jeisciy
/V'PotsnUoriielricStiil8ce,MarGh8.2004,75to100footelevalion                   jS MSi^DrnteT^
 • 6WSI Phase I Groundwater Screening |joc3aon5,1997>1998                     , v Topographic contour. ttoaimd whefB olwcurad




                                                                                                                                        500042

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX   II




  TABLES




                500043

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                    TABLE 1

                                               Sununary of Chemicals of Concern and
                                            Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
Scenario Timeframe:    Current/Future
Medium:                Groundwater
Exposure Medium:       Groundwater

                                              Concentration                                                  Exposure
                                                                                               Exposure
                                                Detected            Concen-      Frequency                     Point
  Exposure            Chemical of                                                                Point
                                                                    tration          of                      Concen-                 Statistic
    Point              Concern                                                                 Concen-
                                                                     Units       Detection                    tration
                                             Mtn         Max                                    tration
                                                                                                               Units

Groundwater       1,1-DCE                     1.6         355         ug/1          8/46           85           ug/l             99% Chebyshev

                 Ctabon Tetrachloride        0.29        8.745        ugn           7/46           1.4          ug/l             95%Chd>yshev

                 PCE                         0.17         8.2         ug/l          12/46          1.8          ug/l              95% Chebyshev

                 TCE                         0.16         235         ug/l          16/46          67           ugn               99%Chd)yshev

                 Aisenic                      2.6         6.7         ug/l          7/46            7           ug/l               Mod-TUCL

                 Copper                       1.3        2570         Ug/I          17/46          690          ug/l              99% Chebyshev



        Key

        ug/l: microgrant/liter
        95% Chebyshev; 95% Upper Confidence limit - Chebyshev Statistic
        99% Chel^hev: 99% Upper Confidence Limit - Chebyshev Statistic
        Mod-T UCL: Modified -T 95% Upper Confidence Limit


                   Summary of Chemicais of Concern and Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
        The table presents the chemicals of concern (COPCs) and exposure point concentration (EPC) for each of the COPCs detected above tlieir
        respective Region 9 Preliminary Remediation Goals (PRG). The PRG screening levels are equivalent to a cancer risk of 1 x lO"* or an H I «
        0.1. The EPC was calculated using Pro-UCL, Version 2.0 for the majority of the COPCs. TheEPC was used to calculate the human health
        risk and hazard through exposure pathways identified in the risk assessment. The table includes the range of concentrations detected for
        each COPC, as well as the frequency of detection, the exposure point concentration (EPC), and how the EPC was derived (i.e. statistic).




                                                                                                                                500044

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                    TABLE 1 cont.

                                                 Sununary of Chemicals of Concern and
1                                             Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations                                                            |
  Scenario Tinijeframe:    Current/Future
  Medium:                  Sediment
1 Exposure Medium:         Sediment

                                                Concentration                                                   Exposure
                                                                                                  Exposure
                                                  Detected            Concen-      Frequency                      Point
    Exposure              Chemical of                                                               Point
                                                                      tration          of                       Concen-                 Statistic'
     Point                 Concern                                                                Concen-
                                               Min                     Units       Detection                     tration
                                                           Max                                     tration
                                                                                                                  Units

 Sediment            Arsenic                    1.3         1.3        mg/kg           1/1            1.3         mgAcg            maximum detected
                                                                                                                                     concentration




            Key

            ug/1: microgtam/liter
            mg/kg: milligram/kilogram

                      Summary of Chemicals of Concern and Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
         The ttble presents the chemicals of concern (COPCs) and exposure point concentration (EPC) for each of the COPCs detected above their
         respective Region 9 Preliminary Remediation Goals (PRG). The PRG screening levels are equivalent to a cancer risk of 1 x lO"* or «) HI "
         0.1. The EPC was calculated using Pro-UCL, Version 2.0 for the majority of the COPCs. The maximum detected concentration was used as
         the EPC if less than 10 samples were collected from the media of concern. The EPC was used to cakulate the human healtii risk and hazard
         through exposure pathways identified in the risk assessment. The table includes the range of concentrations detected for each COPC, as well
         as the frequency of detection, the exposure point concentration (EPC), and how the EPC was derived (i.e. statistic).




                                                                                                                                 500045

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        TABLE 2

                                SELECTION OF EXPOSURE PATHWAYS

                                                    MONFfOR DEVICES




                                                                       w a n w f i i w y tat*lirt#lf fcH»«l f o l




                                                                       t u i g i i t ^ i f y h i » • a p i M j aWB •




                                                                       W v t a t HWf K M a M P M                  tel



                                                                       T>MpiMMn i M v I n M t kiiMv* i M



                                      Oil
                                       "I

                           MaiMfDptaancpiiV                            m r i r r — r > H « i i i M | hw>il i i




                                                           •MMtlMn
                                                                       WsHMWHWIfllnillillMllllUMl—ftWi




         •wftoiAuktttlhM




                                                                       aiWfiMlMM»wiilliii^uM»Birfilwiimf>««'''iHli%twtii
                              If Clivk#ft ^QpflHy


                                                                       ciMwi«ii>m«wiHfc<«^<n«jti*wwr " • ' " • > " • ' • ' *


                                                                       ClMiiiiUhtotwnlli<i»MmiiHiiinmWi*H'*'t*i*




                                                                       i w » > « •»<»»••«> I t * » I W w » f i * a i i l i i l n < w i * w i f c « i l i



                                                                             • o w p w i inajf • • Mipo^ed IB •>• ^Aif* • ' * * ' ™ ' ^ ' '




                                                                       M T k » « v « w t f b ffM M u r * to i l M v l a M e M M r i M M i



O                                                                      iMV b t « V M t d h * • U u n to « t o 4 M M «
O
O                                                                                            •pMMKIMlM M * * ^ *WltoP«. MtUM
                                                                       HMV b* « 9 M t 4 h I M M M to iltofvWirf MntoMhwto
                                                           p4«ui><U|



                                                                       iimf*>Ti»a<lwto>MiiP>tortii • • * * * < » '



                                                                       MT to •««"••'In *w k«mtoaiMiWid «




                                                           (MI—•«)                                vtoMtonNlto'to



    i.                                                     I

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

1                                                                                    TABLES

                                                                   Non-Cancer Toxicity Data Summary
 Pathway: Oral/Denral
    ClMBicalof CoMcn       Cknak/         On)          OnlRtD          Abfoip.       MJuMd         Adjannl                                   ComblBcd          Soorccfof       Data of
                                          WD            Uaiti         EfllckKy        Rfl)        DcnulRID                                   UBCcfUtaity         RID:           RID:
                                          Valoc                          (fcr         (for          Uaiti                                    /Mediae            Toijct
                                                                       DcnuQ         Vtnul>                                                   FicMn             Oifu

 1,1-DCE                   Cbronic       S.OE-2       mgflcg-day                     S.OE-2       ag/ktrday              Liver                   100             nus           S/19/04

CutooTemddoride            Chronic       7.0E-4       mgflcg-dsy                     7.0E^        mgfltg-diy             Liver                  1000             nus           8/19/04

                           CbixnDc       l.OE-1       mg*g-d«y                       l.OE-1       mgrtEj-day            Kidney                  1000             nus           8/19/04

PCE                        Chrome        l.OE-2       mg/kg-diy                      l.OE-2       mg/ltg-day             Uver                   1000             nus           8/19/D4

TCE                        Cbtmic        3.0E^        mgflcg^y                       3.0&4        mg/kg-day       LivcdCidiiey/Fetus            3000            NCEA           l(V25/04

Arsenic                    Chronic       3.0E-4       mg/icg-dty        95%          2.9E-4       mg/fcg-day              Skin                    3              nus           8/19/04

CoDDer                     Chnmic        4.0E-2       ing*H»y                        4.0E-2       mg/kg-day             GITnct                  1000            NCEA          10/25/004




Pathway: Inhalation
           Ca—tCllofCoWM                    CkimOtl       IikataUoa      lahabUoB                                      r r i a n y Tufct    CoiBbiMd          SMTMOf               Dtior
                                                             RIC          RICUato         RID          RIDUaili               Oiiu          UMimlBly            RID:
                                                                                                                                            /ModUyiat       Toi|<iOr(«a
                                                                                                                                              Fioon

l.l-DCE                                     Chronic         2.0E-1       nn/cam         5.7E-2        mg/kg-diy             Uver                30              IRIS               8/19/04

    DboDTetcKhloride                          NA             NA             NA            NA             NA                  NA                 NA              nus                8/19/04

lsoprop)ibenzene                            Chronic        4.0E-1        mg/cu.m         l.lE-1       mg/kg-day            ICidney             1000             nus                8/19/04

PCE                                         Chronic        6.0E-1        mg/cam         1.7E-1        mg/kg-day            Kidney               30             NCEA            10Q5/04

TCE                                         Chronic        4.0E-2        ing/ca ni       l.lE-2       mg/kg-day             CNS                1000            NCEA            10/25/04

Aisenic                                       NA             NA            NA             NA             NA                  NA               . NA          IRIS«EAST              8/19/04

Copper                                        NA             NA             NA            NA              NA                 NA                 NA              nus/               8/19/04
                                                                                                                                                               HEASr



              Key
             NA: No infonnatioD available
             nUS: Integrated Risk InfomBtioD System, U.S. EPA
             HEAST: Health Effects Assessment Summary Tablet, U.S. EPA
             NCEA: Natknia] Center Sir EaviiouiiieuHl Assessment, U.S. EPA

                                                                       Summary of Toxicity Assessment
             This table provides non-carcinogenic risk information which is relevant to the contaminants of concern in groundwater and soil When available, die chronic loxiciQf
             data have been used to develop oral reference doses (RIDs) and inhalation reference doses (RfDi).




                                                                                                                                                           500047

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

1                                                                 TABLE 4

1                                                   C a n c e r Toxicity D a t a S u m m a r y                                                    |

1 Pathway: Oral/Dermal                                                                                                                            |
1 Chemical of Concern           Oral             Units          Adjusted        Slope Factor          Weight of             Source      Date
                               Cancer                         Cancer Slope         Units .            Evidence/
                                Slope                            Factor                                 Cancer
                               Factor                         (for Dermal)                             Guiddine
                                                                                                      Description J

1 1,1-DCE                        NA               NA               NA                 NA                  C                  nus       8/19/04 1
    Caibon Tetrachloride       1.3E-1        (mg/kg-day)'         1.3E-1        (mg/kg-day)'              82        1        nus       8/19/04 1
    Isopropylbenzene             NA               NA               NA                 NA                  D                  nus       8/19/04 1
1 PCE                          .5.4E-1       (mgflcg-day)'        5.4E-1        (mg/kg-day)'              C                 CalEPA     1Q/2S/04 1
j TCE                          4.0B-1        (mg/kg-dayy          4.0E-1         (mgrtcg-day)'            BI                NCEA       10/25/04 1
    Arsenic                     1.5E0        (mgflcg^Jay)-'       1.5E0          (mgflcg-day)-'           A                  nus        8/19/04 1
1 Copper                         NA               NA               NA                 NA                  D                  nus        8/19/04 1
1 P a t h w a y : Inhalation                                                                                                                          |

     Chemical of Concern        Unit             Units         Inhalation        Slope Factor         Weight of             Source       Date
                                Risk                          Slope Factor          Unite              Evidence/
                                                                                                        Cancer
                                                                                                       Guideline
                                                                                                      Description

1 l.l-DCE                      3.4E-4        (ug/cu. m.)"'        1.2E0          (mg/kg/day)-'    1 ^                   1 HEAST/nUS   1 7/1/97 1
    Caibon Tetrachloride       l.SE-S        (ug/cu. m.)-'        5.3E-2         (mg/kg/day)-'    1       B2            I   nus       I 8/19/04
                                NA               NA                NA                 NA          1 ^                   1   nus       1 8/19/04
1 PCE                          5.9E-6        (ug/cu. m.)-'        2.1E-2         (mg/kg/day)'     1       C             I   CalEPA    1 10/25/04 1

1 "^^                          l.lE-4        (ug/cu. m.)-'        4.0E-I         (mg/kg/day)-'    1 ^^                  1    NCEA     1 10/25/04 1
    Arsenic                    4.3E-3    ;   (ug/cu. m.)"'        1.5E+1         (mg/kg/day)'     1       A             1    nus      1 8/19/04 1
1 Copper                        NA       1       NA                NA                 NA          I       D             1    nus      1 8/19/04 1
[Key                                                                                                                                              1
1 NA: No infmniation available                                                                           A • Human carchiogen
  DUS: Intepated Risk bfotmation System, U.S. EPA                  Bl - Probable Human Carcinogen - Indicates that limited human
  NCEA: National Center for Environmental Assessment               data are available
  HEAST: Hetith Effects Assessment Sutnmaty Tables                 B2 - Probable Human Carcinogen • Indicates sufficient evidence in
  CalEPA: California Environmental Protection Agency               animals associated with the site and inadeqtiate or no evidence in humans
                                                                                                             C - Possible human carcinogen
                                                                                      D • Not classifiable as a human carcinogen
                                                                                      E - Evidence of noncarcinogenicity


                                                     S u m m a r y of Toxicity Assessment


 This table provides carcinogenic risk information which is relevant to the conuminants of concern in groundwater and soils.
 Toxicity data are provided for both the oral and inhalation routes of exposure.                                                                      |




                                                                                                                             500048

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       —   -                  —      ••    • • -         •               l      ••-   '   '      1   -      ""


                                                                              TABLES
                                                                                Pagel
                                                          Risk Characterization Summary - Carcinogens
    Scenario Timcfranie:            Current/Future
    Receptor Population:            SiteWmkR
    Receptor Age:                   Adult

        McdVnm                 Exposure      Eaposure Point        Chemttal of Concern                                     CardnogenlcRisk                           |
                               Medium
                                                                                             Ingestion        Inhalation         Dermal      Exposure Routes Total

                       bidoorAtr             Monitor Devices       PCE                         NA               1.6E-6            NA                1.6E-6
                       (vapor intrusitm)
                                                                   TCE                         NA               1.9E-4            NA                1.9E-4

                                                                                                                            Total Risk-             1.9E-4




o
o
o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                            TABLES
                                                                              Page 2
                                                          Risk Characterization Summary - Carcinogens
     Scenario Timeframe:             Future
     Receptor Population:            Sitt Worker
     Receptor Age:                   Adult

         Medium               Exposure        Exposure Point     Cliemical of Concern                            Cardnogenic Risk
                              Medium
                                                                                        Ingestion   Inhalation       Dermal         Exposure Routes Total

     Groundwater        IndowAir              Monitor Devices   PCE                       NA          1.6E-6           NA                  1.6E-6
                        (vapor Intrusion)
                                                                TCE                       NA          1.9E-4           NA                  1.9E-4

                                                                                                                 ToUlRlsk'                 1.9E-4

     Groundwater            Groundwater       Tap Water         PCE                      3.3E-6        NA              NA                  3.3E-6

                                                                TCE                      9.4E-5        NA              NA                  9.4E-5

                                                                Arsenic                  3.5E-5        NA              NA                  3.5E-5

                                                                                                                  TotelRlsk-               1.3E-4




U1
o
o
o
in
o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                           TABLES
                                                                             Page3
                                                         Risk Characterization Sununary - Carcinogens
     Scenario Timeframe:         Future
     Receptor Population:        Site Daycare
     Receptor Age:               Child (0-6 years old)

         Medium             Exposure       Exposure Point        Chemical of Concern                            Cardnogenic Risk
                            Medium
                                                                                       Ingestion   Inhalation       Dermal         Exposure Routes Total

     Groimdwater        Groundwater        Tap Water            ICB                     l.OE-4        NA              NA                  l.OE-4

                                                               Arsenic                  3.9E-5        NA              NA                  3.9E-5

                                                                                                                Total R i s k -           1.5E-4




U1
o
o
o
U1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                            TABLE 5
                                                                              Page 4
                                                        Risk Characterization Summary - Carcinogens
     Scenario TinKframe:         Future
     Receptor Popniation:        Resident
     Receptor Age:               Adult

         Medium             Exposure        Exposure Point      Chemical of Concern                             Carcinogenic Risk
                            Medium
                                                                                       Ingestion   Inhalation       Dermal          Exposure Routes Total
     Groundwater        Groundwater         Tap Water         l.l-DCE                    NA          1.8E-4           NA                   1.8E-4

                                                              Caibon tetrachloride      1.7E-6      9.8E-8          6.2E-8                 1.9E-6

                                                              PCE                       9.0E-6      4.7E-8          6.7E-7                 9.7E-6

                                                              ICb                       2.5E-4      3.6E-5          6.8E-«                 2.9E-4

                                                              Arsenic                   9.4E-5        NA            2.1E-7                 9.5E-5

                                                                                                                Total Risk-                5.9E-4




tn
o
o
o
01
to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                            TABLES'
                                                                             Page 1
                                                      Risk Characterization Sununary - Noncarcinogens
      Scenario Timeframe:            Current/Future
      Receptor Popniation:           Site Worker
      Receptor Age:                  Adult

        Medium           Exposure          Exposure   Chemical of Concern   Primary Target                        Non-Cardnogenic Risk
                         Medium              Point                              Organ
                                                                                             Ingestion   Inhalation     Dermal     Exposure Routes Total

      Groundwater     Indoor Air          Monitor     Isopropylbenzene          ICidney        NA           1.3           NA                1.3
                      (vapor intrusion)   Devices

                                                                                  Exposure Medium Hazard Inilex Total-                      1.6




                                                                                                                               ORGAN SPECIFIC HI
                                                                                                                               Endpoint    Total HI

                                                                                                                               Kidney      1




o
o
o
in
t«>

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                            TABLE6
                                                                             Page2
                                                      Risk Characterization Summary - Noncardnogens
      Scenario Timeframe:           Future
      Receptor Fopulatioa:          SiteWorter
      Receptor Age:                 Adult

        Medium           Exposure         Exposure    Chemical of Concern   Primary Target                            Non-Cardnogenic Risk
                         Medium             Point                               Organ
                                                                                                 Ingestion   Inhalation     Dermal       Exposure Routes Total

      Groundwater     Indoor Air          Monitor     Isopropylbenzene           Kidney            NA           1.3           NA                  1.3
                      (vapor intrusion)   Devices

                                                                                    Exposure Medium Hazard Index Total»                           1.6

        Medium           Exposure         Exposure    Chemical of Concern    Primary Target                           Non-Cardnogenic Risk
                         Medium            Point                                 Organ
                                                                                                 Ingcsthm    Inhalation     Dermal       Exposure Routes Total

      Groimdwater     Groundwater         Tap Water   TCE                   Liver/Kidney/Fetus      2.2         NA            NA                  2.2


                                                                                    Exposure Medium Hazard Index Total -                          2.8




                                                                                                                                   ORGAN SPEOFTC HI
                                                                                                                                     Endpoint     Total HI

                                                                                                                                     Kidney       4

                                                                                                                                     Liver        2

                                                                                                                                     Fetus        2

on
o
o
o
tn
>i^




                                                                                        (

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                TABLE^
                                                                                 Page3
                                                          Risk Characterization Summary - Noncardnogens
     Scenario Timeframe:           Future
     Receptor Population:          Site Daycare
     Receptor Age:                 Child (0-6 years oM)

       Medium           Exposure         Exposure         Chemical of Concern    Primary Target                         Non-Cardnogenic Risk
                        Medium            Point                                      Organ
                                                                                                    Ingestion   Inhalation    Dermal          Exposure Routes Total

     Groundwater     Groundwater        Tap Water         TCE                   Uver/Kidney/Fetus     10.2         NA           NA                    10.2

                                                          Arsenic                     Skin              1          NA           NA                      1

                                                                                       Exposure Medium Hazard Index Total-                            13.1




                                                                                                                                     ORGAN SPECIFIC HI
                                                                                                                                       Endpoint       Total HI
                                                                                                                                       Kidney          10

                                                                                                                                       Liver           10

                                                                                                                                       Fetus           10

                                                                                                                                       Skin            1




m
o
o
o
m
in

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                            TABLES
                                                                             Page 4
                                                      Risk Characterization Summary - Noncardnogens
     Scenario Timeframe:             Future
     Receptor Populatlott:           Resident                                                                 -
     Receptor Age:                   Adult

        Medium           Exposure         Exposure    Chemical of Concern   Primary Target                        Non-Cardnogenic Risk
                         Medium             Point                               Organ
                                                                                                Ingestion   Inhalation   Dermal       Exposure Routes Total

     Groimdwater       Groundwater        Tap water   TCE                   Kidney/Uver/Fetus      6.1        0.024       0.17                 63

                                                                                    Exposure Medium Hazard Index Total =                       8.1




                                                                                                                                 ORGAN SPECIFIC HI
                                                                                                                                  Endpoint     Total HI

                                                                                                                                  Kidney       6

                                                                                                                                  Liver        7

                                                                                                                                  Fetus        6




Ul
o
o
o
in




                                                                                       {

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                TABLE 6
                                                                                  Pages
                                                        Risk Characterization Sununary - Noncardnogens
Scenario Timeframe:              Future
Receptor Population:             Resident
Receptor Age:                    Child (0-6 years oM)

   Medium            Exposure         Exposure       Chemical of Concern         Primary Target                                Non-Cardnogenic Risk
                     Medium            Point                                         Organ
                                                                                                        Ingestion     Inhalation     Dermal           Exposure Routes Total
Groundwater        Groundwater        Tap water     TCE                         Kidney/Liver/Fetus         14             0.34         0.51                   15.1

                                                    Arsenic                            Skin                1.4            NA          0.0045                   1.4
                                                    Copper                           GI Tract              1.1            NA          0.0033                   1.1

                                                                                         Exposure Medium Hazard Index Total =                                 19.5




                                                                                                                                              ORGAN SPECIFIC HI
                                                                                                                                               Endpoint        Total HI

                                                                                                                                               Kidney          15

                                                                                                                                               Liver           15
                                                                                                                                               Fetus           15

                                                                                                                                               Skin            1
                                                                                                                                               GI Tract        2




                                                   Summary of Risk Characterization - Non-Carcinogens

The table presents hazard quotients (HQs) for each route of exposure and the hazard index (sum of hazard quotients) for all routes of exposure. The Risk Assessment
Guidance for Superfund sUtes that, generally, a hazard index (HI) greater than 1 indicates flic potential for adverse non-cancer effects.



     ^SOOOS

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       TABLE-7

                         CONTAMINANTS OF CONCERN
                                   IN
                              GROUNDWATER




 Contaminants                    Highest Concentration        Ground water cleanup
                                 (Parts per billion)          levels/goal
                                                              (Parts per billion)*
 1,1-Dichloroethylene (1,1-      470                          2
 DCE)
 1,2-Dichloroethane (1,2-DCA)    8.8                          2
 1,1,1-TrichIoroethane (1,1,1-   210                          30
 TCA)
 1,1,2-Trichloroethane (1,1,2-   7.3                          3
 TCA)
 Tetrachloroethylene (PCE)       8.2                          1
 Trichloroethylene (TCE)         320                          1

* - New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Groimdwater Quality Criteria.




                                                                             500058

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                Tables
                              Ahenutivc 4: Enbaoced Biomncdiatkn - Cost Estinuitc Simunary
                                             Monitor Devices Supcrfuod Ste

Item No.                                Item Dcscriplioii                            OuanlitT   UnHCoct        Uirit       OpttaA           Optio-B
CAPrTAL COSTS
Constnicfion Casts                                                                              *^
    1.     Gvil Survey                                                                          S    10.000     LS               10,000 S       10,000
    2.     Worii Plata for BioremediatMO                                                        S    39JX)0     L5               39,000 $       394X10
    3.     Mobilization/Deinobilization                                                         i    iijooo     LS               36JI00 s       XJOOO
    4.     Bioremediadon Svstean                                                                (seedetaiD      U              244,251  s      367,900
    5.     &DiBidwattr PiuDp and Treat Systems                                                  (see detail}    LS             720,409  s      956339
                                                                                                10% of con.     LS               72JD41 s       95,634
           Subtotal Constmctton Carts                                                                                       l J 2 1 . 7 e i $ 1304*72
                                                                                                                                                         1
           General CoDinctor Fee (15% coostiuction)                                                                          168,255
                                                                                                                                   s 225.731
           D e s i n Ennneerinc (20% constnictioa)                                                                           224340s 300.974
           Resident Endneerinis/Inspectian (10% cansnuciiaB)                                                           »           s 150.487
                                                                                                                             112.170
           Oonttncency (20%)                                                                                                 224340s 300.974
                                                                                                                                               1
    7.     Bendt-ScaleUBaiabiiity study                                                  1      S    50.000     LS          50,000 s    504100
                                                                                         1      S    20,000     LS          lajooo »    204J00
    9.     GronndwaierUseRestrictianfCEA)                                                1           $7,200     LS           7,200 s     7300
    10.    Baseline Sanvline                                                             1      $    71364      LS          71364 s     71364
           TOTAL CAPTTAL COSTS                                                                                           1,999371       $
                                                                                                                                     2,631,603

OPERATION « MAINTENANCE (O&M) COSTS
AiuuuU 0 * M C M S
    11.    Groundwalar«jW)Tieattneu Plant OftM                                           1      $ 252382        YR     S     2S23S2     s     252382
                                                                                          I     (seedetaiD      LS     s     IS0370     $     192,610
    13.    Moodily FtarlomtBttce Maoitorine. Year I                                      12     (see detail)    MO     s     226326     s     279370
    14.    QuuicriyFtofonnonceMoailerinc-Yean 2-5                                        4      (see detail)    YR     s      75v442    s      93.190
                                                                                          1     S    71364      LS     s      71364     $      71364
           TOTAL ANNUAL OftM COSTS                                                                                     s     T75,SM     s     8S9416

Unique L o n t - u m 0 * M Cosa                                                                                                               1
   16.      HnalRepon(alYear5)                                                           1      S    36,960      LS    s       36.960
                                                                                                                                  s           136.9601

PRESENT WORTB O F COSTS                                                                                                                       1
  17.  Total Capita] Costs                                                                                               1,999371 s 2,631,603 1
  18.  CW Tieatment System O&M Costs (Op6aa A 7 yis. Option B 10 yn)                                                     1360.161       s
                                                                                                                                     1.772,629
  19.  Bioremediation O&M Costs (Optioo A 7 yi3,OpCioaB t o yrs)                                                          810389
                                                                                                                          211324 $
                                                                                                                                        s
                                                                                                                                     I3S23I6
                                                                                                                                       261386
  20.  MonaJv Perfomance Monitoring (1 year duration)
                                                                                                                          336j0n       567^44
                                                                                                                                        s
   22.    Long-ienn Mooiioring (IS year duntion)                                                                          649.976 $    649376
   23.     FinalReDanfODtianAatYear7.0nioaBandYe>rlO)                                                                      •23jai5 $    18.787
          TOTAL PRESENT WORTH O F C O S l *                                                                            T539W13 T7,454,540|
Option A: Treatment of 100 ppb phime with 10 recirculation loops • 7 yean of treatment, 15 yean total of nxmitoring
Option B: Treamentof lOpfrttplumewidi 16 recirculation loops-10 yean of treatment, 15 total yean of monitoriag




                                                                                                                             500059

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     APPENDIX   III




ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD
         INDEX




                        500060

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   MONITOR DEVICES SUPERFUND SITE
                     ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD FILE
                         INDEX OF DOCUMENTS



3.0   REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION

3.2   Sampling and Analysis Data/Chain of Custody Forms

P.    300001 - Letter to Mr. Nigel Robinson, U.S. Environmental
      300020   Protection Agency, from Mr. Thomas Mathew, P.E.,
               CDM Federal Programs Corporation, re: Proposed
               Screening Level Criteria. Monitor Devices Superfund
               Site. Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study.
               Wall Township. New Jersev. May 17, 2004.

3.3   Work Plans
P.    300021 - Repcrt: Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
      300160   Phase IIB. Monitor Devices Site. Wall Township. New
               Jersey. Draft Work Plan, prepared by CDM Federal
               Programs Corporation, prepared for U.S.
               Environmental Protection Agency, December 8, 1994.
P.    300161 - Report: Final Quality Assurance Project Plan.
      3004 99. Monitor Devices Site. Remedial Investigation/
               Feasibility Study. Wall Township. New Jersev.
               prepared by CDM Federal Programs Corporation,
               prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
               March 9, 2001.

P.    300500 - Report: Final Health and Safety Plan. Monitor
      300618   Devices Site. Remedial Investigation/Feasibility
               Study. Wall Township. New Jersey, prepared by COM
               Federal Programs Corporation, prepared for U.S.
               Environmental Protection Agency, March 9, 2001.
P.    300619 - Report: Quality Assurance Project Plan Addendum No.
      300703   2. Monitor Devices Superfund Site. Remedial •
               Investigation/Feasibility Study. Wall Township. New
               Jersey, prepared by CDM Federal Programs
               Corporation, prepared for U.S. Environmental
               Protection Agency, December 2, 2003.




                                                          500061

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

3.4   Remedial Investigation Reports

P.     300704 - Letter (with attachment) to Mr. Robert Soboleski, .
       300841   State of New Jersey, Department of Environmental
                Protection, from Mr. William S. Hose, Westinghouse
                Environmental and Geotechnical Services, Inc., re:
                Final Submittal. Phase I Sampling Report. Monitor.
                Devices Site. Westinghouse Project Number: 1060-8 6-
                200. June 14, 1990.

P.    300842 - Report: Technical Memorandum #2. Recommendations
      300869   for Monitoring Well Locations. Monitor.Devices
               Site, prepared by CDM Federal Programs Corporation,
               prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
               January 29, 1998.
P.    300870 - Report: Technical Memorandum #3. Data Summary
      300909   and Recommendations for Additional Field Work.
               Monitor Devices Site, prepared by CDM Federal
               Programs Corporation, prepared for U.S.
               Environmental Protection Agency, October 22, 1998.
P.    300910 - Report: Technical Memorandum No. 4. Monitor Devices
      301096   Superfund Site. Remedial Investigation/Feasibility
               Study. Wall Township. New Jersev. prepared by CDM
               Federal Programs Corporation, prepared for U.S.
               Environmental Protection Agency, January 25, 2002.
P..   301097 - Report: Technical Memorandum No. 5. Monitor Devices
      301261   Superfund Site. Remedial Investigation/Feasibility
               Study. Wall Township. New Jersey. prepa.red by CDM
               Federal Programs Corporation, prepared for U.S.
               Environmental Protection Agency, March 26, 2003.

P.    301262 - Report: Final MNA Technical Memorandum. Monitor
      301290   Devices Superfund Site. Remedial Investigation/
               Feasibility Study. Wall Township. New Jersey,
               prepared by CDM Federal.Programs Corporation,
               prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
               September 24, 2003.
P.    301291 - Report: Data Evaluation Summary Report. Monitor
      301926   Devices. Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study.
               Wall Township. New Jersey, prepared by CDM Federal
               Programs Corporation, prepared for U.S.
               Environmental Protection Agency, August 13, 2004.




                                                       500062

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

p.   301927 - Report: Pathways Analysis Report. Monitor Devices
     302082   Site. Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study.
              Wall Township. New Jersev. prepared by CDM Federal
              Programs Corporation, prepared for U.S.
              Environmental Protection Agency, September 30,
              2004.

P.   302083 - Report: Final Human Health Risk Assessment. Monitor
     30238(5  Devices Site. Remedial Investigation/Feasibility
              Study. Wall Township. New Jersey, prepared -by CDM
              Federal Programs Corporation, prepared for U.S.
              Environmental Protection Agency, July 15, 2005.

P.   302387 - Report:. Final Remedial Investigation Report.
     302631   Monitor Devices Site. Wall Township. New Jersey.
              Volume I. RI Report. Tables arid Figures,
              prepared by CDM Federal Programs Corporation,
              prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
              August 3, 2005.
P.   302632 - Report: Final Remedial Investigation Report-.
     303049   Monitor Devices Site. Wall Township. New Jersey.
              Volume II. Appendices A-H. prepared by CDM Federal
              Programs Corporation, prepared for U.S.
              Environmental Protection Agency, August 3, 2005.

P.   303050 - Report: Final Remedial Investigation Report..
     304103   Monitor Devices Site. Wall Township. New Jersey.
              Volume III. Appendices I-K. prepared by CDM Federal
              Programs Corporation, prepared for U.S.
              Environmental Protection Agency, August 3, 2005.

3.5 Correspondence

P.   304104 - Letter (with enclosure) to Mr. Nigel Robinson, U.S.
     304107   Environmental Protection Agency, from Mr. Thomas
              Mathew, P.E., CDM Federal Programs Corporation, re:
              Response to NJDEP Comments on the Proposed
              Screening Level Criteria, Monitor Devices Site,
              Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study, Wall
              Township, New Jersey, August 27, 2004.

P.   304108 - Letter to Mr. Nigel Robinson, U.S. Environmental
     304108   Protection Agency, from Ms. Jeanne Litwin, REM,
              CDM Federal Programs Corporation, re: Pathways
              Analysis Report, Monitor Devices Site, Remedial
              Investigation/Feasibility Study, Wall Township,
              New Jersey, September 30, 2004.



                                                           500063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

p.   304109 - Response to Comments from NJDEP Received from EPA-
     304110   on March 18, 2005.

P.   304111 - Letter (with enclosure) to Mr. Nigel Robinson,
     304132   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, from Mr.
              Thomas Mathew, P.E., CDM Federal Programs
              Corporation, re: Response to Comments on the Draft
              Remedial Investigation Report, Monitor Devices
              Site, Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study,
              Wall Township, New Jersey, June 17, 2005.

P.   304133 - Letter to Mr. Nigel Robinson, U.S. Environmental
     304134   Protection Agency, frorn Mr. Anton Navarajah, State
              of New Jersey, Department of Environmental
              Protection, re: Monitor Devices Superfund Site,
              Response to NJDEP Review Comments on the Draft
              Human Health Risk Assessment, August 1, 2005.


4.0 FEASIBILITY STUDY
4.3 Feasibility Study Reports

P.   4 00001 - Report: Draft Final Feasibility Study Report,
     400276, Monitor Devices Site. Wall Township. New Jersey,
               prepared by CDM Federal Programs Corporation,
               prepared for U.S. EPA, Region 2, August 24, 2005.


7.0 ENFORCEMENT

7.8 Correspondence

P.   700001 - Letter to Mr. Edward Brown, Wall Herald Corporation
     700001   from Mr. Stephen Luftig, United States
              Environmental Protection Agency, re: Monitoring
              Devices Inc. Site, Allaire Airport-Wall Township,
              Monmouth County, New Jersey, Notification of
              Potentially Responsible Party Status, January 12,
              1988.


10.0 PUBLIC PARTICIPATION

10.9 Proposed Plan
P.   10.00001- Report:. Superfund Program Proposed Plan. U.S.
     10.00014 Environmental Protection Agency. Region II. Monitor
               Devices. Inc./Intercircuits, Inc.. August 2005.



                                                           500064

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 APPENDIX I V




STATE LETTER




                500065

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

RicharJ J. (\viey                          Department of Environmcnlal Pnnection                        nradley M. Campbell
Acting tftfvrmrtr                                                                                          Commii$iot\er




               Honorable Alan J. Steinberg, Regional Administrator
               United Slates Environmental Protection Agency Region II
               290 Broadway
               New York, hfY 10007-186(5

               Subject:       Record of Decision (ROD) for Operable Unit No. 1
                              Monitor Devices Soperfnnd Site
                              Wall Townsliip, Monmouth County

               Dear Mr, Steinberg:

               The New Jersey Department of Enviroiunental Protection (Department) has completed its
               review of the September 2005 Draft Record of Decision (ROD) for Operable Unit No. 1
               (OUl), the contaminated ground water aquifer. We are pleased to concur with the chos<3i
               remedial alternative.

               The chosen remedial alternative for OUl includes the installation of a ground water
               recirculation system (extraction and reinjection wells) in the area of the volatile organic
               compounds (VOC) plume, along with a system of introducing biologic amendments into
               the subsurface to promote bioremediation. A monitoring program will be set up to evaluate
               the progress of the remedy.

              Because a number of years would be required before restoration of the ground water is
              achieved, the preferred alternative includes long-term monitoring of the ground water to
              ensure that human health and the environment are protected, and institutional controls,
              such as a Classification Exception Area.

              As stated in the ROD, the remedial alternative will control the spread of ground water
              conumination further downgradient of the site, and reduce the concentration of
              contaminants in the ground water over time.

              The soil contamination at the site will be further evaluated to determine if the nature and
              extent of the soil contamination has been adequately characterized.

              We appreciate the opportunity to participate in the remedial decision making process and
              the efforts of USEPA to address this contaminated site.




                                         New J*rjey it an Et/ual Opportunity Employer
                                                       RtcydtdPvr                            500066

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to call me at (609) 292-1250.




                                                       Assistant Commissioner
                                          Remediation and Waste Management Program


cc:    Nigel Robinson, USEPA
       Anton Navarajah, NJDEP BCM
       David Barskey, NJDEP BEERA
       Joe Marchesani, NJDEP BGWPA




                                                                                  500067

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      APPENDIX V




RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY




                         500068

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                           APPENDIX V
                      RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY
                       Monitor Devices Site
                    Wall Township, New Jersey

INTRODUCTION
This Responsiveness Summary provides a summary of the p\iblic's
comments and concerns regarding the Proposed Plan for the Monitor
Devices site, and EPA's responses to those comments. At the time
of the pioblic comment period, EPA proposed a preferred
alternative for remediating groundwater. All comments summarized
in this document have been considered in EPA's final decision for
the selection of remedial alternatives for the site.

This Responsiveness Summary is divided into the following
sections:
     I.   BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS: This
     section provides the history of community involvement and
     interests regarding the Monitor Devices site.
     II. COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY OF MAJOR QUESTIONS, COMMENTS,
     CONCERNS AND RESPONSES: This section contains summaries of
     oral comments received by EPA at the public meeting, EPA's
     responses to these comments, as well as responses to written
     comments received during the public comment period.
The last section of this Responsiveness Summary includes
attachments, which document public participation in the remedy
selection process for this site. They are as follows:

     Attachment A contains the Proposed Plan that was distributed
     to the public for review and comment;

     Attachment B contains the public notices that appeared in
     the Asbury Park Press; and

     Attachment C contains the transcripts of the public meeting.

EPA received no written comments during the public comment
period.
I.   BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS

Early in the RI/FS, EPA met with residents and local interest
groups to learn about the concerns of the community. EPA has
also met Wall Township officials on several occasions to discuss
the site, including the Township's plans for future land use of
the site and neighboring airport properties.
                                                            500069

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

On August 24, 2005, EPA released the Proposed Plan and supporting
documentation for the groundwater remedy to the public for
comment. EPA made these documents available to the public in the
administrative record repositories maintained at the EPA Region
II office (290 Broadway, New York, New York) and the Wall
Township Public Library (2700 Allaire Road, Wall, New Jersey
07719). EPA published a notice of availability involving these
documents in the Asbury Park Press newspaper, and opened a public
comment period on the documents from August 24, 2005 to September
23, 2005. On September 7, 2005, EPA held a public meeting at the
Wall Township Library to inform local officials and interested
residents about the Superfund process, to present the preferred
remedial alternatives for the site, solicit Oral comment, and
respond to any questions.

II.    COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY OF MAJOR QUESTIONS. COMMENTS.
       CONCERNS. AND RESPONSES

PART It Verbal Comments
This section summarizes comments received from the pviblic during
the public comment period along with EPA's responses.

A.     SUMMARY OF QUESTIONS AND EPA'S RESPONSES FROM THE PtJBLIC
       MEETING CONCERNING THE MONITOR DEVICES SITE - SEPTEMBER 1,
       2005
A public meeting was held September 7, 2005, at 6:00 p.m. at the
Wall Township Public Library, 2700 Allaire Road, Wall, New
Jersey. Following a brief presentation of the investigation
findings, EPA presented the Proposed Plan and preferred
alternatives for the site, received comments from meeting
participants, and responded to questions regarding the remedial
alternatives under consideration.

Comment #1:              A commenter r e p r e s e n t i n g the Water Resources
A s s o c i a t i o n of Monmouth County i n d i c a t e d t h a t , i n h e r former r o l e
as mayor of Wall Township she had known about the s i t e f o r many
y e a r s and was happy with EPA's p l a n s f o r i t s cleanup. She a l s o
asked whether l o c a l b u s i n e s s e s , p a r t i c u l a r l y the Zodiak/Air
C r u i s e r company, which s i t s over t h e a r e a of groundwater
contamination, use the contaminated water and might be exposing
workers to i t .

EPA response: No local businesses have production wells within
the zone of groundwater contamination (this was confirmed by a
representative of Zodiak, also attending the meeting).


                                          Page 3

                                                                                500070

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Comment #2:            A commenter asked about t h e n e i g h b o r i n g a i r p o r t
l a n d . A g r e a t deal of s o i l mining has taken p l a c e on t h a t
p r o p e r t y ; would the removal of s o i l change the ^ f o o t p r i n t " of the
groundwater contamination, make i t change d i r e c t i o n ?

EPA response: While changes in topography can affect the
direction of groundwater flow to some small degree, the primary
direction of groundwater flow at the site is towards the
east/southeast. EPA relies on data from a series of monitoring
wells it has installed at the site. The groundwater flow
direction has been consistent over time.

Comment #3:                A commenter asked whether the p r o p o s e d remedy
would d i s r u p t l o c a l b u s i n e s s e s i n the a r e a , e i t h e r d u r i n g
c o n s t r u c t i o n o r during o p e r a t i o n and maintenance, p a r t i c u l a r l y
f o r the Zodiak/Air C r u i s e r company.

EPA response: Use of the contaminated groundwater will, of
course, need to be controlled, but EPA does not contemplate any
major disruptions to existing businesses during the remedial
design, remedial action or subsequent operation and maintenance
of the preferred alternative. Enough vacant land appears to be
available in the area to implement Alternative 4.




                                           Page 4                               500071

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ATTACHMENT A

PROPOSED PLAN




      Page 5
                500072

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Superfund Program                                               U.S. Environmental Protection
 Proposed Plan                                                   Agency, Region Ii   <i^^'^%.

 MONITOR DEVICES, INC/INTERCIRCUITS, INC.
 August 2005




  EPA ANNOUNCES PROPOSED PLAN                              the Administrative Record file for the site. EPA and
                                                           NJDEP encourage the public to review diese
This Proposed Plan identifies the preferred alternative    documents to gain a more comprehensive
for addressing groundwater contamination at the            understanding of the site and Superfund activities
Monitor Devices, Inc/Interciruits, Inc., Superfund site,   that have been conducted at the site.
commonly referred to as the Monitor Devices site, and
provides the rationale for that preference. The Monitor
Devices site was placed on the National Priorities List     Dates to remembor
(NPL) of Superfund sites in 1986. Groundwater at the        MARK YOUR CALENDAR
site is contaminated with a variety of volatile organic     PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD:
compounds (VOCs). EPA's proposed alternative for            August 24 - September 23, 2005
site groundwater is Alternative 4, enhanced                 U.S. EPA will accept written comments on the
bioremediation, which involves the installation of an       Proposed Plan during 0ie public comment period.
extraction and reinjection well system within the
                                                            PUBLIC MEETING:
contaminated plume that will allow for the introduction     September 7,2005,6:00 pm
of amendents to .promote the biolo^c degradation of the     U.S. EPA viAll hold a public meeting to explain ti^e
VOCs within the aquifer.                                    Proposed Plan and all of the altematives presented in
                                                            the Feasibility Study. Oral and written comments wil
                                                            also be accepted at the meeting. The meeting wNi be
This Proposed Plan includes summaries of all the            held at the Wall Public Library Branch, 2700 Allaire
cleanup alternatives evaluated for use at the site. This    Road, Wall Township, New Jersey.
document is issued by the U.S. Environmental
                                                            For more information, see the Administrative
Protection Agency (EPA), the lead agency for site           Record at the following locations:
activities, and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP), the support agency.       U.S. EPA Records Center, Region II
EPA, in consultation with NJDEP, will select the final      290 Broadway, 18" Floor.
                                                            New Yoric, New Yoric 10007-1866
remedy for the site after reviewing and considering all     (212)-637-3261
information submitted during a 30-day public comment        Hours: Monday-Friday - 9 am to S pm
period. EPA, in consultation with NJDEP, may modify
                                                            Wall Public Library Branch
the preferred alternative or select another response        2700 Allaire Road.
action presented in this Proposed Plan based on new         Wall, New Jersey 07719
information or public conunents. Therefore, the public      (732)449-8877
is encouraged to review and comment on all the
alternatives presented in this Proposed Plan.
                                                           SITE DESCRIPTION
EPA is issuing this Proposed Plan as part of its
community relations program under section 117(a) of        The Monitor Devices site is located in Wall
the Comprehensive Environmental Response,                  Township, Monmouth Coimty, New Jersey. The
Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA, or                 former facility occupies two acres in the I ^ e w o o d
Superfund). This Proposed Plan summarizes                  Industrial Park section of the Monmouth County
information that can be found in greater detail in the     Airport (also known as the Allaire Airport) off
Remedial Investigation Report (RI) and the Feasibility     Route 34 (see Figure 1). Monitor Devices formerly
Study Report (FS), and other documents contained in        occupied Building 2S in the industrial park, which is




                                                                                                     500073

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 located along the airport access road at the intersection   NJDEP determined that Monitor Devices never
 of George and Edward Streets. Building 2S is currently      possessed the required permits to discbarge
 occupied as a repair and storage facility. The area         wastewater. In May 1980, NJDEP issued a Notice
 surrounding tiie site and the Monmouth County Airport       of Civil Administrative Penalty Assessment and an
 is zoned for mixed residential, commercial, and li^t        Administrative Order to Monitor Devices. The
 industrial use. Several industrial parks, light industry,   order required the cessation of all wastewater
 and commercial properties and undeveloped areas             discharge, the installation of monitoring wejls, and
 border the airport to the south and west. The airport and   groundwater sampling. The con^any did not fully
 commercial patic are cim'ently active.                      comply with this order. In 1980, Monitor Devices
                                                             changed its name to Intercircuits, Inc., and moved its
 SITEmSTORY                                                  operation to Lakewood, New Jersey. Monitor
                                                             Devices/Intercircuits declared bankruptcy in 1988
 Monitor Devices, Inc., operated in Building 25 fi-om        and eventually went out of business.
 1977 to 1980. The Monitor Devices operation primarily
 involved the manufacture and assembly of printed            The Monitor Devices site was proposed for
 circuit boards used by companies in the conq>uter           inclusion on the >^ati(»ial Pricnities list (NFL) in
 industry.                                                   April 198S, and formally placed on the NPL on June
                                                             1,1986. NJDEP initiated an RI/FS field
As part of the manufacturing process, circuit panels         investigation; however, after completing a phase of
were plated with copper, lead, nickel, gold, and tin. The    field investigations, NJDEP requested that EPA
various plating processes required both electrolysis and     assume responsibility for the site.
electroplating lines. Effiuentfiromtiieelectrolysis and
electroplating lines was directed to three pipes that        After several phases of soil and groundwater
discharged to the rear of the building. The pipes            studies, EPA's enviroimiental consultant completed
discharged rinse watersfiromthe nickel-gold plating and      field investigations in 2004, and prepared a RI
electrolysis, rinse waterfi'omthe copper and lead            Report summarizing the results. In August 2005, a
electroplating line, and alkaline washing solution.          FS Report was con^leted for the site.
Volatile organic confounds (VOCs) such as
trichloroethylene (TCE) were used as solvents and            The results of the 2005 RI report are discussed
cleaners in a variety of facility operations.                below, and formed the basis for the development of
                                                             the FS report, released concurrent with this
A complaint against Monitor Devices was filed with the       Proposed Plan and included in the Administrative
Monmouth County Dq)artment of Health (MCDH) in               Record for the site.
January 1980. In response to the complaint, the MCDH
visited the Monitor Devices facility and observed            SITE CHARACTERISTICS
discolored effluent from discharge pipes. Sampling
identified elevated levels of copper, lead, and mercury in   The RI indicated &e following:
the effiuent and in the stained soils.
                                                             SoUs
In early 1980, site inspections by EPA and Ae New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection               'EPA sampled surface soils (withiii the first two feet
(NJDEP) noted effluent pipes discharging wastewater          of the ground surface) and subsurface soils to
directly onto the ground, at rates of as much as two         investigate soil contamination. The soil
gallons per minute. Wastewater that was not percolating investigation initially focused on the area
into the ground was observed to be flowing around the        surrounding Building 25, in addition to bacl^round
building and along an access road. A small dam had           samples; however, groundwater sampling suggested
been constracted to control the migration of                 a possible source area near building 62-C of the
manufacturing e£Quent, resulting in a small imlined          industrial park (see Figure 2), and additional soU
pond. Drums of acetone, isoprop)d alcohol and a              sampling was also performed there.
varied of acids were also stored at the site, apparentiy to
be iised as part of the facility operations.                 Resultsfiromthe soil sao^iing did not identify any
                                                             "principaltiureatwastes", that is, soils that might be




                                                                                                  500074

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 acting as continuing sources of either VOC or metals                 Groimdwater beneath the site flows toward the east,
 contamination to the groundwater, at the site. (See                  with a slight southern component The aquifer is an
 explanation of Principal Threats, below)! EPA and                    unconfined unit con^osed of intetixdded sand, silt,
 NJDEP are still evaluating the soil data to determine if             and gravel, referred to as the Kirkwood-Cohansey
 the nature and extent of the soil contamination has been             aquifer. While generally sandy in the area of the
 adequately characterized.                                            site, silt and interbe«Wed silty gravel layers were
                                                                      detected during the installation of wells MW-17C
 Groundwater Contamination                                            and MW-19C at approximately 60 and 10 feet,
                                                                      respectively, below ground surface at the site. The
 The objective of the groundwater investigation was to                Kirkwood-Cohansey aquifer is, on average, 90 feet
 characterize the vertical and horizontal extent of                   thick at the site.
 contamination at, and downgradient of; the site. Using a
 "Geoprobe" rig, groundwater screening samples were                   Groundwater flow from the site is towards the
 collected, first along the predicted axis of the                     east/southeast A public supply well located on
 contaminant plume, and then at progressive depths and                Route 34 is approximately one half mile south of
 distances downgradient. In an effort to identify the                 Hurley Pond Road. While it is hydraulically
 plume extent. These screening san^jles were followed                 downgradient of the site, the groundwater phime
 by die installation and sampling of monitoring wells.                does not pose a threat to the public supply well
                                                                      because it is screened in the deeper Englishtown
                 WHAT IS A "PRINCIPAL THREAT"?
                                                                      aquifer system, and not the unconfined Kirkwood-
                                                                      Cohansey Aquifer in which site contamination is
       The NCP estal)llshes an expectatton that EPA will use          migrating, llierefore, the Route 34 public supply
       treatment to address the principal threats posed by a site
       wherever practcable (NCP Section 300.430(aX1 KiHKA)).          well has significant confining layers between its
       The "principal threat" concept is applied to the               productive interval and the overlying Kiricwood-
       characterization of "source materials* at a Superfund site.
       A source material is material that includes or contains        Cohansey Aquifer. It is h i ^ y unlikely tiiat ttie
       hazardous substances, pollutants or contaminants that act      Englishtown Aquifer can be impacted by
       as a reservoir for migration of contamination to               contamination from the site.
       groundwater, surface veter or air, or acts as a source fbr
      direct e)q>osure. Contaminated groundwater generally la
       not considered to be a source material; however, Non-          Throughout the groundwater investigation, eight
      Aqueous Phase Uquids (NAPLs) in groundwater maybe
      viewed as source material. Principal threat wastes are          organic conpounds exceeded the site-q^ecific
      those source materials considered to be highly toxic or         groundwater screening criteria; however, of the
      highly mobile that generally cannot be reliably contained, or
      would present a significant risi( to human health or the        eight compounds, carbon tetrachloride was only
      environment should exposure occur. The decision to treat        detected in one groundwater sampling round at
      these wastes is made on a site^speafic basis through a          levels exceeding the site-specific screening criteria,
      detailed analysis of the altematives using the nine remedy
      selection crKeria This analysis provides a basis for making     and methylene chloride is believed to be a
      a statutory finding that the remedy employs treatment as a      laboratory contaminant and not associated with the
      principal element
                                                                      site. The remaining VOCs found were:

                                                                              1,1-Dichloroethylene (1,1-DCE)
 Groundwater samples were collected fi'om monitoring                          1,2-dichloroetiiane (1,2-DCA)
 wells and one public supply well to characterize the                         1,1,1-trichloroethane (1,1,1-TCA)
nature and extent of contamination in groundwater fit)m                       l.U-TCA
contaminants associated with the site. A total of 47                  •       Trichloroethylene (TCE)
monitoring wells were installed and san^led, at depths                        Tetrachloroetiiylehe (PCE)
ranging from 21 feet to 128 feet below the ground
surface, and as far as 4,800 feet downgradient of the                 In the most recent (2004) sampling events, the
site. A total of six rounds of groundwater samples were               highest concentrations of these compounds, TCE at
collected during the various investigations. Laboratory               320 parts per billion (320 ppb) and 1,1-DCE at 470
results were compared to site-specific saeening criteria              ppb, were detected in MW-17A, located
for groimdwater, typically New Jersey Groimdwater                     approximately 175 feet downgradient of Building
Quality Criteria or Maximum Contaminant Levels                        62-e. The highest concentration of PCE, 82 ppb,
(MCLs).                                                               was detected in MWD-4S. No organic compounds




                                                                                                                500075

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 were detected in wells MW-llS and MW-1 ID, site               contamination may indicate a potential secondary
 background wells. In addition, no organic compounds           source that may have resulted from past airport
 were detected in the side-gradient wells AMW-S and            operations. The presence of discontinuous layers of
 AMW-6.                                                        silts and clays in the aquifer in this same area may
                                                               also contribute to this contamination pattern.
 All semi-volatile organics were detected below the site-
 specific screening criteria with the exception of bis(2-      Groundwater samples were also collected to
 ethylhexyl)phthalate, which was detected in one well          evaluate the degree to which contamination might be
 during one sampling round, and is believed to be a            naturally attenuating, through biodegradation or
 laboratory contaminant. No pesticides or                      other conditions naturally present in the aquifer.
 polychlorinated biphenyls were detected ia any of the         There was littie evidence tiiat natural attenuation of
 site monitoring wells.                                        the VOC contaminants is occurring at levels that
                                                               would warrant consideration of "monitored natural
 In the 2004 sampling events, nine inorganic analytes          attenuation" as a remedial strategy.
 exceeded the site-specific groundwater screening
 crito-ia, including aluminum, arsenic, cadmium,               No organic compoimds were detected in the
 chromium, hexavalent chromium, copper, iron,                  groundwater sample collected from the Route 34
 manganese, vanadium, cyanide and thallium Metals              public supply well (PSW-1), and no inorganics
 contamination is localized to wells near Building 25,         detected exceeded die site-specific groundwater
 and does not indicate any downgradient migration.             screening criteria.
 Ihese metals included chromium at 404 ppb, hexavalent
 chrtmiium at 190 ppb, and copper at 3,400 ppb.                ENFORCEMENT

 As stated earlia, groundwater flows toward the east,          Based on the findings of County, State and Federal
 with a slight southern component; however, the                inspections, the NJDEP's Division of Water
 groundwater contaminant plume appears to trend in a           Resources issued an Administrative Order (AO) and
 more southerly direction than would be suggested by the       Notice of Civil Administrative Penalfy Agreement
 groundwater gradients. This contradiction (between the        in May 1980 for unpermitted discharges. Except for
 groundwater flow patterns and the apparent contaminant        payment of $1,500 and installation of tiuee
 migration patterns) led EPA to believe that other sources     monitoring wells. Monitor Devices failed to comply
 may exist, such as in the area of Building 62-C. As           with the AO requiremaents, particularly the
 mentioned earlier, soil sampling at Building 62-C did         installation of a groundwater recovery and
 not show a source emanating from that location.               decontamination system. In 1985, Monitor Devices
                                                               and its president were named in a six-count
The area of VOC contamination in groundwater is                indictment by a Monmouth Coimty Grand Jury For
approximately 3,100 feet long along its primary axis           unlawful release, crinunal mischief, and illegal
(fiom northwest to southeast), extending from the              discharge of pollutants in violation of New Jersey
Monitor Devices building to approximately 400 feet             Water Pollution Act of 1977. The indictment
from the intersection of Route 34 and Hurley Pond              resulted in a guilty plea and the agreement to pay
Road. The plume is approximately 1,300 feet wide and           $100,000 towards the clean-up of the site. The plea
ranges from 45 to 70 feet in thickness. Groundwater            agreement was not complied with; in 1988 Monitor
screening and monitoring well sample results show that         Devices went bankmpt and the State of new Jersey
the groundwater contaminant plume is slightiy                  decided to take no further action against the
descending in elevation as it progresses hydraulically         company or its president
downgradient, indicating the presence of a slight
downward vertical gradient                                     In 1985, EPA conducted a finandal review of Wall-
                                                               Herald, the owner of the site, and of Moiutor
  The very high groundwater contaminant concentrations         Devices. Based on the investigation, it was
 in the area of Building 62-C are either the result of an      concluded that both companies appeared'to have
  as-yet-unidentified second release or the result of a slug   insufficient resources and/or environmental
 of groundwater contamination that was discharged              expertise to perform the RI/FS.
. during the Monitor Devices operation, and its center has
 migrated as far as Building 62-C. The h i ^ groundwater




                                                                                                    500076

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 SCOPE AND ROLE OF THE ACTION                                 WHAT IS RISK AND HOW IS IT CALCULATED?

EPA plans to address groundwater at this site in this first   A Superfund baseline human health lisk assessment is an
operable unit' EPA and NJDEP are still evaluating the         analysis of the potential adveise health effects caused by
                                                              hazardous substance releases from a sHe in the absence of
nature and extent of soil contamination that may be           any actions to control or mitigate these under cun-ent- and
associated with the site.                                     future-land uses. A four-step process is utilized for assessing
                                                              sKe-related human health risl(s for reesonable maximum
                                                              exposure scenarios.
SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS
                                                              Hazard identification: in this step, the contaminants of
                                                              concern at the site in various media (i.e., soil, groundweter,
The human health risk assessment (HHRA), a portion of         surface water, and air) are identified based on such fectors es
the RI Report for the site, evaluated both soil and           toxicity, frequency of occurrence, and fate and transport of the
groundwater contaminants. EPA and NJDEP are still             contaminants in the environment, concentrations of the
                                                              contaminants in specific media, tnobilty, persistence, and
evaluating the soil data; therefore, the HHRA sunanaiy,       bioaccumulation.
below, only discusses the groundwater conclusions.
                                                              Exposure Assessment in this step, the different exposure
                                                              pathways through which people might be exposed to ttie
Among all receptors evaluated at the site, only current       contaminants identified in ttw pre>tou8 step are evaluated.
and future site workers and off-site residents had            Examples of exposure pathways include Incidental ingestion
                                                              of and dermal contact with contaminated soil. Factors
potential adverse health impacts due to exposure to site      relating to the exposure essessment include, but are not
contaminants released from the Monitor Devices site.          limited to, the concentrations that people might be exposed to
                                                              and the potential frequency and duration of exposure. Using
Detailed summary of risk estimates for site workers           these factore. a "reasonable ma)dmum exposure" scenario,
under the current and future land use scenarios and off-      which portrays the highest level of human exposure that could
site resklents under the fiiture land use scenario are        leasonably be expected to occur, is celcuiated.
presented below.                                              ToxicityAssessment: In this step, the types of edverse health
                                                              effects associated with chemical es^sures, and the
                                                              relationship between magnitude of exposure (dose) end
On-site Workers                                               severity of adveree effects (response) are determined.
                                                              Potential health effects are chemical-specific and may include
Under the current land use scenario, site workers             the risk of developing cancer over a lifetime or other non-
                                                              cancer health effects, such as cttanges in ttie normal
exposed to groundwater contamination are limited to           functions of organs within the body (e.g., changes in ttie
inhalation of vapors migrating from the subsurface.           effectiveness of the immune system). Some chemicals ere
                                                              capable of causing both cancer and non-cancer health
However, under the future land use scenario,                  effects.
groundwater exposure to site workers could also include
direct ingestion with groundwater if wells are installed      RIsIf Characterization: This step summarizes and combines
                                                              exposure information and toxicity assessments to proN^de a
to use groundwater as tap wata.                               quantitative assessment. of site risla. Exposures ere
                                                              evaluated based on the potential risic of developing cancer
                                                              and the potential for non-cancer tteelh hazards. Ttie
The total reasonable maximum e5q)osure (RME)                  likelihood of an individual developing cancer is expressed es
estimated cancer risk for workers (2 x 10"*) is slightly      a probability. For example, a 10^ cancer risk meens a
above tiie EPA target range of 1 x 10^ to 1 x 10^ for         *one-in-ten-thousand excess cancer lisl^; or one additk>nal
                                                              cancer may be seen In e population of 10,000 people as a
current exposures, due to the potential for inhalation of     resuK of exposure to site contaminants under the conditk)ns
TCE from vapor intrusion, and increases to 3 x 10^ for        explained in the E}q>osure Assessment Current Superfund
                                                              guidelines for acceptable exposures are an individual lifetime
future workers when groundwater ingestion .is also            excess cancer risk in the range of 10* to 10* (correspondlrtg
included.                                                     to a one^in-ten-thousand to a one-in-a-mllion excess cancer
                                                              risk). For non-cancer heath effects, e "hazard lnde)f (Hi) is
                                                              calculated. An HI represents ttie sum of the individual
The total hazard index for current and future site            exposure levels compared to ttieir corresponding reference
workers is above the tiireshold of unity (1) for RME          doses. The key concept for a non-cancer HI is that a
                                                              threshold level' (measured as an HI of less than 1) eidsts
exposure, primarily due to ingestion of TCE in tap            below which non-cancer health effects
water. TCE, the major risk driver in the groundwater,
can adversely impact the liver, kidney, and fetus.




                                                                                                                500077

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Off-site Residents                                           Human Health Risks

OfF-site residents near the Monitor Devices site could be    Based on results of the HHRA, the groundwater is
exposed to contaminants in groundwater in the future if      determined to be the environmental concern for the
wells are installed that draw on the contaminated portion    site. The potential risks to ciurent and future site
of the aquifer for tap water. Residents may be exposed       workers and to fiiture off-site residents using
to contaminants in groundwater via drinking water            groundwater as tap water exceeded EPA's
ingestion, dermal contact while showering/bathing, and       thresholds of ooncem. The dominant risk drivers in
inhalation of vapors while showering/bathing.                groundwater were TCE, 1,1-DCE, and arsenic. TCE
                                                             and 1,1-DCE have been identified as site-related
Adult The cancer risks for future adult residents            contaminants. Arsenic is widely distributed in the
exposed to groundwaterfix>mthe site exceeded the             environment The site-specific background,
range of 10^ to 10* for tiie RME scenario (6 x iff^).        concentration of arsenic in groundwater was 4.3
Cancer risks for adult residents are predominantiy due to    ppb, while the arsenic concentration used in the risk
the presence of TCE, 1,1-DCE, and arsenic in                 calculation was 6.7 ppb; consequently, about 65
groundwater.                                                 percent of the risk calculated from arsenic for the
                                                             site is contributed to the arsenic background
TCE and 1,1-DCE have been identified as site-related         concentration. Furthermore, based on the site
contantinates. Arsenic is widely distributed in the          history, arsenic is not considered a site-related
environment. The site-specific background                    contaminant at the Monitor Devices site.
concentration of arsenic in groundwater was 4.3 ^g/L,
while die arsenic concentration used in the risk             Ecological Risks
calculation was 6.7 ug/L; consequentiy, about 65
percent of the risk calculated due to arsenic for the site   An ecological risk characterization was performed
is contributed to the arsenic background concentration.      for the Monitor Devices site in 1998 and re-
                                                             evaluated in. 2004. A groundwater evaluation
The total hazard index for future adult residents exceeds    indicated very little potential to adversely affect
die tiireshold of 1 for RME (8). This is primarily due to    aquatic life due to the limited possibilities of
the presence of TCE in groundwater. Bcposure to              groundwater reaching the smrface. No further
elevated concentrations of TCE may cause adverse             consideration of groundwater was warranted in the
efiects to the livn-, kidneys, and developing fetus.         Ecological R i ^ Assessment

Child CO to 6 years): The cancer risks (1 x 10') for         It is EPA's current judgment that the Preferred
future child (0 to 6 years) residents exposed to             Alternative identified in this Proposed Plan, or one
groundwater from the site exceeded the range of 1 x 10*      of the other active measures considered in the
to 1 X 10^ for RME. Cancer risks for child residents         Proposed Plan, is necessary to protect human health
are predominantly due to.the presence of TCE, 1,1-DCE,       or welfare or the environment from actual or
and arsenic in groundwater. Again, the exposure point        threatened releases of hazardous substances into tiie
concentration (EPC) of areenic (6.7 jig/L)used in the        environment
risk calculation was only slightly higher dian the site-
specific background concentration of arsenic (4.3 (ig/L);    REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES
consequentiy, about 65% of the total risk calculated for
the site due to arsenic is contributed to the arsenic        The following remedial action objectives for
background concentration.                                    contaminated groundwater address the human health
                                                             risks and environmental concerns at the Moiutor
The total hazard index for future child residents exceeds    Devices site:
EPA's threshold of 1 for RME (19) This is primarily
due to the presence of TCE in groundwater. Exposure          •        Prevent or minimize potential current and '
to elevated concentrations of TCE may cause adverse                   future human e}q)osures including ingestion
effects to the liver, kidneys and developing fetus.                   and dermal contact with groundwater that
                                                                      presents a significant risk to public health
                                                                      and the environment;




                                                                                                   500078

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              expectations set out in the Superfund regulations,
 •       Minimize the potential for off-site migration of     none of the remedies rely exclusively on
         contaminated groundwater; and                        institutional controls to achieve protectiveness.

 •       Restore the groundwater to drinking water            The time frames below for constmction do not
         standards within a reasonable time frame.            include tiie time for remedial design or the time to
                                                              procure contracts.
 There are currently no complete exposure pathways to
 contaminated groundwater beneath the Monitor Devices         ALTERNATIVES
 site because there are no known contaminated wells in
 use. All residents in the area of the site are currentiy     Alternative 1: No Action
 connected to the municipal water system; however, if
 contamimated groundwater is used as drinking water in        Estimated Capital Cost:          $0
 the future, significant health risks would exist In          Estimated Annual (^ration &
 addition, if the contaminated groundwater were used in         Maintenance (O&M) Cost:        $0
 industrial processes within the area, significant human      Estimated Present Worth Cost:    $0
 health risks may exist thus, remedial actions must.          Estimated Construction Timeframe: None
 minimize the potential for human exposure to
 contaminated groundwater.                                    Regulations governing the Superfimd program
                                                              expect that the "no action" alternative be evaluated
 Table 1 lists the contaminants of concern found in           generally to establish a btiseline for comparison.
 groundwater at the site, and tiieir respective Cleanup       Under this alternative, EPA would take no action at
 Goals, in this case the drinking water standards (MCLs)      the site to prevent exposure to contaminated
or Ground Water Quality Criteria (GWQCs). Qeanup              groundwater. Ihstimtional controls wotdd not be
Goals were selected that would both reduce the risk           implemented to restrict future groundwater use.
associated with exposure to contaminants to an
acceptable level and ensure minimal mugration of              Alternative 2: Institutional Controls/Long-term
contaminants off the site. The metals chromium,               Monitoring
hexavalent chromium and copper were identiified as
contaminants of potential concern; however, because           Estimated Capital Cost:                $37,000
these metals were not identified as risk drivers and were     Estimated Annual OdcM Cost:            $71,000
localized to only one well cluster, EPA is not proposing      Estimated Present Worth Cost:         $975,000
Cleanup Goals for tiiese metals. A groundwater
monitoring program for the site should retain metals          Alternative 2 relies on institutional controls, such as
testing, and if monitormg results indicate tiiat the extent   a classification exception area (CEA), to prevent
df the metal contamination changes, remediation of            future use of contamimated groundwater within the
metals could be evaluated.                                    boundaries of the site, and a groundwater
                                                              monitoring program would be established to
SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES                              evaluate the groundwater contamination over time.
                                                              Under the groundwater monitoring program,
Remedial altematives for the Monitor Devices site are         groundwater conditions would be monitored
presented bdow.                                               periodically (e.g., quarterly, semi-annually or
                                                              annual^).
Each groundwater remiediation alternative would be
coupled with institutional controls to limit the potential    Long-term monitoring activities would include
exposure of the public to the groundwater contamination       annual groundwater sampling frOm some of the 47
until the groundwater is cleaned up. Institutional            site monitoring weUs and the public supply wdl
Controls typically are restrictions placed to minimize        downgradient to the contaminant plume for VOC
human exposure and continue monitoring to track               analysis. In addition, groundwater samples would be
contaminant miigration (i.e., long-term monitoring).          collected periodically from three monitoring weUs
Institutional controls are generally used m conjunction       for metals analysis. Since this alternative results in
witii otiier remedial technologies. Consistent with           contamimants reinaimimg on site above levels that




                                                                                                        500079

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 would not allow for unlimited use, a review of the site at   collectiom, treatment (if necessary), and reinjection
 least every 5 years would be required.                       of water and nutrients or other chemical
                                                              amendments into the contaminated aquifer. K would
 Alternative 3 - Groimdwater Collection and                   be implemented by installing and operating multiple
 Treatment                                                    two-well recirculation loops oriented parallel to the
                                                              direction of groimdwater flow. The downgradient
 Estimated Capital Cost:              S 1.400.000             well in each loop would be used for groundwater
 Estimated Annual O&M Cost:           $ 325,000               extraction, and the upgradient well would be used
 Estimated Present Worth Cost:        $5,400,000              for injection of groundwater and bioremediation
                                                              amendments. The reinjection of amendments with
 The objective of Alternative 3 is to remediate the           groundwater into the aquifer would encourage
 contaminated groundwater plume through groundwater           bioremediation within the aquifer, thereby
 pumping and treatment Treatment of extracted                 accelerating the rate of aquifer recovery.
 groundwater would involve a combination of filtration
 and air stripping. Based on the estimated air emissions      Bioremediation would be inplemented by
 from the air stripper, vapor phase treatment would not       stimulating microbes in the aqtufer that would then
 be necessary.                                                destroy the VOCs, through one of two mechanisms,
                                                              aerobic co-metabolism or enhanced anaerobic
 The feasibility study evaluated a number of different        bioremediation (EAB). The selection of the
 combinations of groundwater extraction wells and             bioremediation approach to be implemented would
treated water discharge options, including discharge to       be based on the outcome of bench-scale treatability
surface water and reinjection (see Feasibility Study          studies during remedial design. In terms of overall
Report). For cost-estimating purposes in this Proposed        implementation, both bioremediation technologies
Plan, this Alternative assumed a series of extinction         would be sinailar with the exception of the actual
wells that would capture the 10 ppb TCE plume,                amendments to be delivered to the subsurface. For
requiring a pumping rate of 280 gallons per mimute (280       aerobic co-metabolism, the amendments would be
gpm). The treated water would be discharged to a storm        oxygen and a primary substrate (e.g. methane,
water cateh basin associated with the airport.                propane, butane, or ammonia), while for EAB, the
                                                              amendmoit would be an electron donor such as
This alternative also includes institutional controls such    lactate or whey powder.
as groundwater use restrictions and periodic
groundwater monitoring to track the migration of the          Treatment of the extiacted water may be necessary
plume and to verify the effectiveness of this alternative.    prior to reinjection in order to satisfy regulatory
It is estimated that this system would be need to be          requirements. It is assumed, for cost-estimaating
operated for 25 years in order to restore the aquifer.        purposes, that treatment would be required and that
                                                              it would be similar to &e technologies discussed in
Since this alternative results in contaminants remaining      Alternative 3.
on site at levels that would not allow for unlimited use
of the groundwater imtil the remedial action is               The feasibility study evaluated a nuniber of different
completed, a review of the site at least every five years     combinations of groundwater extraction wells. For
would be conducted.'                                          cost-estimating purposes in this Proposed Plan, this
                                                              alternative assumed 16 recirculation loops to capture
                                                              and treat the 10 ppb plume. The recirculation loops
Alternative 4: Enhanced Groundwater                           would be operated in a pulse mode in which they
Bioremediation                                                would extract treat and inject groundwater along
                                                              with bioremediation amendments periodically. The
Estimated Capital Cost:              S2.600.000               recirculation loops would only be operated during a
Estimated Annual O&M Cost:           $890,000                 bioremediation amemdmemt injection event
Estimated Present Worth Cost:        $7,250,000
                                                              This alternative also includes institutional controls
This alternative involves enhanced bioremediation for         such as groundwater use restrictions and periodic
destruction of contaminants, through groundwater              groundwater monitorimg to track the migration of the




                                                                                                 500080

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       EVALUATION CRITERIA FOR SUPERFUND REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES
   Overall Protectiveness of Human Health and the £nWro/i/nen( evaluates whether and how an alternative
  eliminates, reduces, or controls threats to public health and the environment through institutional controls,
   engineering controls, or treatment.
   Compliance with ARARs evaluates whether the alternative meets federal and state environmental statutes,
  regulations, and other requirements that are legally applicable, or relevant and appropriate to the site, or whether a
  waiver is justified.
  Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence considers the ability of an alternative to maintain protection of human
  health and the environment overtime.
  Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume of Contaminants through Treatment evaluates an alternative's use
  of treatment to reduce the harmful effects of principal contaminants, their ability to move in the environment, and the
  amount of contamination present
  Short-term Effectiveness considers the length of time needed to implement an alternative and the risks the
  alternative poses to workets, the community, and the environment during implementation.
  Implementability considers the technical and administrative feasibility of implementing the aitemative, including
  factors such as the relative availability of goods and services.
  Cosf includes estimated capital and annual operations and maintenance costs, as well as present vmrth cost
  Present worth cost is the total cost of an aitemative over time in terms of toda/s dollar value. Cost estimates are
  expected to be accurate within a range of-fSO to-30 percent
  State/Support Agency Acceptance considers whether the State agrees with the EPA's analyses and
  recommendations, as described in the RI/FS and Proposed Plan.
  Community Acceptance considers whether the local community agrees with EPA's analyses and preferred
  aitemative. Comments received on the Proposed Plan are an important Indicator of community acceptance.



plume and to Verify the effectiveness of this aitemative.           1. Overall Protection of Human Health and the
It is estimated that this system would be operated for                 Environment
approximately 10 years to actively restore the aquifer. It
is estimated tiiat five to eight annual sampling rounds            The no action aitemative is not considered
would be conducted after completion of active                      protective because it does nothing to prevent
operations in order to confinn thiat the site has been             exposure to contaminated groundwater in the future,
restored.                                                          which would result in unacceptable future risks.

Since this aitemative results in contaminants remaining            The remaining altematives are considered
on site at levels that would not allow for unlimited use           protective. Aitemative 2 (Institutional Controls and
of the groundwater umtil the remedial action is                    Monitoring) is considered protective because it
completed, a review of the site at least every five years          includes restrictions on the use Of groimdwater and
would be conducted.                                                includes groundwater monitoring to ensure that tiie
                                                                   plume does not migrate to areas that would result in
EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES                                         human exposure. Aitemative 2 eliminates human
                                                                   contect Altematives 3 and 4 also meet the
Nine criteria are used to evaluate the different                   threshold of preventing human exj^osure and teke
remediation alternatives individually and against each             differing approaches to remediating the groundwater
other in order to select a remedy, (see Table above )              contamination, but are equally protective of human
"Evaluation Criteria for Superfimd Remedial                        healtii.
Altematives"). This section of the Proposed Plan
profiles the relative performance of each aitemative
against the mime criteria, moting how it compares to the           2. Compliance with ARARs
other options under consideration. The nine evaluation
criteria are discussed above. The "Detailed Analysis of            The Cleanup Goals (see Table 1) are MCLs or
Altematives" can be found in the FS.                               groimdwater quality standards and, therefore,
                                                                   ARARs. Aitemative 1 (No Action) would not meet
                                                                   ARARs. Aitemative 2 (Institutional Controls and
                                                                   Monitoring) is not expected to achieve ARARs in a




                                                                                                                500081

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

reasonable time frame due to limited natural attenuation            has potential worker or community impacts due to
(dilution only) at the site. Aitemative 3 (groundwater              the injection of various reagents into flie aquifer,
collection and treatment) may not meet the Cleanup                  tiiough the primary concern would be in the
Goals in the entire aquifer within a 30-yeartimefiame               management of drummed chemicals at the treatment
but would substantially reduce contaminant                          facility.
concentrations and achieve ARARs throughout much of
the aquifer within 30 years. Aitemative 4 (enhanced                 The short-term effectiveness with respect to the time
bioremediation) would likely meet the Cleanup Goals m               until the remedial action objectives are achieved is
15 years.                                                           quickest for Aitemative 4 (enhanced
                                                                    bioremediation). For Aitemative 3, it is expected
Altematives 2 through 4 would require institutional                 that MCLs in much of the groundwater might be
controls, such as a CEA, to control use of the                      achieved in less than 30 years, but that meeting
groundwater until groundwater Cleanup Goals can be                  MCLs in the whole aquifer was estimiated to be 87
met                                                                 years. Aitemative 4 will achieve the remedial action
                                                                    objectives faster than Aitemative 3, approximately
Because the No Action and Monitoring altematives (1                 15 years.
and 2) are not expected to meet at least one of the
threshold criteria (Protection of Human Health and the              6. Implementability
Environmttit and Compliance with ARARs), they were
eliminated from consideration under the remaining                   Altematives 3 and 4 would be constmcted using
seven criteria.                                                     standard constmction equipment and services. The
                                                                    administrative implementability of Alternative 3
3. Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence                           (e.g, obtaining NJPDES permit for the discharge of
                                                                    treated water) could be time-critical. The
Altematives 3 and 4 are considered permanent remedies               administrative implementability of Aitemative 4
and the long-term effectiveness of these altematives                (e.g, obtaining required permits for injection of
would be assessed through routine groundwater                       bioremediation amendments) would be more
monitoring and five-year reviews.                                   difficult amd need to be further evaluated, but the
                                                                    aitemative is still considered implementable.
Alternative 4 ranks higher than Aitemative 3 in long-
term effectiveness and permanence since it is estimated             The primary technical implementability constraint is
to restore aquifer conditions in as littie as half the time.        reinjection of water, or in the case of Aitemative 4,
                                                                    water and amendments to pronaote bioremediation.
4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume of                    Reinjection can be avoided for Aitemative 3 by
   Contaminants Through Treatment                                   discharging the treated water to local sur&ce water,
                                                                    but reinjection is an integral feature of Aitemative 4.
Altematives 3 and 4 would reduce the toxicity, mobility             A number of technical challenges, including wdl
or volume of the contaminants in groundwater through                fouling and shortoircuiting, are associated with
extraction and treatment (for Aitemative 3) or through              reintroducing water into an aquifer. These
enhanced bioremediation in conjunction with pump and                challenges can be managed but raise the level of
treat (for Aitemative 4). Altematives 3 and 4 offer a               involvement requured during operation and
comparable level of improvement in mobility and                     maintenance of the system.
toxicity reduction.
                                                                    7. Cost
5. Short-term Effectiveness
                                                                    Alternative                          .£fiSL
Altematives 3 and 4 have minimal impacts with respect                  1                                  $0
to the protection of workers, the community, and the                   2                                  $ 975,000
environment during remedial construction. Both the                     3                                  $5,400,000
active altematives involve long-term operation of                      4                                  $7,250,000
treatment facility at Uie site, tiiough die size of the
treatment works is expected to be minimal. Aitemative 4

                                                               10




                                                                                                         500082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 8. State/Support Agency Acceptance                              COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

The State of New Jersey is still evaluating EPA's                EPA provided information regarding the Cleanup of
preferred aitemative in this Proposed Plan.                      the Monitor Devices site to the public through
                                                                 public meetings, the Administrative Record file for
9. Community Acceptance                                          the sites, and announcements published in the
                                                                 Asbury Park Press Ledger newspaper. EPA
Community acceptamce of the preferred altematives will           encourages the public to gain a more comprehensive
be evaluated afier the public comment period ends and            understanding of the sites and the Superfimd
will be described in the Record of Decision, the                 activities that have been conducted there.
document that formalizes the selection of the remedy for
the site.

SUMMARY OF THE PREFERRED                                         For further information on the Monitor Devices site, please
                                                                 contact:
ALTERNATIVE
                                                                     Nigel Robinson                Natalie Loney
The Preferred Aitemative for cleanup of the                          Remedial Project              Community Relations
groundwater at the Morutor Devices site is Alternative               Manager                       Coordinator
4, Enhanced Bioremediation, hereafter refeired to as the             (212)637-4394                 (212)637-3639
Preferred Groundwater Aitemative.
                                                                                       U.S. EPA
This aitemative includes the imstellation of a                                 290 Broadway 19* Floor.
groundwater recirculation system (extraction and                            New York. New York 10007-1866
reinjection wells) in the area of the VOC plume, along
with a system for introducing biologic amendments into
                                                                   The public liaison for EPA's Region 2 is:
the subsurface to promote bioremediation. Treatability
studies would determine the best conditions either
                                                                                     George H. Zachos
aerobic or anaerobic, for successful bioremediation
                                                                                 ' Regional Public Liaison
within the aquifer. A monitoring program would be                                 Toll-free (888)283-7626
required to evaluate the progress of the remedy.                                      (732)321.6621

Because a number of years would be required before                                U.S. EPA Region 2
restoration of the groumdwater is achieved, the preferred                  2890 Woodbridge Avenue, MS-211
aitemative imcludes lomg-term monitorimg of the                             Edison, New Jersey 08837-3679
groumdwater to ensure that human health and the
environment are protected, and institotional controls,
such as a Classification Exception Area,- or well                The dates for the public comment period, the date, '
restrictions.                                                    location and time of the public meeting, and the
                                                                 locations of the Admimistrative Record files, are
The Preferred Aitemative is believed to provide the best         provided om the front page of this Proposed Plan.
balance of tradeoffs among the alternatives based on the         EPA Region 2 has designated a public liaison as a
information available to EPA at this timie. EPA believes         point-of-contact for the community concerns and
that the Preferred Aitemative would be protective of             questions about the federal Superfimd program in
human health and the environment would comply with               New York, New Jersey, Puerto Rico, and the U S .
ARARs, would be cost-effective, and would utilize                Virgin Islands. To support this effort, the Agency
permanent solutions and aitemative treatment                     has established a 24-bour, toll-free number that the
technologies to the maximum extent practicable. The              public can call to request infonnatioii, express their
selected aitemative can change in response to public             concerns, or register complaints about Superfund.
comment or new information.


                                                            11



                                                                                                             500083

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      TABLE - 1
                            CONTAMINANTS IN GROUNDWATER




 Contaminants                       Highest Concentration           Ground ivato* cleanup levels
                                    (Parts per billion)             (Parts per billion)*
 1,1-Dichloroetiiylenc (l.l-DCE)    470                             2     .
 1,2-Dichloroetiiane (1,2-DCA)      8.8                             2
 1,1,1-Trichloroetiiane (1,1,1-TCA) 210                             30
 1,1,2-Trichloroetiiane (1,1,2-TCA) 7.3                             3
 Tetrachloroetiiylene (PCH)         8.2                             1
 Trichloroetiiylene (TCE)           320                             1

* - New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Groimdwater Quality Criteria.




                                                 12




                                                                                      500084

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Ul
o
o
o
CO
in

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   /v"-\        •••-••• V " ' - ~ ^ ^ * ' ° ° ' ^ ^ ' - v        '^-     i                  -'(n     \




 '/




 _.        ..-•• « ' .   .,-^    i        W          I     •   iii! V       X-.- I-    *|UW4          2 :
  •'S'-4 Monitor Devicesi                            i          "^ ' ^          •^       ^             ^




                                                                                             ''-^:   ^ ^ ^ ' 0WM1   , ,




      (/                                •"••—?y^^K




      3.6       TCE Gononlntion In gtoundwXar Mm^a, n i u o t r t i m p*r Kar
                Nolc: In lome c n n t i t iuconcsntralian contoun do not honor Iho M l
                poMad beauM Bw Nffwe m t cmiad «ta apodlicolnalien ki
                ttw

      •       A^ipnudniato location of aMkig
              golf couiu pumiiing ixtia                                              A
              Appoalniala golf couna boundaiy
                                                                                                              I r;_;' •'^^v ^   /
      \
 E                                        3:             s:                  -^                  ="^=7                              •   "   ^




                                                                                                                                  Figure 2
/w* TCE Isoconcentration contour. 1 ugfl.            « Existing well locatiof»                      Potentiometric Surface artd TCE Data
V. V- l a lsoconcei«ration contour. 1 ufl/l Inferred ^ Monitoring Went. Installed In 2004            75 to 100 Foot Eievation. March 2004
/ V TCEisoconcentrationcontour, 10ugrt.                         '     *., « „ .                                       Monitor Devices Sits
/ • TCE Isocoocentration contour. 100 ug/L •                         ^     I^XTxAft^B^.-                       Wali Township, New Jersey
/ V Potentiomelrte Surface. March 8. 2004.75 to 100 fool eteveUon g | MSSOT D i w i w s ^
 • GWSI Phase I Groundwater Screeninfl Uocationt. 1997-1998          , v Topographic contour, dashed where obscured
                                                                                                                                                CDM

                                                                                                                                                500086

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ATTACHMENT 6

PUBLIC NOTICE




   Page 6
                500087

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                          •




                                                                                                                   ASBURY PARK f>ftESS WEDNESDAY, AUQ. 24, 2005




                                           ^ • ^ ' ° ""•"*.

                                                              \                                   AmerGen
                                         iSE •'« MRcn*'
                                                               S
                                                                                                        I=ROMPAQEAI :.

                                                                                              stated that the company stUl Visit our Web sitei
               EPA is hosting a Public Meeting for the                                        could have its application ac- w w w . a p p . c o m        '            »
                 Monitor Devices Superfund Site                                               cepted if it followed one of two
                                                                                              state proposes designed to drasti- and click on the Web Extras button
          The U S Eilvironmentat Protictitjtt Ageflcy wvitea yoU to atteAd a piAAXc meeting   cally reduce the number of ani- for a linl< to             , ,
          to discuss the Proposed Plan to address contiminat64gratih<l\va(er at the ^unitor   mal deaths.                              Nuclear HftHiulatdtY
          Devices Superiiitid site in Wall Township, New Jerssy'-'' . ^ \             '          According to a 1989 report Cowmlftston
                                                                                              funded by the plant wlien it was
          The tnfceting will be held at »hc Wall Pubhc Libnry at!                             owned by GPU Nuclear, the cool- for a page explalnin'g rtiliciew
                                           iVoo Allaire Road ^ \                              ing system Itilled bay anchovies, reactor oversight,'
                                       Wall Townnhlp, N«* M f i y \                           grass shrimp, W d d&ms and
                                     Oh Wednesday September tiSOOS                            blue crabs — species whose num- application. The company pro-
                                              atfiiOOPM                    %                  bers near the plant still concern vided the best available data and
                                                                                              state officials.                         continues to beltevie the plant
          To request a copy 6f the Proposed Mati ybu eWi,                                        The study Estimated/that 12 wo^id be tbneistent with thi^
          6-mail Natalie Loney> CoiftmunitV
                                  nftinunitVInvolv4rfien\'_
                                             Involv4rfien\ C                                  percent of Baraegat'Bay'S bay hrt;;, state's coastal protection polioifes,
                                       lontv.        *• ~ -
                                       lolitY'"''t''i'g'3tcfla.fo<^'     A i i,               chovy populatioh wks bfeliig he said. > •'                    r
          otcallNatarie:{212)637'-3639 ortoll-freil at i M - i i l $ < S 5 5' .               killed annually iri this c()Oliiig,^>S; ., fecologlcM ' studies commis-
                                                                                              tem. Thfe 12 pferfcent amouhted to ,8ioned by AmerGerf arer now 'Iw            'f.
          01; visit fiPA'S^tbVite.                                                            354,000 potods* t a t ^cdM sliriJttp,., pro|res8, Neslilt said. Results'fere
         http;//WwWiepa.gl)v/reglan02/aopeilaAd/np1/tnoM(tti'^dMe«sj)r6)»M*l2l>05.hHD'        also caUed'-^tad'^hfimp/lKe Sto,' ejnifected tOdUgment data already
               )                                                   I        s
          ThejmbU(i>(!on\«ient behod for this Proposed PUn ruhifrofliWMnesday Augu^
          24,200^tb Vmtif, September 23,2005. All4vtittincotnHi«n&i^hoMldbetSoittJa
                                                                                                                                                         no.           f
                          Niget Robinaon, I^emedlal Project Manager
                            Ut8. EnVlroaitiental Protecnon AgeMy
                                                                                                  ,Copliiigtower«.6v«.., ,     ytf.
                                                                                                                                                         'tf'We nee&''to'.1''^'
                                   290 Broadway, 19"" Flttdt                                    DepaimifeJlt>{5faciMflpotot^>tO;      I*I^A M r n      talk to the StatB , ',;
                                        NewVdrlt,NY                                           those figures last'M«in^>6i>aM'Y'inC V "                 and find W t
                                          10007-1866                                          tempt to coilvlnce AmerOfeni'ti;) ^'LufAt Iho            what they need ^^
                                                                                              build A (»olittg to^er. The toweY ^' " * ! ' " " ' "     team us," Nes-
          Otyoii can ismail y<swt comments to-                                                i^ a way the plant c6ViA obtain ntlClear                 bit,8aid. **» ffiat
                                         min»g)ii.n>gfl(gifflatt»V     ^                      the permit It needs to use two „i__»



88000S

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      ATTACHMENT C

PUBLIC MEETING TRANSCRIPT




         P^Se 7             500089

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

          1
1^    2       - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -                       -X
      3       IN RE:
              EPA MONITOR DEVICES SUPERFUND SITE
      4
              - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _                         _x
      5
      6               EPA Meeting, held at the Wall Public Library,
      7       2700 Allaire Road, Wall, New Jersey, on Wednesday,
      8       September 7, 2005, commencing at 6:10 p.m., before
      9       Jamie I. Moskowitz, GSR, RPR, CRR, a Certified
     10       Shorthand (Stenotype) Reporter and Notary Public

     11       within and for the State of New York.
     12
     13
     14
     15
     16
     17
     18
     19
     20
     21
     22
     23
     24
     25



                                             FINK & CARNEY
                                  REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
                     39 West 37th Street, 6th FlocMT. New York. N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500


                                                                                           500090

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 1
 2   A P P E A R A N C E S :                                                              J'
 3
            ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
 4             Community Involvement Coordinator
               Public Outreach Branch
 5             29 0 Broadway - 2 6th Floor
               New York, New York 10007
 6
            BY;      NATALIE LONEY
 7
 8   ALSO PRESENT:
 9   NIGEL ROBINSON, Remedial Project Manager
     JOHN PRINCE, Section Chief, Central NJ Remediation
10   JULIE M C P H E R S O N , Human Health Risk Assessor
     GRANT ANDERSON, Hydrogeologist
11
12
13
14
15
                                                                                          U
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25



                                     FINK & CARNEY
                         REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
            39 West 37th Street. 6th Floor, New York, N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500


                                                                                 500091

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     1
I    2                          MS. LONEY:            Good evening,
     3           everyone.           Thank you for coming to the
     4           public meeting for the Monitor Devices
     5           Superfund Site.                My name is Natalie
     6           Loney.         I'm the community involvement
     7           coordinator for the site, and with me
     8           today from EPA is Nigel Robinson.
     9                          Nigel is the remedia:l project
    10           manager from the site.                      We have John
    11           Prince who is the section chief for
    12           New Jersey.             I have Julie McPherson.
    13           Julie is a human health risk assessor.
    14           And next to Julie is Grant Anderson,
    15           also with us.               He is a hydrogeologist.
    16                          I'm just going to go over
    17           briefly where we are in terms of the
    18           work at the Monitor Devices Site.
    19           After my brief remarks, Nigel is going
    20           to come and talk about the site
    21          history and what's led up to the
    22          proposed remedy to address
    23          contamination at the site.
    24                         This rather wordy islide really
    25          is broken down into this continuum.



                                  FINK& CARNEY
                      REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
         39 West 37th Street. 6th Floor, New York, N.Y. 10018 (212) 869-1500


                                                                               500092

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     1
»    2            And these are the different steps in
                                                                                        ""TwH^


     3            the Superfund process from site
     4            discovery through ranking onto the NPL
     5            site, the remedial investigation and
     6            feasbility study where we look at the
     7           nature and extent of contamination at
     8            a Superfund site, and what are some of
     9            the feasible options for addressing
    10           contamination.               We're now at this
    11           phase.         We have come up with a
    12           proposed remedial action plan for the
    13           site.
    14                         We have a public meeting and
    15           glean comments from the public on                                      J
    16           EPA's proposed remedy.                     From this
    17           phase we move on to the record of
    18           decision where EPA memorializes our
    19           decision as to what the remedy to
    20           address the contamination at the site
    21          will be.
    22                         We then, from the rod, we go
    23          into the remedial design, and finally
    24          the operation and maintenance of the
    25          remedy, whatever is selected.                            So,



                                  FINK & CARNEY
                      REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
         39 West 37th Street, 6th Floor, New York, N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500


                                                                               500093

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 1
 2            this is relatively straightforward.                              I
 3           don't want to go into any great length
 4           of detail about it.. Just see where we
 5           are now.
 6                          So, I'm just going to let
 7           Nigel come .up to the podium, and talk
 8           to you about what's going on at
 9           monitor devices and where we are in
10           terms of ah action plan to address
11           conteunination.
12                         MR. ROBINSON:               Thanks,
13           Natalie.          I just have a presentation
14           here since I see only two outsiders
15           and the rest are linked to EPA in one
16           way or another.                I will try and make
17           it quick and whatever question and
18           answer session at the end.
19                         So, anyway this is just an •
20          aerial photograph of the site and the
21          area around it, and right along here
22          is Route 34, and then this is Hurley
23          Pond Road.            This is the Allaire
24          Airport, this is the runway and site
25          or the building where the



                              FINK & CARNEY
                  REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
     39 West 37th Street. 6th Floor, New York. N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500


                                                                          500094

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         1
»        2            contamination originated is referred
         3            to as Building 25, and that's right
         4            here.
         5                          And here is Air Cruiser right
         6            along Route 34, and then you have a
     7                golf —'• not a full golf course but a
     8                putting range right at the corner of
     9                Hurley Pond Road and Route 34.
    10                              Okay.        The site is two acres
    11                and it is located by the Allaire
    12               Airport in the industrial park
    13               section.          And it is located right at
    14               George and Edward Street-                        And we will
    15               keep referring to it as Building 25.
    16               It's operated from 1977 to 1980.
    17                              It basically manufactured and
    18               assembled printed circuit boards for
    19               the electronic industry.                       The circuit
    20               panels or the boards were plated with
    21               copper, lead, nickel, gold and tin.
    22              The effuent from the operation, which
    23              involved electrolysis and
    24              electroplating were unfortunately
    25              discharged to the outside of the



                                      FINK & CARNEY
                          REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
             39 West 37th Street, 6th Floor, New York. N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500


                                                                                  500095

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 1
 2           building, to the rear of the building,
 3           and that's what caused or originated
 4           the contamination at the site.
 5                         And based on investigation by
 6           New Jersey DEP, Monmouth County Health
 7           Department and other local
 8           authorities, we went through the whole
 9           process Natalie earlier referred to,
lb           and the site was eventually placed on
11           the national priority list in 1986.
12                         The folks who are not familiar
13          with the national priority list, it is
14           the list of Superfund sites, toxic
15          waste sites, the worst sites, the most
16           contaminated sites.                   We basically have
17           a list and they have different ranking
18          based on their toxicity.
19                         Okay.        We performed and we
20          have just completed remedial and --
21          remedial investigation and feasbility
22          study.         And during that process we
23          ended up doing groundwater screening
24          at 63 locations.                  Basically the
25          screening were to determine where you



                              FINK & CARNEY
                  REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
     39 West 37th Street. 6th Flow. New Yoik. N.Y. 10018 (212) 869-1500



                                                                          500096

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         1
         2            would find the most contaminated
         3            groundwater at the site.                      And in
         4            additiion to that we did surface -- we
         5            sampled for surface and subsurface
         6            soils.        We ended up installing 31
     7                monitoring wells.                 Altogether I think
     8                there are 47 wells at the site.
     9                              EPA installed 31, and the
    10                remaining monitoring wells were either
    11                installed by the property owner or by
    12               New Jersey DEP.                In all, we took six
    13               drums of groundwater samples to try to
    14               characterize the nature and extent of
    15               the contamination at the site.
    16                             Trying to —             this slide gives
    17               an indication, like a cross section if
    18               you're looking through -- through the
    19               earth, and this is Monitor Devices'
    20               site.       This is ground level, surface
    21               level, and then we have a layer of
    22               soil going from -- basically 80 to
    23              120 feet thick.                 This is referred to
    24              as the unconfirmed aquifer, and this
    25              is Kirkwood cohansey.                       And this is



I                                     HNK & CARNEY
                          REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
             39 West 37th Street, 6th Floor, New York, N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500


                                                                                  500097
                                                                                           r

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     1

I    2           where a lot of the wells are on the
     3           golf course they are located within
     4           this formation.                And then we have what
     5           we call aquitard, it's more like a
     6           confining layer.                 It's 25 to a hundred
     7           feet thick and then below it we have

     8           the Englishtown aquifer.                        This is an

     9           aquifer that the public water supply

    10           is obtained from within the area.

    11                         And within the area most
    12           businesses and most residents, they
    13           obtain their water supply from the


r   14
    15
                 municipality.              The closest public
                 supply well is located 4,700 feet
    16           just, a little bit short of a mile,
    17           along Route 34.                And as I mentioned
    18           earlier, it's a screened in the
    19           Englishtown aquifer, and we have
    20           sampled it, and it is shown -- and it
    21           shows no contamination.
    22                         And as I mentioned also, the
    23          golf course, this is located across
    24          Route 34, uses groundwater from the
    25          upper aquifer forfirrigating their own



                                 HNK & CARNEY
                      REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
         39 West 37th Street. 6th Floor, New York, N.Y. 10018 (212) 869-1500



                                                                               500098

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                        10
     1
     2            grounds.
     3                          The groundwater results from
     4            the sampling that we did shows eight
     5            volatile organics, refers to them as
     6            VOCs, that exceeded the site-specific
     7            screening criteria.                   Basically just
     8            exceeded the standard.                     We found very
     9            few semi-volatile organics, and we
    10            found no pesticides or PCBs.                           And we
    11            found seven inorganic compounds that
    12            exceeded the standard.                     And of these,
    13            three of them are directly attributed
    14           to the site and the operation that we
    15           placed there.
    16                          In analyzing the volatile
    17           organic compounds that we found, and
    18           this is what we came up with:
    19           Trichloroethylene, 1,1,
    20           2-trichloroethene., 1,
    21           1-dichlorethylene, 1, 2-dichlorethene
    22           and 1, 1, 1-trichloroethene.                            The
    23          biggest one is trichloroethylene,
    24          which we referred to as TCE, and it is
    25          in I will say larger quantity, and



»                                 HNK & CARNEY
                      REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
         39 West 37th Street, 6th Floor, New Yoric, N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500



                                                                               500099

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                            11
         1
r    2                it's the compound that we are most
     3                concerned with at the site.                          We came
     4                up with three organics, and they are
     5                chromium, hexavailent chromium,
     6                copper.
     7                              The groundwater results that I
     8                said earlier, we found that TCE was
     9                the most widely detected contaminant
    10               at the site, and then we found TCE in
    11               21 of the 47 monitoring wells that we
    12               sampled in 2004, last year.
    13                              TCE exceeded site-specific
    14               screening criteria of one part per
    15               billion in 13 of the wells.                           The
    16               highest concentration of TCE was
    17               detected in monitoring well 17A, and
    18               this was at 340 parts per billion.
    19'                             Okay.        We plotted the TCE
    20               plume and you see that later on a map.
    21               And it is basically 2,800 feet long
    22               and at its widest points there's
    23               1500 feet wide, and is ranges from
    24              40 feet below ground to 120 feet below
    25              ground.          And it's near Building 62C,



                                      FINK & CARNEY
                          REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
             39 West 37th Street, 6lh Floor. New Yrak, N.Y. 10018 (212) 869-1500


                                                                                   500100

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       12
     1
»    2            which I will also show you on the map.
     3            And it ranges from 45 to 7 0 feet in
     4            thickness.
     5                          Okay.        This is the map, and
     6            just referring again to that first
     7            photograph, this along here, this road
     8            here, this is Route 34.                     This is
     9           Hurley's Pond Road.                   Okay, this is the
    10            airport runway, and this is Monitor
    11           Devices Building 25.                    This is where
    12           the contamination originally occurred.
    13           And in here, just a little bit down
    14           right across from -- from Air Cruiser
    15           we have Building 62C.                     And this is the
    16           plume that we have plotted, the
    17           groundwater contamination.
    18                          And on the outer edge which is
    19           the green line, that is -- we have
    20           concentration of TCE of 1 part per
    21          billion.           If you move further in, the
    22          yellow line or mustard.line it has
    23          concentration of 10 parts per billion.
    24          And the red line has concentration of
    25          100 parts per billion.



»                                 FINK & CARNEY
                      REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
         39 West 37th Street. 6th Floor. New York, N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500

                                                                              500101

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       13
     1
I    2                          So, within this red area, this
     3            is where we have the highest
     4            concentration of TCE contamination.
     5                          This is another profile of the
     6            contamination, and here to draw a
     7           point of reference, this is the Route
     8           34 right here.               This is a golf course
     9           over here.            And right within this
    10           point again, this is where we have the
    11           highest level of concentration greater
    12           than a hundred PPB.                   Then on the outer
    13           one we go to ten PPB, and then the
    14           last one, one PPB.
    15                         And you see that here where
    16           the original Monitor Device's building
    17           is, and if you go right down here you
    18           will see that a contamination left
    19           this building's leach true to soil and
    20          work its way down.
    21                         We also believe that right
    22          around here. Building 62C, that that
    23          was also a source for some of the
    24          contamination that we have here.
    25                         The soil results that we did



                                  FINK & CARNEY
                      REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
         39 West 37th Street, 6th Hoor, New Yoric. N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500



                                                                              500102

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                            14
         1
»        2            at the site, the soil that we sampled,
         3            the result shows, that VOCs, the
     4                organic and the semi-volatile organic
     5                pesticides and PCBs were detected
     6                below a site-specific cleanup
     7                criterias or screening criteria.
     8                Arsenic was also detected above the
     9                site-specific soil screening criteria,
    10                but also detected in background
    11                samples.          And we do not believe that
    12                it is soil related.                   I think that
    13               arsenic is just a natural occurring
    14               element within this area.
    15                              Investigation that we have
    16               performed to date have shown or
    17               identified areas of soil contamination
    18               that pose -- identified areas of soil
    19               contamination that really doesn't pose
    20               a direct contact risk as a source to
    21               groundwater.              However, EPA and DEP are
    22               still going over the results, and we
    23              will determine at some point in the
    24              not too distant future in a matter of
    25              months, if the soil work that we have



                                      FINK & CARNEY
                          REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
             39 West 37th Street, 6th Floor, New Yoric, N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500


                                                                                   500103

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                        15
     1
     2             done there has been adequately
     3             characterized and we need to go back
     4            and look at different things.
     5                           In terms of the surface water
     6            and sediments, we also did some
 7                sampling there.                And we found that it
     8            is unlikeliy -- it is unlikely
 9                contaminants found in surface water
10                and sediment were a result of
11                contamination from the site.
12                              And there is also a little
13               patch, like a pond area right below
14                the end of the runway and that's the
15               surface water that we analyzed.                               And
16               we don't think that the groundwater
17               discharges directly into that surface
18               water body.
19                              We then looked at the
20               contaminant fates and transport.                              And
21               it's basically looking at how
22               contaminants move through soil and
23               through groundwater.                     And what we
24               found that the greatest potential for
25               transport of contaminants is by



                                  HNK & CARNEY
                      REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
         39 West 37th Street. 6th Floor. New Yoric. N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500



                                                                               500104

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                    16
 1
 2           groundwater migration.                      We found that
 3           surface drainage -- surface water and
 4           sediment transport, dust generation
 5           and air transport are not considereti
 6           significant transport mechanism for
 7           the contaminants that we found at the
 8           site.
 9                          We also found that the
10           chlorinated VOCs, such as TCE detected
11           in groundwater persists due to low
12           degradation.              Basically, it gets into
13           the water, it moves very slowly, and
14           it doesn't break down easily or
15           quickly.
16                          So, you will find that the
17           compound can be in the groundwater for
18           10, 15, 2 0 years.                  Okay?
19                          What we also looked at is if
20           there was any, say, biologic
21          degredation of these chlorinated
22          compound.            And we looked at anaerobic
23          reductive chlorination, and we found
24          that it is limited.                     And we found that .
25          aerobic degredation appeared to be



                              HNK & CARNEY
                  REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
     39 West 37th Street, 6th Roor, New Yoric, N.Y. 10018 (212) 869-1500



                                                                           500105
                                                                                         r

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                     17
     1
     2            insignificant in the groundwater.
     3                          And just to talk a little bit
     4            more on that.             At some Superfund
     5            sites, when you have groundwater
     6            contamination, we perform what you
 7                call - - w e look at natural
 8                attenuation, and basically what it is
 9                is to look at the contaminants,
10               analyze them, and see if they-are
11               breaking down into simpler compounds.
12                             If they are breaking down into
13               simpler compounds, then we look at the
14               risk that it poses to the community,
15               to monitoring wells, et cetera.                            And
16               if it doesn't pose much of a risk and
17               if the breakdown is quick, then we
18               might not need to spend, you know,
19               money to remediate it.
20                             And so, that's one of the
21               reasons why we looked at whether
22              aerobic or anaerobic degredation takes
23              place at the site in the groundwater.
24                             And then we looked at the risk
25              that contaminated groundwater poses.



                                  FINK & CARNEY
                      REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
         39 West 37th Street. 6th Floor. NewYcMk,N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500



                                                                            500106

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                            18
         1
    I    2            And here we looked at human health
         3            risk assessment, which was also
         4            performed as a part of this entire
         5            RIFS study.            And we found that the key
         6            contaminants were trichlorethylene, 1,
         7            1-diclorethylene and
         8            tetrachlorethylene.
         9                          We found that the use of
        10           groundwater at the site currently
        11           could pose a risk to site workers.
        12           And we also looked at the future use
        13           of the groundwater at the site, and it
        14           could also pose a risk to on-site
»
        15           workers, and, say, if a day care
        16           center was established at the site, it
        17           could pose a risk to the children
        18           there and to off-site residents.
        19                          Okay.        After looking at the
        20           risks, looking at the fate and
        21           transport of contaminants and
        22          groundwater, looking at all of the
        23          sampling, then we tried to come up
        24          with a preferred alternative.
        25                         And in looking at or in coming



                                     FINK & CARNEY
                          REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
             39 West 37th Street, 6th Floor. New Yoric. N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500


                                                                                   500107

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 108 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       19
   1-
   2             up with a preferred alternative to
   3             address the problem at the site, we
   4             look at how protective of human health
   5             and environment the alternatives are,
   6             and whether they comply with
   7             regulations, whether federal, state or
   8            local.         How consistent they are with
   9            the CERCLA and Superfund, and CERCLA
  10            and Superfund are basically the
  11            policies that we are mandated to go
  12            by.      And how easy these remedies are
 13             implemented, and how cost effective
 14             they are.
 15.                           So we basically came* up with
 16             four alternatives.                   Number one is a no
 17             action alternative.                    Nvimber two is
 18             institutional controls/long-term
 19             monitoring.             Number three would be a
 20             groundwater collection and treatment.
 21            And number four would be enhanced
 22             groundwater bioremediation.
• 23                           For alternative.one, which is
 24            a no action alternative, basically we
 25            evaluated to establish a baseline for



                                 FINK & CARNEY
                     REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
        39 West 37di Street, 6th Floor. New Yoric, N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500


                                                                              500108

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 109 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                   20
 1
 2            comparison with the other
 3            alternatives.              In this case EPA takes
 4            no action at the site to prevent
 5            exposure to contaminated groundwater.
 6                          Number two, alternative two,
 7           which is institutional
 8            control/long-term monitoring, we, in
 9            this case, we would implement what we
10           call a classification exemption area
11           to prevent future use of groundwater
12           within the boundary of the site.
13                         What this basically means is,
14           that through New Jersey DEP we would
15           define a certain area at the site or
16           around the site and put restrictions
17           within that area.                  So, it would be a
18           case where nobody could -- could
19           install a new portable well and get
20           exposed to contaminants from the
21          groundwater.
22                         And also for this alternative,
23          we would be sampling and analyzing
24          VOCs from all 47 existing monitoring
25          wells on site for -- 1, 4-dioxene from




                                                                                        r
                              FINK & CARNEY
                  REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
     39 West 37th Street, 6th Floor. New Yoric N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500


                                                                          500109

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 110 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         21
         1

r        2            10 wells and metals from three wells.
         3            Also, continuing with alternative two,
         4            the monitoring well data, we will use
     5                that to assess the migration and the
     6                attenuation of groundwater
     7                contamination over time, and plan for
     8                remedial action if required.
     9                             We would also review, do a
    10               review of site conditions every five
    11               years to determine if long-term
    12               monitoring should be discontinued.
    13               And in this case, the monitoring
    14               program would be performed over a
    IS               3 0-year period.
    16                             For alternative three, they
    17               extracted groundwater, would be
    18               extracting groundwater from five
    19               extraction wells to capture the ten
    20              part per billion plume.                      In all, we
    21              would be extracting the groundwater at
    22              the rate of 280-gallons per minute.
    23                             We would be treating the
    24              groundwater basically by these
    25              different processes, and then also the



                                      FINK & CARNEY
                          REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
             39 West 37th Street, 6th Floor, NewYcKk,N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500



                                                                                500110

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 111 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                   22
 1
 2            treated groundwater would be
 3            discharged either to surface water via
 4            the storm sewer, or it would be
 5            reinjected back into this, the ground.
 6            We would also do long-term monitoring
 7            and periodic site reviews.
 8                          We would also for alternative
 9            four now, this is what is called
10           enhanced groundwater bioremediation.
11           And basically what we found or what
12           has been happening at some of the
13           sites, is that the chlorinated solvent
14           can be degraded, as I mentioned
15           earlier, using both aerobic and
16           anaerobic process.                  The anaerobic
17           process reuses the chlorination, also
18           known as EAB.              And in this case this
19           process does not have any -- any
20           oxygen.         The aerobic process has
21           oxygen.
22                         Okay.        For the bioremediation
23          continued with it, it would be
24          implemented -- bioremediation to be
25          implemented will be based on the




                                                                                        r
                              HNK & CARNEY
                  REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
     39 West 37th Street, 6th Floor. New York, N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500


                                                                          500111

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 112 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                    23
 1
 2            outcome of bench scale treatability
 3            study, which would be performed during
 4            the remedial design.                    Implementation
 5            is similar for both technologies with
 6            the exception of actual amendments to
 7           be delivered to the subsurface.
 8                          This picture or slide gives an
 9            idea of what the aerobic process is.
10           TVnd as I mentioned, TCE is a main
11           contaminant there, and in this case
12           what we would be doing is adding
13           methane gas, we would be adding bugs,
14           such as -- which has enzymes, and the
15           reaction -- the reaction will take
16           place.        And in the end we would end up
17           with carbondioxide, water and
18           chloride.           And these are all nontoxic
19           materials.
20                         Okay.         Given that the
21           contaminants presented at the site are
22           chlorinated solvent, we found that EAB
23           is a viable alternative for
24          remediating these contaminants.
25          However, given that the aquifer is



                              FINK & CARNEY
                  REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
     39 West 37th Street. 6th Floor. New Yoric. N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500



                                                                           500112

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 113 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                            24
         1
         2            aerobic with low organic carbon,
         3            aerobic co-metal holism would be
         4            appropriate.
         5                           Bioremediation alternative
         6            includes both possibilities as a bench
     7                scale study will be conducted during
     8                the pre-design phase to determine the
     9                best approach.
    10                              Okay.        For all four
    11                alternatives these are the costs that
    12                are involved, and how long they would
    13               have to be performed.
    14                              For alternative one, we would
»
    15               be doing nothing, it would cost
    16               nothing, and the duration would be no
    17               t ime.
    18                              Alternative two, a total cost
    19               would have been $975,000.                          Alternative
    20               three, total cost would be 5,400,000
    21               and it will take 25 years.
    22               Alternative four which is the
    23               bioremediation, it would be 7,250,000

    24               and would last for 15 years.

    25                             Based on the proposed plan



                                      FINK & CARNEY
                          REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
             39 West 37di Street, 6th Floor. New Yoric. N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500


                                                                                   500113
                                                                                                 f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 114 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                               25
 1
 2           which we have in the back, our
 3           preferred alternative is the enhanced
 4           bioremediation.                It achieves the
 5           remediation objective within 15 years,
 6           achieves the most reduction in the
 7           toxicity due to the combination of
 8           ex-situ treatment and enhanced in-situ
 9           bioremediation.
10                         Long-term monitoring of the
11           groundwater will be implemented to
12           protect human health and the
13           environment, and institutional
14           controls will also be implemented.
15                         That's it in a nutshell, and
16           we are open for questions and answers.
17                         MS. LONEY:            We only ask that
18           if you are going to ask the question,
19           since this is a public meeting and we
20          are documenting the meeting, we ask
2i          that you just state your name for the
22          record.
23                         MS. FRENCH:             My name is Claire
24          French.          I'm the Monmouth County
25          clerk, and tonight I'm representing



                             FINK & CARNEY
                  REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
     39 West 37th Street, 6th Floor. New York, N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500


                                                                      500114

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 115 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                          26
     1
 2                the Water Resources Association for
 3                the County, that I'm a member of.                                In
 4                the '70s and '80s. I was mayor of Wall
 5                Township and very involved in Monitor
 6                Devices, and a great disappointment
 7                that it brought to our community.
 8                               At the same time I was on
 9                advisory board for the New Jersey
10               Water Supply Authority and our concern
11               was, of course, building the reservoir
12               in the vicinity, and did the
13                footprints or any future footprint
14               effect that -- we were satisfied that
15               it didn't.
16                              We were pleased at the time to
17               see that the footprint didn't                              —
18               didn't threaten any water supply,
19               since our well is a distance away.                                 I
20               think it's a mile, even though there's
21               a water tower that's much closer.                                 I
22               don't know if the water tower is
23               indicated on the map or not.
24                              There are a couple of
25               little -- just items that I noticed.



                                   FINK & CARNEY
                       REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
         39 West 3 7 * Street. 6th Floor. New Yoric. N.Y. 10018 (212) 869-1500
                                                                                               r"
                                                                                 500115

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 116 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                        27
     1
>    2           One is you have the reference Lakewood
     3           Industrial Park.                 I don't think
     4           there's anything up there called
     5           Lakewood Industrial Park, so I think
     6           you should correct that.                        I think at
     7           the time it was called Harris
     8           Industrial Park.                 Also Air Cruiser is
     9           now Zodiak.             Again, owned by a foreign
    10           company.
    11                          But one of the things that
    12           they use that company for is and they
    13           always have, they make portable
    14           hospitals canvas products, and used
    15           for emergency slides and rafts for the
    16           air industry, and they do have a
    17           big -- a big pool.
    18                          And what they do is if they --
    19           if they have a new raft to experiment
    20           with, that they pump water into it and
    21           then all the employees get to jump in
    22           the raft and make sure that their
    23           quality control is up to speed and
    24          nothing happens to the raft.
    25                          I only mention that because in



                                  FINK & CARNEY
                      REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
         39 West 37th Street, 6th Floor, New Yoric. N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500



                                                                               500116

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 117 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                            28
         1
»    2                looking at the footprint, you know, it
     3                looks like it takes that property in
     4                the -- in maybe the second level of
     5                contamination on the footprint, I'm
     6                not sure.           I don't know whether they
     7                will -- when they pump groundwater --
     8                or whether from a well, or whether
     9                they use city water.                    I wanted to
    10                raise that as a thought.
    11                              MR. ROBINSON:               I think they
    12               use city water, but we have a Air
    13               Cruiser representative here, or a
    14               Zodiak representative.
    15                              MR. MELNICK:              I'm Steve
    16               Melnick, M-e-1-n-i-c-k, and I work for
    17               Air Cruiser.              To answer that one
    18               question, that pool is only there --
    19               it was originally there for fire
    20               supression -- the pool was there for
    21               fire supression, and was there
    22               originally as part of the sprinkler
    23               system for the company.                       There was two
    24               130,000-gallon tanks that are still in
    25               there, empty, in the building, and



                                      FINK & CARNEY
                          REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
                                                                                                 J
             39 West 37th Street. 6th Floor. New Yoric. N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500


                                                                                   500117

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 118 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                        29
     1
I    2           that pool is obsolete, just so you
     3           know.        And we are on a city water
     4           system.
     5                          MS. FRENCH:             I thought tonight
     6           I might be speaking out on his behalf
     7           because, again, you did point out in
     8           your presentation, that in the area of
     9           the footprint possible contamination
    10           for workers on the ground, but we're
    11           well represented by Zodia tonight.
    12                          Also, I wanted to ask a
    13           question in the alternate number two.
    14           Does the 3 0-year period that you talk
    15           about start now, or was it implemented
    16           years ago?
    17                         MR. ROBINSON:                The 3 0-year
    18           period will start once we choose a
    19           remedy, do the -- once -- after the
    20           remedy has been chosen, designed and
    21           implemented.              So, it's going to start
    22           in the future, a year, two, three
    23          years down the road.                     Once it's
    24          implemented.
    25                         MS. FRENCH:             Also, you know.



                                  FINK & CARNEY
                      REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
         39 West 37th Street. 6th Floor. New Yoric, N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500


                                                                               500118

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 119 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           30
         1
I    2                the county has been considering and
     3                actually working toward purchasing the
     4                airport.         Since 1977, when the Monitor
     5                Devices was first discovered,
     6                Mr. Rahmani, the owner of the airport
     7                has done a lot of excavation on the
     8                airport site.             And if you have been up
     9                there you probably have noticed that.
    10               The whole runway has been -- actually
    11               I don't know how many feet I would
    12               guess at, but if you're ground level
    13               and a plane takes off it looks like
    14               underground.
    15                             Just a question, do you as
    16               representatives of the EPA, how often
    17               do you go to look at what is happening
    18               up there or what kind of changes that
    19               have taken place, that may or may not
    20               effect that footprint?
    21                             MR. ROBINSON:               Well, we, you
    22              know, our job is basically at this
    23              point is to characterize the
    24              contamination at the airport.                            And
    25              based on where we stand now, the



                                      FINK & CARNEY
                          REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
             39 West 37th Street, 6th Floor, New York. N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500
                                                                                                J
                                                                                  500119

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 120 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                               31
      1
I     2                contamination is not on the runway
      3                part of this, so we don't go over that
      4                side.
      5                              MS. FRENCH:              So even if that
      6                elevation is dropped considerably, it
      7   1            wouldn't effect the footprint; is that
      8               what you're saying?
      9                              MR. ROBINSON:               No, because we
    10                would be looking at the groundwater
    11                aquifer.           And we have background wells
    12                there, and it shows that the flow, the
    13                groundwater flow is towards the east,
    14                and not towards the runway.                           And I
    .15               don't know if Grant wants to talk a
    16                little bit more on that issue?
    17                               MR, ANDERSON:               Groundwater
    18                flow generally follows a subdued
    19                expression of the topography.                             So when
    20                the topography goes from high to low
    21-              you can generally assume that the
    22                groundwater flow below it goes from
    23               high to low as well.                      So the airport
    24               has been built up.                    The runways have
    25               been elevated, and where the runways



                                    HNK & CARNEY                                                    1
                           R E P O R T I N G A N D V I D E O SERVICES
              39 West 37th Street. 6th Floor. N e w Yoric. N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500



                                                                                      500120

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 121 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                     32
 1
 2           are elevated they will actually create
 3           groundwater flow directions away from
 4           that.
 5                          MS. FRENCH:             But the elevation
 6           of the runway is not built up -- the
 7           runway itself has been not built up,
 8           it has been mined' out.                      And while I
 9           understand your thought about the
10           elevations, certainly the aquifers
11           don't always follow that rule.
12                          MR. ANDERSON:               An unconfined
13           aquifer generally does follow that
14           rule.        And we -- it has been confirmed
15           at this site too.                   We have a lot of
16           groundwater flow information.                              And we
17           know to a high degree, certainly which
18           way the groundwater is flowing.                                And
19           it's generally flowing to the east
20           away from the airport runway.
21                          MS. FRENCH:             Which is good.
22          Again, my interest: is just as a
23          citizen to, since I still live in Wall

24          Township, and most of you that are

25          studying this and coming up with all



                              FINK & CARNEY
                  REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
     39 West 37th Street, 6th Floor. New Yoric. N.Y. 10018 (212) 869-1500


                                                                            500121

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 122 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                             33
         1
r        2            these alternative probably weren't
     3                born when this all started.                           Most of
     4                you.       I would like to also mention
     5                that I appreciate very much your
         6            analysis of the alternatives, and I am
     7                pleased with, you know, recommending
     8                alternatives.
     9                              And r am freezing.                    So, if you
    10                don't have any questions for me I'm
    11                going home where it's nice and warm.
    12               But again, I thank you so much for
    13                coming to town and having this hearing
    14               right here.              I'm disappointed that
    15               more people don't come, because this
    16               is very important.                    This is -- this is
    17.              a big story to Wall Township.                              The
    18               press should be covering this, and
    19               also recognizing the work that you're
    20               putting into the solution.                           So, thank
    21               you very much.
    22                              MR. ROBINSON:               Thank you.
    23                              MS. FRENCH:              And
    24               congratulations to all of you on your
    25              work on this project.



                                      HNK & CARNEY
                          REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
             39 West 37th Street, 6th FlocM-. New Yoric. N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500


                                                                                    500122

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 123 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                    34
 .1
 2                           MR. MELNICK:             I have a
 3             question for you.                 Do you know where
 4             you're going to put these wells in --
 5             the ejection and extraction wells?
 6                           MR. ROBINSON:              I will let Tom
 7             or Ali.
 8                           MR. RAHMANI:             We have primary
 9             location of those extraction and
10             ejection wells, which will be defined
11             during our investigation.
12                           MR. MELNICK:             I was just
13            curious to see if there --
14                           MR. RAHMANI:             It is shown on
15            one of the drawings in the FFS,
16            feasibility study -- report.
17                          MR. MELNICK:              My own question
18            is, I wanted to know how it was going
19            to effect us and our property; if
20            there's anything in the future that's
21            going to be on site for us that would
22            be a hinderance to our business as
23           well?
24                          MR. ROBINSON:               I don't —            I
25           think we have enough area there to put



                               HNK & CARNEY
                   REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
      39 West 37th Street. 6th Roor, New Yoric. N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500


                                                                           500123

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 124 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                          35
     1
     2   '             extraction and ejection wells. and I
     3                don't foresee us having to put any on
  4                   Zodiak' s property.
     5                              MR. MELNICK:             I know there
     6                have been existing wells there in the
 7                    past.
 8                                  MR. ROBINSON:             We have sampled
 9                    existing wells.
10                                 MR. MELNICK:              That was my only
11                   question.
12                                 MR. ROBINSON:               Thank you.
13                                 MS. LONEY:            Half of the public
14                   is gone , and the other half is on its
15                   way out           So I guess this ends the
16,                  public ]meeting unless, there is no
17                   unless,         Thank you for coming and good
.18                  night.
19                                  (Whereupon, the meeting
20                   concluded at 7:00 p.m.)
21
22
23
24
25



                                      HNK & CARNEY
                          REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
             39 West 37th Street, 6th Hoor. New Yoric N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500


                                                                                 500124

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 125 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                              36
     1
»    2                                  C E R T I F I C A T E

     3   STATE OF NEW YORK          )

     4                               ) ss.
     5   COIMTY OF NEW YORK )

     6                                  I, Jamie I. Moskowitz, a
     7                  Shorthand (Stenotype) Reporter and

     8                 Notary Public of the State of New

     9                  York, do hereby certify that the
    10                  foregoing Meeting, of the Monitor
    11                 Devices, taken at the time and place
    12                 aforesaid, is a true and correct
    13                  transcription of my shorthand notes.
    14                                  I further certify that I am
    15                 neither counsel for nor related to any
    16                 party to said action, nor in any way
    17                 interested in the result or outcome
    18                 thereof,
    19                                  IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have
    20                 hereunto set my hand this 12th day of
    21                 Septembe
                         sptembear 2005.                    .          i.
    22
    23                    ''Jamie Ilyse Moskowitz, CSR, RPR, CRR
                           License No. XI01658
    24
    25



                                        FINK & CARNEY
                             REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES                                          ^
                39 West 37th Street. 6th Hoor. New Yoric, N.Y. 10018 (212)869-1500



                                                                                     500125
