LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: RECORD OF DECISION, OPERABLE UNIT 1 - LIGHT NONAQUEOUS PHASE LIQUID SOURCE AREA, DIAMOND HEAD OIL REFINERY SITE, KEARNY TOWNSHIP, HUDSON COUNTY, NEW JERSEY
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/105100
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: db87d4b4b394bcd5f11f2252e7f3da20ce159f8fb11d97af45538d0b3d4baa28
Source PDF pages: 128
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          SDMS Document



                                                             105100
                        RECORD OF DECISION

Operable Unit 1 - Light Nonaqueous- Phas'e. Liquid. Source Area

              Diamond Head Oil Refinery Site,.       ./

         Kearny Township,-Hudson County,' New Jersey .




       United States Environmental Protection Agency

                          Region II          ':V .

                       September 2009 •




                                                             500001

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         DECLARATION STATEMENT

                          RECORD OF DECISION

SITE NAME AND LOCATION                           ,

Diamond Head Oil Sliperfund site (EPA ID# NJD092226000)
Kearny Township, Hudson County, New Jersey
Operable Unit 1 - Light Nonaqueous Phase Liquid Source Area

STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

This decision document presents the Selected Remedy for the
light nonaqueous phase liquid (LNAPL) source area located on- the
Diamond Head Oil Refinery site in Kearny, Hudson County, New
Jersey. The Selected Remedy was chosen in accordance with-the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act (CERCLA)/ as amended, and to the extent practicable, the
National. Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan
(NCP). This decision is based on the Administrative Record file
for the' site.

The State of New Jersey concurs with the Selected Remedy. .

ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE

The response actions selected in this Record of Decision (ROD)
are necessary to protect public health or welfare or the
environment from actual or threatened releases of hazardous
substances from the site into the environment.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY                     "

The response, action described in this document represents the
first phase,, or operable unit, for the site. It addresses .the
LNAPL source area, and is considered an Interim Action for the
site.

The Selected Remedy described in this document involves the
excavation of the LNAPL source areas, construction of an on-site
biocell for treatment of wastes, and off-site disposal of the
most highly contaminated areas within the excavated material.
Specifically, the major components of the selected response
action include:




                                                           500002

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  • Isolation of the remedial target area's with cut-off walls,
  1^ and excavatipn of,-the principal threat LNAPL areas, a total
   ^ of approximately 4 5,825 cubic yards of material;     ' '
         •-   ,   "   -   •   -   •   '   -   .   •   '   •   *      '   "   -




  • For the highly contaminated portion of the excav4ted
    material that is not amenable to on-site treatment,
    transportation and off-site disposal facility (with
    treatment as required to meet land disposal requirements);

      For the. lesser contaminated LNAPL material amenable to on-
      site treatment, construction of a biocell within the
      excavated area to facilitate biodegradation of the LNAPL
      wastes, including the installation of piping for air and
      nutrient distribution and a collection system for air and
      water that may accumulate in the biocell;

      Introduction of nutrients and bulking agents to the lesser
      contaminated LNAPL material to enhance permeability and the
      conditions for biological activity, followed by placemerit
      of this augmented LNAPL materia!! in tHer biocell for
      treatment and capping; and                         ^.

  • Operation of the aeration, nutrient distributipn, and water
    collection systems for the biocell for an estimated five-
    year period; and

  •   Performance sampling and final confirmation sampling to
      demonstrate that the LNAPL wastes have been destroyed
      through biological degradation, at which time the bipcell
      components will be dismantled.

DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

Part 1: Statutory Rec[uirements

This Interim Action is protective of human health and the
environment in the short term and is intended to provide
adequate protection until a final ROD is signed, complies with
those federal and)state requirements that are applicable or
relevant and appropriate for this limited-scope action, and is
cost-effective. Although this, interim action is not intended to
address fully the statutory mandate for peirmanence and treatment
to the maximum extent practicable,- this interim action does
utilize treatment and thus supports that statutory mandate.




                                                                  500003

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Part 2: Statutory Preference for Treatment

The Selected Remedy meets the statutory preference for the use
of remedies that involve treatment as a principal element.'

Part 3: Five-Year Review Requirements

(Subsequent actions' are planned to,address fully the threats : ,
posed by conditions at. this site. Because this-remedy will'
 result in hazardous substances remaining on site above health-
based levels, a- review will, be conducted to ensure that the
 remedy cbntinues;to provide adequate'protection of human health '
 and the environment within .five- years afte.r, commencement, of the
 remedial action.• Because this is an Interim' Action, review of
 this site and remedy will be ongoing as,EPA continues to develop
 remedial alternatives for the site.

ROD DATA CERTIFICATION CHECKLIST

The following information is included in the Decision ,Summary
section of this ROD. Additional information can be found in the
Administrative. Record file for, the site.

 •    Chemicals of concern and their respective concentrations
      may be found in the "Site Characteristics". section.

 •    Potential adverse effects associated with exposure to LNAPL
      may be found in the "Summary of Site Risks" section.

 •    A discussion of cleanup levels for chemicals of concern may
      be found in the "Remedial Action Objectives" section.
           /   '   •   •   •   -       ,        •   ,       '                               •   -   '   .    .   •   '




 •   ' A discussion of.principal threat waste is.contained in the
       "Principal Threat Waste" section,of this document.

 •    Current and reasonably-anticipated future land use
      assumptions are discussed in the "Current and Potential
      Future Site and Resource Uses" section.               . ...

 •   . A discussion of potential land use that will be available
      at the sites as a result of the Selected Remedy,is
      discuss.ed in the "Remedial' Action Objectives" section. ,
                                   -       '\       '   •       •   -   ,   ,   '   •   •




 •    Estimated capital, annual operation ..and maintenance (O&M),' .
      and total present worth costs are'discussed in the
      "Description of Alternatives" section.    ,    .  ~




                                                                                                            500004

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Key factors that-,led to selecting the remedy (i;e., how.the
     Selected Remedy provides the best balance of tradeoffs with
     respect to the balancing and modifying criteria,
     highlighting crite-ria key to the decisions) may be found in
     the "Comparative Analysis of Alternatives" and "Statutory
     Determinations" sections.'




Walter E. Mugdari, Director
Emergency and Remedial •
Response Division
EPA - Region 11'




                                                                    J




                                                          500005

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                     - D e c i s i o n S\iinmary

Operable Unit 1 - L i g h t Nonaqueous Phase L i q u i d Source Area
             -   '   '   .   '   .   '   :   '   '   .   '   .   -   '   .   -    "   "   .   •   '   '




                 Diamond Head Oil Refinery Site,                                                          : '

         Kearny Township, Hudson County, New Jersey




       United States Environmental Protection Agency

                                                                                 Region II

                                                                 September 2009




                                                                                                                500006

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                                PAGE

     SITE NAME, LOCATION AND BRIEF DESCRIPTION. .... .            3

     SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES............... 3

     HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION. .                .... .5

     SCOPE AND ROLE OF OPERABLE UNIT                             .5

     SUMMARY .OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS. ........... ..... .        6

     CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES..11

     SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS. ..............;.. ... ... .... ..... .11

     REMEDIAL ACTION ' OB JECTIVES                  . . .          . 13

     REMEDIATION GOALS. . ..... ... . . . . .V                         13

     DESCRIPTION OF ALTERNATIVES . .............-..'. .'. ....... 14

     COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES. ........             .18

     PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE                                      24

 '   SELECTED REMEDY. .;....                                    .24

     STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS          . . . . . .................. 26-

     DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES.                      .28

     APPENDICES

    APPENDIX I     FIGURES
' ' APPENDIX II    TABLES
    APPENDIX III  ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX
    APPENDIX IV    STATE LETTER
   . APPENDIX V  • RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY




                                                                       500007

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE NAME, LOCATION AND BRIEF DESCRIPTION
The Diamond Head Oil Refinery^ site, located at 1401 Harrison-
Avenue, ..Kearny,; New Jersey,- near .-the Hackensack Meadowlands, is
characterized by contamination from''a former waste oil'
reprocessing facility. Figure .1-shows the site's location. The
si.te is comprised of a 15-acre unoccupied parcel that includes
wetland areas- and drainage ditches', a small wetland/pond, a'
vegetated landfill area along the western border, arid the remnants
of the former Diamond Head Oil Refinery facility on-the eastern
portion of the site. The parcel is -bordered by Harrisori Avenue
(also called the Newark.Turnpike\ to the north, entrance ramp "M"
of Interstate 280 (1-280) to the east, 1-280 to the south, arid
Campbell Distribution Fouridry to the west.
                               /   .   -       .       -       •   •   -     •   -   ^   •




The larid use surrounding the site is industrial or open
space/wetlands; the nearest residential area is approximately a
half-mile bo the west. To the south,' a Municipal Sanitary
Landfill Authority (MSLA) landfill, identified as the,. 1-D
Landfill, is situated south of 1-280.
The'15-acre parcel is fenced. The prior site operations took
place on the eastern half of the parcel; the landfilled area was
once an access road to the 1-D Landfill, and a landfill mound
remains from those activities that rises 10 to 15 feet above the
rest of the site. Surface water drains through a drainage ditch
that eventually discharges to Frank's Creek, which in turn ,
discharges to the Passaic River.

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES
           f       •   "   :               •       -       '       •


 The oil reprocessing facility operated urider several company
'names, including PSG Resources, Inc., Ag-Met Oil Service, Inc.,
 and Newtown Refining Corporation, from 1946 tc early 1979. All of
 these companies' were owned by Mr. Rot)ert Mahler. During facility
 operations, multiple aboveground storage tanks and possibly
 subsurface pits; were used to store oily wastes. These wastes were
 intermittently discharged directly to adjacent properties.to the
 east and the wetland area on the south side of the site, creating
 an "Oil Lake."
In 1976, the New Jeirsey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
purchased several lots from PSC .Resources,. Inc., as part of its
plans for construction of 1-280. In 1977, NJDOT removed over
10 million gallons of oil and oil-contaminated liquid and over
230,000 cubic yards of oily sludge from the area pf the Oil Lake.




                                                                           500008

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The liquid wastes were, shipped to waste-oil recycling facilities.
The oil-contaminated sludges from the bottom of the Oil Lake were
excavated and placed in a series of disposal cells, one atop the
MSLA 1-D Landfill, and a series of smaller cells within the right-
of-way (ROW) to the highway, next to the then still-operating oil-
reprocessing facility. The details of these disposal efforts are
not well documented, but a_ simple liner and a clay-based capping
material were to be part of the disposal efforts for the sludges.
While the surficial Oil Lake was removed and filled, the NJDOT
also reported finding an "underground lake" of oil-contaminated -
groundwater extending from the eastern limits of the 1-280 right-
of-way to Frank's Creek, west of the site.
From the close of operations in 1979 until 1982, the abandoned
site was not completely fenced. In 1982, during the dismantling
of the oil reprocessing facility, approximately 7,500 gallons of
materials were apparently pumped out of the tanks and disposed off
site, and 27 tons of contaminated soil were reportedly removed
from the site. It was sampling'undertaken during this cleanup
effort that first identified hazardous substances, including
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in waste material collected from
the site. Aerial photographs from 1982 show that the oil
reprocessing facility infrastructure had been dismantled. The
buildings and facilities associated with previous site operations
were constructed on the eastern half of th!e site, and some remnant
concrete building and tank foundations remain. In 198 5, the
refinery property was sold to Mimi Urban Development Corporation,
which subsequently changed its name to Hudson Meadows Urban
Development Corporation.
The property sat idle for a number of years, at least in part
because of the, alleged contamination. EPA was asked by NJDEP to
evaluate the site for inclusion on the National Priorities List
(NPL) in 1999. The site was added to the NPL in September 2002.
In 2002, EPA began-a remedial investigation and feasibility study
(RI/FS) to determine the nature and extent of the problems posed
by the site. In addition to the LNAPL findings discussed below,
the RI found -soil, groundwater, arid sediment contamination
attributa:ble to the site. The RI also included a number of test
trenches through the landfill portion of the site to assess the
nature of the material buried there, and borings were collected
along the 1-280 ROW berms to confirm the presence of the buried
sludges. Site studies are ongoing; for example, new groundwater
monitoring wells were installed earlier in 2009. on a number of
neighboring properties to fully assess the extent of the
groundwater, pi^oblems posed by the site. Field investigations for,
the comprehensive remedial investigation of the site are expected




                                                           500009

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

to be complete in 2 010, at which time EPA can proceed with . , -^^
evaluating remedial alternatives for the entire site.    ,

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNI'TY PART'ICIPATldN

Since the Diamond Head'Oil Refirie'ry site's pi.acement on ,the NPL>
public interest in, the' site' Has been low."'^: On, July. 14, .''200,9/- EPA
released the Proposed Plan arid supporting documentation for. this
Interim Action remedy (OUl), to the public for comment. EPA made
these documents available „to'.the public in the administrative'- •
record, repositories maintained at' the EPA Region II of f ice.. (2,90
Broadway, New York, New York 100 07)', and the, Kearny .Public Library \
(-318 Kearny Avenue, Kearny, New Jersey ,07032) . - EPA published a
notice of availability involving these documents' in The Observer
Newspaper, and opened a public comment period on,the documents
from July 14, 2 009, to August 12,' '2009. • V            '
                                .   1   •                  -   ,   '   •   •   •   •   .   .   '




On July 22, 2009> EPA,held a public meeting at'the Kearny
Municipal Building, to inform local officials and interested
citizens about the Superfurid process, to'review the planned '
remedial activities at the Diamond Head Oil R,efinery. S;ite,. and to
respond to' any questions from area residents arid other attendees. '

Re^sponses to the comments r.eceived at the public meeting are -
included,in the Responsiveness Summary (see Appendix V ) .

SCOPE- AND ROLE OF OPERABLE UNIT            )

As with.many Superfund sites, the problems at ,the Diamond Head Oil
Refinery site are complex. EPA has organized the work into two
operable units (OUs):

Operable Unit 1:           LNAPL Source Area.

Operable Unit 2:           Comprehensive site remedy addressing
                           contaminated soil, sediments and
                           groundwater.

The first operable-uriit, the subject of this ROD, addresses soils
contaminated with high concentrations ,of LNAPL that- constitute, a
principal threat ("...source materials considered to be highly toxic
or highly mobile that generally cannot be reliably contained-or
would present a significant risk to human health or the        • ,-
environment should exposure occur"). This is considered an
Interim Action to address these principal threat wastes at the
site, and EPA expects to initiate this remedy while completing the.




                                                                               500010

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

RI/FS that will assess other contamination problems attributable
to the site.

The second operable unit is expected to address remaining
contamination problems for the site, including low-level threat
LNAPL ("... materials that generally can be reliably contained and
that would represent a low risk in the event of a release"), soil
contamination, sediments and groundwater, along with.addressirig
response actions required for the on-site landfill mounds. To
understand the difference between the principal threat LNAPL. to be
addressed in this actiori and the low level threat LNAPL to beV
addressed in 0U2, please refer to the "Nature and Extent of LNAPL
Source Material" Section on this ROD, below. This second operable
unit is expected to be the final response action for this site.

SUIOIARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS

Site Hydrology

The'nearest surface water body is Frank's Creek, and as a result
of 1-280's construction, all drainage on the, north side of the    •-'
highway now travels by coristructed drainage swale about '600 feet .
to the- creek, which in turn discharges to the Passaic River.
Prior to the 1940s, the area south of Harrison Avenue was wetland..
Landfilling activities that started in the 1940s began to shrink
and divide the wetland areas, and the Oil Lake, estimated in 1977
at between six-^and seven acres,, appears to have formed in a
remaining lowland area surrounded by properties filled for
industrial'development and, by what would become the MSLA 1-D
Landfill. With the, construction tof 1-280, including the placement
of the ROW berms, an isolated wetland, frequently ponded, remains
just south of the former Diamond Head Oil facility.

Two factors have a significant influence on the water table at the
site. The first is the presence of wetlands along the southern
site boundary that include areas of surface water, and the second
is the presence of an LNAPL plume in the southeast corner of the
site in the area of the former lagoon. Although lighter than
water, the density of the LNAPL has the effect of depressing the
water table'and influencing groundwater flow. Excepting these
areas, groundwater is first encountered at the site under
unconfined conditions at a depth of one to two feet below the
ground surface.




                                                            500011

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

site Hydrpgeology                           '

The stratigraphy at the site consists,-of a-relatively uniform
vertical sequence of unconsolidated materials as follows, from top
to bottom: ,      ;         ' .

• A highly variable (in cbntent and thickriess) layer of     -.
  anthropogenic fill across the site, consisting of typical
  demolition-type debris,, including wood, brick, metal, glass,
  plastic and concrete mixed in.a matrix of poorly sorted•fine to
  coarse sand and. gravel or silt, sand, and gravel.'

• A sand unit about, five feet,thick on the western side of the
   site and pinching out •until it is not present on the eastern '
   side of -the site. ,        <

• A silty clay unit, up to eight, feet--, thick in sections, of the
  site,-which appears to be continuous throughout the study area.

• A distinctive peat layer of^varying thickness but considered
  continuous,across the site.

• A silt arid sand unit approximately 15 to 20 feet thick beneath-
  the peat...

•   Laminated silt and clay unit, the full thickness of which was
    not observed in any of the study borings to date (as deep as 50
    feet).                                 -                    • "

•   Bedrock, which also has-not been encountered: to date, is
    reported tb be between 114 to 138 feet; below grade

Shallow groundwater flow direction above the silty clay and peat
layers is consistent;with surface water flow directions to the
south and west. In the, waterbearing unit below the peat,
groundwater flows from northeast to southwest, consistent with
regional trends in groundwater flow.

The ongoing RI 'studies will result in a more comprehensive
understanding of stratigraphy and groundwater.
Nature and Extent of LNAPL Source Material,
The RI studies to date have outlined two areas as potential' source
areas, where LNAPL may be continuing to release confamination to
the environment:       .




                                                            500012

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

•   the former oil reprocessing section of the site,, once containing
    two buildings, multiple aboveground storage tanks (ASTs), drum
    storage areas, and possibly underground'pits; and
•   remnants of the Oil Lake, estimated in 1977 to cover an area of
    six,to seven acres, located over the southern section of, the
    site and extending outside the site's,fenced boundaries to the ^
    east and south-                                               ,
Currently, in the oil processing section of'the site, only the
foundations of one building and two ASTs are visible. No remnants
of the Oil Lake are visible, but historical information,shows that
the lagoon occupied the southeastern section of the..site and
extended eastward. Figure 2 shows the boundary of the Oil Lake
compiled from historical aerials of the site.
There is evidence of oil contamination in nearly every boring
installed within the 15-acre fenced property and in many borings
to the southeast. Because of this "smear"? of oil contamination
across the site, the RI studies performed to date have used the
following methods to document the nature and extent, of the LNAPL,
and to identify the more severely contaminated areas of the site:
• A geotechnical measurement tool called laser-induced
  fluorescence (LIF) allowed for,the subsurface mapping of borings
  that contain LNAPL. LIF cari rapidly identify an oil
  "fingerprint," including both extent and relative concentration.
• , Soil borings were collected throughout the site downto >the
   laminated silt and sand unit> as much as 50 feet deep, and the
   presence of oil staining or separate-phase oil in the soil
   borings was documented. These results were compared with the .
   LIF sample points to calibrate the LIF data to site-specific
   conditions.              .'
• A number of monitoring wells, meant to measure groundwater
  contamination, have thicknesses of floating product in the tops
  of the wells, with as rriuch as five feet of LNAPL floating in
  some wells.
^« Samples of contaminated soil, oily wastes and sludges were
   collected and serit for laboratory analysis to identify potential
   contaminants of concern and to establish an analytical profile
  . of the LNAPL.                          '
Using these methods, several characteristics of the LNAPL were
established:




                                                            500013

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

•   The LIF study coricluded'that LNAPL .is present in .the subsurface
    throughout most of the investigated area, though the LIF showed
    wide variations in the intensity of the ,LNAPL. signal, indicating
    substantial variation in concentration across the site.

•   LNAPL was 'measured in wells in three areas' of the site, one iri
    the'former process area, and £wo, within the. fobtprint of the Oil
    Lake. These areas 'are identified on Figure, 2.                 •
•   The vertical occurrence of LNAPL can be further, separated into
    two,depth intervals: (1) at the water table (approximately two
    feet below ground surface), sometimes with an extended smear
    zone into^ the saturated fill-cbntairiing material and soil to
    about 10 feet below ground surface; and (2) as a distirict deeper
    interval at depths of 10 to 16 feet'below; ground .surface within
    the silty/clayey soil. The bulk of LNAPL-containing, soil-; is
    located near the water table withiri the fill layer.
•   LNAPL appears to contain more diesel range organics thari
    gasoline range orga:nics. ,,' The • following compounds or classes of
    compounds were detected in.the LNAPL: berizene, toluene,,
    ethyibenzene, and xylenes, as well as a:' number of other volatile
    and semivolatile'organic compounds (VOCs and SVOCs) consistent
    with a petroleum matrix. In addition, two PCBs (Arochlor^1232
^,. and Arochlor-1260) and a variety of metals, including lead and
    cyanide were also identified in LNAPL-zone samples.
•   Despite the large thickness of LNAPL found in some monitoring
    wells and its relatively high saturatiori, LNAPL is extremely
    viscous and is relatively immobile under ambient gradients.
    This, is indicative of a highly weathered LNAPL,. where much of
    the more mobile comporients of the site releases have degraded or
    already traveled away from the site, leaving the less mobile
    fractions.                     ,   i >
                                       (       •            •       V   •           •               •   -   -     •   '   :




      •   '   •   '   ,    '               '                    '   -       '   .       ,   '   •




•   Withiri LNAPL, there are piockets of less weathered LNAPL of high
    saturation that present a leaching concern tb groundwater.
    These are LNAPL areas that may be considered to present a risk,
    for leaching contaminants to groundwater.
                      -.       -   .               •   •(




Principal Threat Evaluation of LNAPL
Based on the LNAPL studies performed to date, portions of the
LNAPL are more mobile,' are likely to have a higher •-toxicity, and
are at a much greater concentration at the site. These high-level
wastes fjonri the "principal threat" posed by the site. Having
developed an understanding of .the nature and exterit of the LNAPL,


                                                            •9




                                                                                                                500014

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

the RI studies further identified characteristics for the
principal threat LNAPL, consistent with EPA guidance. :
EPA defines principal threat wastes as. "those source materials
considered to be highly toxic or^highly mobile,that generally
cannot be rei'liably contained or would present a significant risk
to human health or the environment should exposure occur. They
include liquids or other highly mobile materials (e.g., solvents)
or materials that have high concentrations of toxic compounds."
By contrast,"low-level threat wastes are defined as "those
materials that generally can be reliably contained and that would
represent a low risk in the event of a release. They include
materials that exhibit low toxicity, low mobility in the
environment, or are near health-based-levels."
                    ,   .   '   •   •                         •        (   \   •   •   •   •'




The following lines of evidence^based on site-specific data were
used to interpret whether the LNAPL source material at the Diamond
Head site represents a principal and/or a low level tlireat:
• Assessment of the presence of LNAPL iri the soil column through
  soil borings and interpretation of LIF '^results, placing
  particular emphasis ori LNAPL found at or near the ground surface
  and, therefore, posing a direct-conta,ct threat;
•     Comparison of LIF results to areas where LNAPL was visually
      observed in the pore spaces of soil cores collected from soil
      borings, and to groundwater data to'indicate where the highest
      mass of wastes were located, arid where those high-concentration •
      wastes were as'sociated with elevated groundwater concentrations;
      and
• Areas where a measureable thickness of LNAPL was found in
• I

  monitoring wells and piezometers during RI studies
Using these lines of evidence, LNAPL detected at the site was
separated Into areas where LNAPL material is considered to
represent a principal threat(,- and areas, where. LNAPL can be
considered to represent a lower-level threat, arid for which
appropriate measures will be considered during future feasibility
studies. Figure 2 shows the areas identified as a principal,
threat using these lines of evidence (shaded in orange). .The
total area is roughly 176,000 square feet. This area includes the
two areas of the site where monitoring wells contain measurable
thicknesses, of LNAPL (shaded in yellow). The thicknesses of the
principal threat LNAPL varies., Based; on. an average depth of seven
feet below ground surface, a volume of 45,825 cubic yards,
including 2,593 cubic yards where LNAPL floating product is found
in wells, constitutes the principal threat LNAPL (outlined in red
on Figure 2).    .
                                        .   1   0   •   •-•       ••




                                                                                                500015

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 A noncontiguous area within clovferleaf of 1-280 (also identified
 on Figure 2) appears to meet'Soraie of the characteristics of a
 principal threat as described in the FFS,'but it is not as near
 the surface, and grouridwater contamination is not as clearly .
 attributable to this area. This area-is not included within the
,definition of;a principal threat for this<Interim Action; further
 studies of this area will be carried out as part of the site-wide
R I . .   •,•-;,   .   '.   '•   "'.•",':   •:^'--    '.   •                      •   ,.   ^ \   ' v   •   ^




While further studies of'.the landfilled area of .('the site are
required, the history of site activities and the,test trenches
already installed support EPA's conclusion that the landfill is
not a,source of LNAPL. EPA. will further evaluate"the landfill as
part of the' site-wide RI. \
'CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES

Site Uses: The Site is abandoned arid fenced off. The site is
included within the Kearny Urban Enterprise Zone and is slated for
Commercial/retail redevelbpmlent.

Groundwater Uses: Groundwater underlying the site is considered by
New Jersey to be Class li^A, -a source of potable water. EPA has
identified groundwater contamination in shallow wells on and in
the vicinity of the site; however, EPA has not found any potable
wells or commercial production wells in the vicinity of the site.
A'more comprehensive^ understanding of grouridwater c'ontamination- -
problems is part of the origoing Rl/FS for the site. Residences and
businesses in the area are currently using a municipal water
supply.                    •

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS

The focus of this Interim Action is to address light nonaqueous
phase liquid (LNAPL) that constitutes a principal threat at the
site. The principal' threat LNAPL is physically similar to free
oil product. Oil products are toxic to ecological receptors arid
humans through direct contact, incidental ingestion, and
inhalation pathways. Potential exposure tb ecological receptors
and humans from the high-concentration LNAPL that is present at
the site could result in adverse health effects. It is,
therefore, important that steps be taken to reduce or eliminate
the volume of LNAPL present at the site. Reducing or eliminating
the LNAPL at the site would reduce potential exposure to free
product and is an important early step in managing the site risks;
however, it is not expected to. eliminate the overall risks and
hazards to ecological receptors or humans because of residual

                                                     -11       '   '..   '   ''



                                                                                                 500016

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

contamination that would remain on the site. This residual '
contamination will be addressed in subsequent actions .and will be
accompanied by full ecblogical and human health risk assessments.

For the Interim Action, the concentratiori of specific constituents
in the LNAPL were compared to human health and ecological
screening criteria to demonstrate that exposure to the LNAPL
exceeds EPA's acceptable cancer risk range for human health and
exceeds EPA's acceptable hazard index of 1 for human health and
ecological receptors (Tables 1 and 2 ) .

Human Health                                         ^    '
For human health, the tap water Regional Screening Levels (RSLs)
that were used for the carcinogenic end points correspond to a
target cancer risk of 10"^. The tap water RSLs that were used for
the nonearcinogenic end points correspond to a target hazard
quotient of 1. As shown in Table 1, a comparison of the data to
the RSLs, 34 of the 41 compounds exceed the cancer or non-cancer
screening criteria, bften by orders of magnitude. Therefore, use
of the LNAPL as a drinking water supply would result in human
health risks and hazards that exceed the upper-bound of the cancer
risk range and/or the acceptable hazard-index of 1.              '

Ecological    '
The evaluation for potential ecological impacts was completed by^
comparing LNAPL concentrations, to the ecological screening values
that were used in the draft Diamond Head Oil Preliminary
Ecological Risk Assessment performed as part of the RI^. As shown
in Table 2, the comparison of the LNAPL concentrations to the
ecological screening values indicates that all of the detected
organic chemicals exceeded available screening values. A more
limited number of inorganic chemicals (barium> chromium, copper,
lea.d, mercury, and vanadium) also exceeded their screening values.
These results suggest that LNAPL could have the potential to
adversely affect aquatic life if it should discharge to surface
water.

In addition to removing the potential exposure to LNAPL at the
site, reducing or eliminating the LNAPL would also limit its
potential migration, which would aid in investigating and
selecting a remedy for the remainder of the site.

''' New Jersey Guidance for Sediment Quality Evaluations and Water Quality
Criteria (NJDEP 1998) , US Department of^Energy Preliminary Remediation
Goals (PRGs): (USDOE 1997) ," EPA Region III Screening Levels (EPA, 1995),
EPA National Ambient Water Quality Criteria (EPA, 2002).

                               ' -• 12   .- ,           "-           ' ,



                                                                 500017

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Based upon the 'results of the site studies to 'date, as well as the
streamlined comparison of LNAPL concentrations to protective human
health ecological screening values, EPA has determined that actual
or threatened releases of.-hazardous substances from the site, if
not addressed by the Selected Remesdy br one: of the other 'active
measures considered, may preserit a current or potential threat to
human health and the environment.

REMEI)IAL ACTION OBJECTIVES

The following remedial action objectives (RAOs) for the principal ',
threat LNAPL wastes address the human health' risks and
enyirorimental concerns at the Diamond Head Oil site:

•   Remove or treat principal threats, consisterit with the NCP, to
    the extent practicable;
•   Prevent current and future migration of LNAPL and associated
    chemical contaminants to the various media at the site including
    groundwater and seeps to surface water; and
•   Prevent human exposure through direct contact with the.principal
    threat LNAPL.
The first two RAOs are intended to address the principal threat
LNAPL and the conta,mination that may be released from this
material. The third RAO is intended to address risks tb potential
future site workers/users as a result of exposures to this
material. '                                     ,
REMEDIATION GOALS
This proposed action would address the principal threat wastes
that have been identified to, date at the site, thereby addressing •
the most highly contaminated material tha;t, without early
attention, would result in ongoing contamination of currently
uncoritaminated areas. The RAOs would be achieved by attaining the
remediation goals of no measurable thickriess of LNAPL in,
monitoring wells, and no potential for LNAPL-contaminated soil to
leach oil and grease to grouridwater, as measured by a synthetic
precipitate leachate procedure (SPLP) or comparable test. Because
there are no Federal or State cleanup- staridards for LNAPL, EPA
established these remediation goals based upon the toxicity and
mobility and the principal threats to address this continuing
source.                -



                                  13


                                                           500018

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

DESCRIPTION OF ALTERNATIVES

CERCLA .requires that each remedial alternative be protective of
human health and the environment, be cost effective, comply with
other statutory laws, and utilize permanent solutions and
alternative treatmeht technologies and resource recovery
technologies to the maximum extent practicable. In addition, the
statute includes a preference for the use of treatment as a
principal element for the reduction of toxicity, mobility or
volume of hazardous substances. Remedial alternatives for the
Diamond Head Oil Refinery site are presented below.

The RAOs identified above are primarily focused o^n addressing the-
LNAPL mass and do not specifically address the co-located chemical
contamination in soil at the site. Some, though not all of this
chemical contamination is associated with LNAPL; therefore, by ;^
reducing the mass of LNAPL, the Interim Action would also reduce
some,of the co-located chemical contamination and^the unacceptable
risks to potential human and ecological receptors associated with
both the LNAPL and co-located chemical contamination at the site.

While the effects of the selected technologies on the co-located
chemical contamination cannot be quantified at this time, the
effectiveness of each alternative is presented in terms of LNAPL
source reduction and the technology's potential to reduce
concentrations of other chemicals present at the site.
The principal threat LNAPL to be addressed by this action
encompasses two areas (outlined in red in Figure 2 ) , and
identified in the FFS report as the "remedial target area." The
thickness of the principal threat LNAPL varies from between six
and 12 feet, and at its deepest, appears to have penetrated as
much as six inches into the silty/clay layer that underlies the
site. The total,volume of these areas was estimated in the FFS at
45,825 cubic yards.

The RI included several treatability studies of technologies that.
are commonly used for petroleum-based LNAPL: in-situ air sparging
and LNAPL pumping. For both technologies, the viscosity of the
LNAPL was an impediment to successful performance. Consequently,
neither of these technologies was carried forward in the FFS,
although the biodegradation treatment process at work'in air
sparging is present in Alternative 2.
Detailed descriptions Q £ the remedial alternatives can be found in
the FFS report.                 '


                                 14



                                                          500019

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 1: No Action                                                             •

Estimated Capital Cost:                                                                                                                                  . $0
Estimated Operation & Maintenance (p&M) Cost:                                                                                                              $0
Estimated Present Worth Cost:                                                                                                    ,•                        $0
                '   .   ,   .       .   .   .       •   ^        '       '   • - '   -   •    •   .          •




The ,Superfund program requires that the "no-action" alternative be
considered as a: baseline for comparison with the other
alternatives. The no further action alternative does not include
any. physical remedial measures (beyond-those response actions
already completed) that address the LNAPL contamination at the .
s i t e .   •                                           • ' • „ - ; • • ' • •                 .       .'''

                            '   •               .           '        '                                           '   '   '   •   •   •   •   •   •   :   •   •




Because this alternative would result in contaminants remaining on
site above health-based levels, CERCLA requires that the site be
reviewed every five years.. If justified by the reyiew, remedial
actions may be implemented to remove or treat the wastes.

Alternative 2: On-Site Biocell

Estimiated Capital Cost:                                                                                                         $16,080,000
Estimated Annual Biocell Operations Cost:                                                                                          . $207,000
Estimated 6&M Cost:                                                                                                                   .'   $0
Estimated Present Worth Cost:                                                                                                    $17,340,000
Construction^Time:                    ^                                                                                                1 Year
Remediation Time:        ,   :                                                                                                        5 Years,

Urider this alternative, the remedial target areas would be        , :
isolated with a sheet, pile wall, and the principal threat LNAPL
'areas excavated. Some-of this material, as discussed more fully
below,, would be removed for off-site disposal. The remaining
excavated material would be augmented with nutrients and bulking
agents to enhance permeability and the conditions for biological
activity. The area within the sheet pile walls would be converted
 into a biocell by installing piping to supply air and, distribute •
nutrient additives, along with a collection system for air and
water that may accumulate in the biocell. The. augmented LNAPL
material would then be- placed in the biocell for treatment, and
capped.                     '            •;

The b'iocell would require continued operation of the aeration,,
nutrient distribution, arid water collection systems, including
collecting and treating water accumulated in the biocell, and
maintenance of the cover, until the remediatiori goals are
achieved. The FFS describes performance sampling and final
confirmation sampling that would be required 'to demonstrate .that
the LNAPL wastes have been destroyed thrbugh iSiological
                                                                                             15



                                                                                                                                             500020

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

degradation, at which' time the biocell components would be
dismantled. The FFS estimates that the biocell would require five
years to achieve'the remediation goals.
Areas where a measureable layer of floating LNAPL product is found
in monitoring wells may not be amenable to treatment in the
biocell, or may extend the .time frame, required for treatment
beyond the. projected five-year time period. Under this
alternative, these areas,would be excavated and transported for
off-site disposal. These highly contaminated soils, and sludges may
need treatment via stabilization to allow for.transportation. The
quantity of material that would not be suitable, for the biocell
cannot be determined until the remedial design stage; for cost-
estimating purposes,, the FFS assumed, at a minimum, that the
floating product area, approximately 2,600 cubic yards of the
45,825 cubic yards within the remedial target areas, would be
disposed of in this fashion. Although additional treatability
work during the remedial design will refine the amount of material
to be shipped off site for disposal, the volume Could be much
larger than 2,600 cubic yards; the effectiveness of the process in
achieving cleanup goals within given time periods will be a major
factor in this determination. For example, removing a larger
volume of material for off-site disposal may reduce -the time to
meet cleanup goals arid enable more rapid reuse of' the site.
Because this alternative would result in contaminants remaining on
site above health-based levels,, CERCLA requires that the site be
reviewed every five years. A subsequent Record of Decision will
be required to make a 'final determination about the underlying
constituents that would remain within the treated soil. If . .
jxistified by the RI/FS, additional remedial actions may be-
implemented to remove or treat such wastes.

Alternative 3:   On-Site Soil Washing

Estimated Capital Cost:                                       $18,560,000
Estimated O&M Cost:   •                                                $0
Estimated Present Worth Cost:.               '                $18,560,000
Construction Time:                                    ,   ' •' •   i Year

Under this alternative,'' -the remedial target areas would be
isolated with a sheet pile wall, and the principal threat LNAPL
areas excavated. The excavated material would then be treated ori
site using soil washing. The excavated soils and LNAPL wastes
would be placed in a slurry reactor vessel and combined with a
washing fluid, a combination of water., surfactants and co-solvents
that would "wash" (desoirb or'dissolve) the LNAPL from the soil

                            .    '1 6   ''   '   •   •\




                                                                 500021

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

. particles. This technology requires'-a water treatment facility to
 treat the LNAPL and^ Gontam:inants of cbncern in -the wkshirig fl'riid
 so it,can be reused. The separated wastes from:soil washing would
 be, taken off site for further treatment and disposal. The treated
 soil material would be tested for compliance with the cleariup
 goals, and returned to the excavated areais.
 The FFS describes confirmatiori,samplirig required to demonstrate
 that the LNAPL wastes have been, rembved from the treated soils
 prior to returning the material to the,excavation. The FFS
 estimates that Soil washing could be implemerited in approximately
 one year. • ;                 ' ' .•
 As with Alternative 2, areas where floating LNAPL product is found
 may not be amenable to soil washing,.and this alternative assumes
 that these areas would be excavated, treated as necessary/ and
 transported for off-site disposal. For cost-estimating purposes,
 the FFS assumed that, at a minimum, the floating product area
 would be addressed in this ,fashion. '^ \
 Because this alternative would, result in contaminants remaining on
 site above health-based levels, CERCLA requires that the site be
 reviewed every five years. A subsequent Record bf Decision will
 be -required to make a final determination about the underlying
 constituents thab would remain within the treated soil. . If .
 justified by the RI/FS, additional remedial actions may be
 implemented to remove or treat such wastes.

 Alternative 4:    Excavation and Off-Site Treatment/Disposal

 Estimated Capital Cost:    : ,                                                                                                $19,i450,000
 Estimated 6&M Cost:                                                                                                                     $0
 Estimated Present Worth Cost:                                                                                                 $19,450,000.'
 Construction Time:                                                                        "                                         1 Year

 Under this:alternative, the remedial target areas would be
 isolated^with, a sheet pile wall, and the principal threat LNAPL
 areas excavated. : As with Alternatives 2 and 3, dewatering would
 be required prior to excavation, and the removed water would need
 to be treated prior to discharge. The excavated material would
 then be stabilized on site to allow for transportation for pff-
 site disposal. The excavated areas woul^ be backfilled with clean
 fill;,'                        • ' • -• '              ;         "       "           ./


 Sampling would be performed during the remedial design to
 delineate the extent of the remedial target areas, but no
 performance monitoring would be required. The FFS estimates that
 this alternative could be implemented in approximately one year,
           '   '       .-   •       "   ^   1   7   .       • ;       V       •   •    '   •   :   .   '   •   •   •   ,   -    ^   •     •   ;   .




                                                                                                                                        500022

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   -' (

Because this alternative would create a "clean island" in the
center of the site, the sheet pile wall would be left in place at
the end of the action: The excavated area would be graded to .-.
create a recharge area that would maintain a positive gradient
from within the'sheet piled areas to the outside tb prevent
recdntamination of the area by other contaminants of concern.
This alternative would not result in contaminant's ^remaining' withiri
the remedial target areas above health-based levels, as any
uriderlying constituents within the excavated area would also be
removed; however, because this alternative would result in'
contaminants remaining on site above health-based l^eveIs, CERCLA
requires that the. site be reviewed every five years. A subsequent
Record of Decision will still be required to make' a final
determination about the need for five-year reviews for other areas
of the site.     .                        . ,

COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES
       •   .   ,                         '   •   '           •       '       '                 '      •      -   '




In selecting a remedy, EPA considered the factors set out in.
CERCLA §121, 42 U.S.C. §9621, by conducting a detailed analysis of
the viable remedial response measures pursuant to the NCP, 4 0 CFR
§300.430(e)(9) and OSWER Directive 9355.3-01. The'detailed
analysis consisted of an assessment of the individual response
measure against each of nine evaluation criteria and, a comparative
analysis focusing upon the relative performance of each response
measure against the criteria.
__I                 ' — .   ,   .   ••       -       J   -   :   _       .       ,   '.   —   • • \


Threshold Criteria - The f i r s t two c r i t e r i a are known as "threshold
c r i t e r i a " because they are the minimum requirements that each        '
response measure must.meet in order to be eligible for selection
as a remedy.


1.    Overall Protection of H\aman Health and the Environment
Overall protection of .human health and the environment addresses
whether each alternative provides adequate protection of human
health and the environment and describes how risks posed through
each exposure pathway are. eliminated, reduced, or controlled,
through treatment, engineering controls, and/or institutional
controls.            ,        •<

Given the limited scope of this action, the remedial^ action
objectives only consider protectlveness of actions to address the
principal threat LNAPL,, Site-wide protectlveness will be
considered in a subsequent decision document. The no action
alternative is not considered protective because it does nothing
                                 1-8



                                                                                                          500023

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 to mitigate the LNAPL as,a coritinuirig source of cbntamiriatiori or ,
 as'a, direct contact t^hreat/. .;-.:   /•        -

 Alterriative 1, the "No Action" alternative, is not protective of
 human .health ,and the environment. The retnaiinirig alterriatiyes are
. corisidered, protective, because they remove the LNApL through
 treatment or off-site dispbsal.,/. ^                  '

  2. Compliance with applicable or relevant and\appropriate
  requirements (ARARs)        -
  Section X21(d) ofCERfLAandNCP.§300.430(f)(l)(ii)(B) r e q u i r e that
• remedial a c t i o n s a t CERCLA s i t e s a t l e a s t a t t a i n l e g a l l y
  a p p l i c a b l e : or_ r e l e v a n t and a p p r o p r i a t e Federal and S t a t e
  requirements, standards, criteria", and l i m i t a t i o n s which a:re
   c p l l ^ c t i v e l y r e f e r r e d to as "ARARs, " unless such ARARs are: 'waived
   under CERCLA s e c t i o n 121(d)(4). Applicable requirements are those
   cleanup 'standards, .standards of c o n t r o l , and o t h e r s u b s t a n t i v e
  requirements, . c r i t e r i a , or l i m i t a t i o n s promulgated under Federal
   environmental o r State environmental or f a c i l i t y s i t i n g laws that
   s p e c i f i c a l l y address^ a hazardous substance, pollutant,^
   contaminant, remedial a c t i o n , ^location, or o t h e r circumstance
   found, at a CERCLA s i t e . Only those S t a t e standards that are
   i d e n t i f i e d - b y a s t a t e in a timely manner and that are more
  s t r i n g e n t than FederaTi requirements may be a p p l i c a b l e . Relevant
  and a p p r o p r i a t e requirements are those cleanup standards,
  standards of c o n t r o l , and o t h e r s u b s t a n t i v e requirements,
  c r i t e r i a , or l i m i t a t i o n s promulgated under Federal environmental
  or S t a t e environmental or f a c i l i t y s i t i n g laws t h a t , while not
 ,:" a p p l i c a b l e " t o a hazardous substance, p o l l u t a n t , contaminant,
, remedia.1 a c t i o n , l o c a t i o n , or o t h e r circumstance a t a CERCLA s i t e
  address problems or s i t u a t i o n s s u f f i c i e n t l y s i m i l a r to those ,
  encountered at the CERCLA s i t e that t h e i r use i s w e l l - s u i t e d to ,
   the p a r t i c u l a r s i t e . Only those S t a t e standards t h a t are
   i d e n t i f i e d in a timely manner and are more s t r i n g e n t than Federal
  requirements may be r e l e v a n t and a p p r o p r i a t e .              • ^
  Compliance with ARARs addresses whether a remedy will'nieet a l l of
  the a p p l i c a b l e or r e l e v a n t and appropriate requirements of other
  Federal and S t a t e environmental s t a t u t e s or provides a b a s i s for
  an invoking waiver.
 Alterriative 1 does not comply with ARARs. Alternatives 2, 3'and 4
 are expected to satisfy applicable or relevant and appropriate
 requirements (ARARs) that pertain,to the priricipal threat LNAPL
 and comply with the substantive requirements of the applicable,
 laws and regulations. EPA has developed site-specific remediation,
 goals that are consistent with the expectations of the New Jersey
     " • , " : ' - .                        . 1 9   •                                   1 -




                                                                               500024

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Technical Requirements for the remediation of free product
(N.J.A.C 7:26E-1);. The Resource Conservation and. Recovery Act
(RCRA), 40 CFR 261, is applicable for assessing the disposal
requirements of potentially hazardous solid wastes, such as the
LNAPL-contaminated soils. Based upon the available documentation,
EPA has concluded that the LNAPL wastes are not listed hazardous
waste, nor''do they exhibit hazardous characteristics; therefore,
they are not expected to require treatment to meet RCRA'Land
Disposal Restrictions.

It should be noted that the active alternatives require the
disturbance of the on-site wetlands. Restoration of the wetlarids,
is not included in these alternatives, as a significant full-scale
remediation effort is expected to follow this Interim Action.
Therefore, wetland restoration will need to be considered as part
of the overall remedial action for the site.


 Primary Balancing C r i t e r i a - The next f i v e c r i t e r i a , c r i t e r i a 3
 through 7, are known as "primary balancing c r i t e r i a " .                These
[ c r i t e r i a a r e f a c t o r s with which t r a d e o f f s between response
 measures are assessed so t h a t the b e s t option will be chosen,
 given s i t e - s p e c i f i c data and c o n d i t i o n s .

3.    Long-term effectiveness and permanence                   y
A s i m i l a r degree of long-term e f f e c t i v e n e s s and permanence r e f e r s
to expected r e s i d u a l r i s k and the a b i l i t y of a remedy to maintain
r e l i a b l e p r o t e c t i o n of human h e a l t h and. the environment over time,
once clean-up l e v e l s have been met. This c r i t e r i o n includes the
c o n s i d e r a t i o n of r e s i d u a l r i s k that will remain o n - s i t e following
remediation and the adequacy and r e l i a b i l i t y of c o n t r o l s .
The No Action alterriative offers no long-terth effectiveness or
permanence. For Alternatives 2 arid 3, the potential risks,from
the principal threat LNAPL would be reduced, although both
alternatives can be expected to leave some- residual LNAPL in the
remedial target areas'. Alternative 4 eliminates principal threat
LNAPL within the.remedial target areas.. As discussed earlier,
this action only addresses LNAPL that is considered a principal
threat; under all the active alternatives, lower-level threat
LNAPL would remain on other areas of the site.
Other than water from biocell dewatering during operation, no
treatment residuals are expected from Alternative 2. Treatment
residuals, in addition to water from dewatering, are expected frbm
Alternative 3; the concentrations of principal threat LNAPL and

                         '                    20



                                                                                 500025

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

associated .contaminants are expected tc be high in these residuals
(e.g., filter cake arid'blo.wdown water from soil washing) . The
residuals from Alternative 3 are assumed to require off-site
treatment and disposal.; There are rib'treatment residuals for
Alterriative 4, as this alternative Irivolves the excavation and
off-site disposal of-all the waste.                    .••'••.".
For Alterriatives 2 and 3, ,at the,,end of the implementation period,
an isolation barrier,would not be needed around,the treated soil,
as the treated soil is expected to be, of similar characteristics
to the surrounding soil, including, some residual L N A P L and some
underlying coristituerits that would not be treated.
Under*" Alternative: 4, ari i'sblation barrier arourid the perimeter of
the remedial target areas would need to be maintained between the .
new backfill and- the syrrouriding soil. This isolation barrier
would be needed as the remediated area is expected to contain no
LNAPL and no other contaminants compared to the surrounding soil.
The surface would need to be graded,to drain clean surface water
toward reitiediateid sbil such that there is a slight positive
gradient from within the remedial target areas to the outside.
Thus,.- while Alterriative 4 provides more long-term-permanence by
addressing all the LNAPL and all the.underlying constituents not
treated by Alternatives 2 and 3\ it-achieves a level of
remediation - a "clean island" in the middle of still-contaminated
soils - that reijuires more rigorous efforts to maintain.         ~ '
4.   Reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume            .
Reduction of t o x i c i t y , mobility, or volume through treatment
r e f e r s to the a n t i c i p a t e d performance of %he treatment
technologies t h a t may be included as p a r t of a remedy.
Alternative 1 provides'no reduction in toxicity, mobility or
volume-. Alternatives 2 and 3 would reduce the toxicity, mobility
and volume of the contaminants in the remedial target areas
through treatment. For ,Alternatives 2 and 3, the treatment is
permanent.
Alternative 4 does not use treatment - rather, the toxicity and
volume are transferred from the site through off-site disposal.                    •
However, the removed v/ateir would need to be treated prior to
discharge, and the excavated material would then be stabilized
on site to allow for transportation for off-site disposal.

5.   Short-Term Effectiveness
Short-term e f f e c t i v e n e s s addresses the p e r i o d of time needed to
implement the remedy and any adverse impacts that may be posed to

                                     ',-^21 '



                                                                       500026

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

workers, the community and the.environment during c o n s t r u c t i o n and
operation of the remedy u n t i l cleanup l e v e l s are achieved.
There are no short-term effectiveness, issues associated with the
No Action alternative. Alternatives 2, 3 and 4 involve
excavation, and would therefore present some short-term risks to
the community (dust, emissions, soil erosion); however, these
risks can be controlled through engirieering controls such as soil
erosion controls, dust suppressants, andthe iraLplementation of
spill prevention and response procedures. Risks to workers during,
implementation also can be controlled through standard health and
safety procedures and the use of personal protection. As noted
earlier, there are no residences within half a mile of the site.
Short-term concerns would relate tb any potential adverse impacts
to industrial and commerciail neighbors. Given the setting, these
effects should be very minimal.                                    '
Short-term'risks associated with Alternative 4 would be the
greatest because of its larger transportation component (both
contaminated soil and clean backfill need to be transported from ,
and to the site). The short-term risks are expected to be the
lowest for the biocell construction and operation.
 This Interim Action will be the first of several remedial actions
 for the site; therefore, one short-term consideration would be
 whether this action delays or otherwise limits future remedial
"decision-making. Alternative 2 appears to pose the highest
 likelihood of influencing future remedial planning because of its
 longer operational phase. The biocell'may also take additional
 time, beyond the projected five years in the FFS, to reach the
 remediation goals, and a longer time period may interfere with .
 other remedial planning or with the timely reuse of the property.
As discussed above, under Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence,
Alternative 4 poses the plausible scenario of a "clean islarid"
within an area with a long history of industrial use, where a .,
 future remedy may need to choose to either to maintain this
 cleaner zone at high expense, or allow it to be recontaminated.
6.    Implementability
Implementability- addresses the t e c h n i c a l and a d m i n i s t r a t i v e
f e a s i b i l i t y of a remedy from design through c o n s t r u c t i o n and
operation. Fa.ctors such as a v a i l a b i l i t y of s e r v i c e s and
m a t e r i a l s , a d m i n i s t r a t i v e f e a s i b i l i t y , and coordination with o t h e r
governmental e n t i t i e s are a l s o considered.
There are,no implementability issues associated with the No Action
alternative. Alternatives 2, 3 and 4 are considered implementable
from a constructability perspective. Possible challenges common to
                                 22    ..      . -



                                                                                          500027

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

all three, alternatives include the difficulty bf-insta;lling, sheet
piles in clayey soils, "excavation -dewatering and water treatment,
phasirig cell construction, and uncertainties in the depth ,to and
variability of the native clay layer.
Because of the complexities of the equipment and process,•the soil
washing technology is expected to have a higher potential for
delays associated with equipment problems. Portions of the
principal threat LNAPL soils are clays and oily wastes^that will
pose significant materials handling challenges; therefore,
preparation of material for placement in the.biocell and for the
feed to the soil washing process is critical for both
alternatives, although probably more,so for the soil washing^-
process. As described in Alternatives 2 and 3, the most highly
concentrated areas of the site, where floa^ting product is found,
cannot likely be treated through either the biocell or through
soil washing, and would need to be transported off site for
disposal.
Equipment and specialists are commercially,available and
sufficiently proven for all three alternatives, although fewer
vendors are available for competitive bidding for the soil washing
technology.
None of the alternatives present any administrative challenges.
Alternative 2 would require operation over a longer period (five
years of operation are estimated) than,Alternatives 3 arid 4. The
remedial activities, needed for this alternative duririg the five-
year operations period are routine, and failure of a component of
the alternative is not expected to result in ariy significant V
threats to public health or the environment.
7.   Cost
Includes estimated c a p i t a l and OSM c o s t s , and net p r e s e n t worth
value of c a p i t a l and OScM c o s t s .
The estimated present worth costs of Alternatives 2, 3 and 4 are
$1'^.3 million,. $18.4 million and^$19.,5 million, respectively.
There are no costs associated with Alternative 1.

Modifying C r i t e r i a - The f i n a l two evaluation c r i t e r i a , c r i t e r i a 8
and 9, are called;"modifying c r i t e r i a " because new information or
comments from, the s t a t e ^ o r the community on the Proposed Plan may
modify the p r e f e r r e d response measure or cause another response
measure to be considered.


                                             23



                                                                                500028

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

8. State acceptance
Jndicates whether based on i t s review of the RI/FS r e p o r t s and the
Proposed Plan, the s t a t e s u p p o r t s , opposes, and/or has i d e n t i f i e d
any r e s e r v a t i o n s with the s e l e c t e d response measure.
                                      .   -   •    •   r   '   .   .   -   •   '   •   •   .   .



The State of New Jersey concurs with EPA's Selected Remedy in this
Record of Decision.                                        ,    •:

91 Community acceptance
Summarizes the p u b l i c ' s general response to the response measures
d e s c r i b e d i n the Proposed Plan and the RI/FS r e p o r t s .          This
assessment i n c l u d e s determining which of the response measures the
community s u p p o r t s , opposes, a n d / o r has r e s e r v a t i o n s about, N

EPA solicited input from the community on the remedial response
measures proposed for the site. Oral comments were recorded from
attendees of the public meeting. No written comments were
received. Appendix V, The Responsiveness Summary, addresses all
the comments received.

PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE

Contaminants to be addressed by this ROD have been identified as '
"principal threat.wastes" for reasons described in the "Site
Characteristics" section, above.

SELECTED REMEDY

Based upon consideration of the results of the site investigation,
the requirements of CERCLA, the detailed'analysis of the response
measures, and public comments, EPA has determined that Alternative
2, On-site Biocell, satisfies the requirements of CERCLA §121 and
the NCP's nine evaluation criteria for remedial alternatives, 40
CFR §3 00.43 0(e)(9) .             - •

The, Selected Remedy described in this document involves the
excavation of the LNAPL source areas, and construction of an on-
site biocell for treatment of wastes, coupled with off-site
disposal,of the most highly contaminated areas of the excavated
material.                           . v           •

The major components of the selected response measure include:

•     Isolation of the remedial target areas with cut-off walls,
      and excavation of the principal threat LNAPL areas, a total
      of approximately 45,825 cubic yards of material;

                                              24



                                                                                   500029

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

•               For the highly contaminated-portion of the excavated material
                that is not amenable t.o on-site treatment, transportation arid
                off-site disposal facility ~:(with treatmerit as required to
                meet land disposal requirements);                        , v

•               For the lesser contaminated LNAPL material amenable to on-
                site treatment, construction of a biocell within the
                excavated area to. facilitate^biodegradation of the LNAPL i ,
                wastes, including the installation of piping'for air and
                nutrient distribution and a collection system for air and
                water that may accumulate in the biocell;
                                .           '           , ' .   ^   •   .           '   .       .   -   '       .   '   •       '           '   •   - '   •   ' ,               "           '   '       '   '   " " ^




•               Introductiori of nutrients and bulking agents to the lesser -
                contaminated LNAPL material to enhance permeability and the
                conditions for biological activity, followed by placement of
                this augmented LNAPL.material in the biocell for treatment
                and capping; arid

•               Operation of the-aeration, nutrient distribution, and water
                collection systems for the biocell for an estimated five-year
                period; and

•               Performance sampling and final confirmation sampling to •
                demonstrate that the LNAPL wastes have been destroyed through
                biological degradation, at which time the biocell. components
                will be dismantled. . ,      3

The Selected ^Remedy was chosen over other alternatives because it'
is expected to achieve substantial and long-term risk reduction
through on-site bioremediation, and is expected to be consistent
with the reasonably anticipated future land use, which is
commercial/retail. The Selected Remedy reduces the risk within a
reasonable time frame, -at a cost comparable to other alternatives
and is reliable' over the lorig term.
.   .   ,   .   -   '   ,   .       .   •   (   ,   .               '       •   -           •               •               -       ,   .                     '     '   -   •       •   ,   '       •   '




The Selected Remedy will achieve the remediationgoals that are
protective for the principal threat LNAPL, but a subsequent
decision is still necessairy to address the underlying constituents
withiri this material. Thus, the need for institutional controls,
such as a deed notice or covenant, would be determined as part of
a future remedy.     ,

Consistent with EPA Region 2's Clean and Green Policy, EPA will
evaluate the use of sustainable technologies and practices with
respect to any remedial alternative selected for the site.


                                                                                                                                    25



                                                                                                                                                                                                                    500030

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS
As was previously noted, CERCLA § 121(b)(1) mandates that a
remedial action must be protective of human health and the
environment, cost-effective, and utilize permanent solutions and
alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery
technologies to the maximum extent practicable. Sectibn 121(b)(1)
also establishes a preference for remedial actions which employ
treatment to permanently arid sigriificantly reduce the volume,
toxicity or mobility of the hazardous substarices, pollutants, or
contaminants at a site. CERCLA § 121(d) further specifies that a
remedial actipn must attairi a degree of cleanup that satisfies^
ARARs under federal and state laws, unless a waiver -can be
justified pursuant to CERCLA § 121(d)(4).

Protection of Human Health and the Environment

The Selected Remedy, Alternative 2, will be protective of human
health and the environment and is intended to provide adequate
protection until a final ROD is signed through the remediation of
LNAPL source areas that constitute a princpal threat-waste and are
both contact hazards and contribute to grbundwater contamination.
                                •   '   .   •   ' )       •        ,             .   ,   . '   •   -




Compliance with ARARs

The -remedial action will comply with all federal and state . -
requirfements that are -applicable or relevant and appropriate.
(ARAR) to its implementation. A comprehensive ARAR discussion is
included in the FFS and a complete listing of ARARs is included in
Appendix II, Table" 3 of this ROD.
                    '   /   •                         ,       ^,       -.,   ,                         ,   .   -   .




Chemical-Specific-ARARs There are no chemical-specific ARARs for
the LNAPL .source areas that are the subject of this action.

Action-Specific ARARs Based upon the available documentation
regarding the source of contaminatiori and sediment testing, EPA
has concluded that the LNAPL source areas are neither listed
hazardous waste or exhibit hazardous characteristics, and,
therefore, do not reguirfe treatment to meet RCRA Land Disposal.
Restrictions prior' to disposal iri a RCRA-compliant uriit. Further
testing prior to land disposal is still required as part of the
remedial action.      L

Action-specific ARARs will be achieved by conducting remedial^,
action activities in accordance with OSHA, RCRA, New Jersey
hazardous waste regulations. New Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act regulations, •                                    >
                                 2,6



                                                                                                   500031

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Location-Specific ARARs Location-specific ARARs will be achieved
by conducting remedial;action activities in aecbrdance With the
National Environmental Policy;Act, specifically with regard to
carrying out Executive Orders 11988 (Floodplairi Management) and
11990 (Protection of Wetlands), and. New Jersey statutes governing
floodplains and^prdtectiori of wetlands. .            ^

Cost Effectiveness

In.the lead agency's judgmerit,.the Selected Remedy is cost-
effective and.represents a reasonable value for the money to be
spent. In making this determination, the following definition was
used: "A remedy shall be 'cost-effective if its costs are
proportional to its overall effectiveness." (NCP
§300\430(f) (1) (ii) (D)) . EPA evaluated the. "overall effectiveness"V
of those alternatives that satisfied the threshold criteria (i.e.,
were both protective of human heialth and the environment and ARAR-
compliarit). Overall effectiveness was evaluated by assessing
three of the five balancing criteria in combination (long-term
effectiveness and permanence; reduction.iri toxicity, mobility, arid •
volume through treatment; and short-term, effectiveness) . Overall
effectiveness was then compared to costs to determine cost-
effectiveness. The estimated present, worth cost of Alternative 2
is $17.3 million, for Alternative 3 it is $18.4 million, and for
Alternative 4 it is $19.5 million.

For a detailed cost summary of Alternative 2, see Appendix II,
Table 4, of this document.

Utilization of Permanent, Solutions and Alternative Treatment
Technologies                     '

Although this interim action is not intended to address fully the
statutory mandate for permanence and treatment to the maximum
extent practicable, this interim actiori does utilize treatment and
thus supports that statutory mandate. Of those alternatives that'
are protective of humari health and the environment and comply with
ARARs to the extent practicable, EPA has determined that the
Selected Remedy provides the best balance of trade-offs in terms
of the five balancing criteria, while also considering the
statutory preference for treatment as a principal element, the
bias against, off-site treatment and disposal, and State and
community acceptance,



                                  27
                                  J

                                                            500032

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element                        -

The Selected Remedy meets the statutory preference for the use of
remedies that involve treatment as a principal element.

Five-Year'Review Requirements

Subsequent actions are planned to address fully the threats posed
by conditions at this site. Because this remedy will result in
hazardous substances remaining on site above health-based levels,
a review will be. conducted to ensure,, that the remedy continues to
provide adequate protection of human health and the environment
within five years after commencement of the remedial action.
Because this is an Interim Action, review of this site and remedy
will be ongoing, as EPA continues to develop remedial alternatives
for the site.

DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES

The Proposied Plan for the Diamond Head Oil Refinery site was
released for public comment on July 14, 2009., The comment period
closed on August 12, 2009.          . ,

The Proposed Plan identified Alterriative 2, On-site Biocell, as EPA's
selected alternative. EPA reviewed all verbal comments submitted
during the public comment period. No written comments were
received.     , '




                                 28



                                                            500033

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 APPENDIX.I
' FIGURES




              500034

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    Source: Hagstrom Union/Hudson/Essex County Atlas, 1990
                                                                   Hudson County, Pag« 5, Grid C-7




                                                                               Figure 1 - Diamond Head Oil - Site Location Map
                                                                                          Vacant Lot Adjacent to 1235 Harrison Avenue
                                                                                          Kearny, NJ 07032 (Hudson County)
See Also; USGS 7.5' Quadrangle: Elizabeth, NJ; Pholorevised 19B1
40» 44' 50- l a . 74° o r 55.9" long   (IvlAD 83)




                                                                                                                          500035

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           nsr n ».b>*-PtM T,»,irT xarw nr'. ..-.r- nHii.iM:YT.rvm,« .>, :>, »




                                                                                                                                                      .• ^   '^^
                                                                                                         • - • , ' •       •>   •


                                                                                                     V


                                                           V #-1
                                                                                                                                              ::^'
                                                                                                                                                     1v,
                                                                                                                                                             #f,                u
                                                                                                                                                                           r-       ^




                                                                                                                       . \ . ^ ^ ilir-.a

                                                                                                                                '•'*mjf-




Legend                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 2
— Temporary Gravel Road                                                                                                                                Proposed Remedial Target Areas
L—l Proposed Remedial Target Area                                                                                                                                Diamond Head RI/FS
O Measureable LNAPL in Wells                                                                                                                                              Kearny, NJ
Q Delineated Wetlands                                                                             N
I ! Extent of Historical Source Area (1976 Aerial Photo)                0          87.5           175                               350
Wi LNAPL Plume                                                                                                                       I Feet

                                                                                                                                                                      CH2MHILL

                                                                                                                                                                         500036

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                    )
            APPENDIX I I
             . TABLES'



/   •



        /




                           .A




                                500037

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 :'"--Table^1 ,.
                        Comparison of LNAPL Concentrations to Humah Health Screening Level
                                             Diamond Head Oil RI/FS




Shading-indicates concentration exceeds screening vaiue                                               ^
Data QualHters and Notes on Data
U The compound was not detected at the indicated concentration.

J Data indicates the presence of a c o n ^ u n d that meets the identification criteria. The result is less than the quantitation limit but greater than zero.
The concetration giveri is an approximate value.
B The analyte was found In the t^roratory blank as well as the sample. This
D Result is from diluted analysis
NA Noi analyzed.
DL Indicates re-analysis foDowlngdiiiulion                                             ' ^                   ^                    ,     /
Screening Leypls an0 Notes
Tap Water RSL is from Regional Screening Level Table, 5/19/2009. RSL based on carcinogenic endpoints {c on table) ac^usted to a target cancer risk
of 10*^ (by multiplying value on table by 100)..
n - noncancer
c = cancer
c* a cancer, where n S L < 100 x c SL                               .     '
NSV - no screening value                                                          >    -
Pyrene RSL used as surrogate for acenaphthylehe and phenanlhrene.




                                                                                                                                                                   Page Vot 1
                                                                                                                                                                 500038

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                            Table 2
                                           Comparison of LNAPL Concentrations t o Ecological Screening Levels
                                                               D i a m o n d Head O i l RI/FS



[Sample Location                                 MW-03S                  MW-03S                            PZ-10   ,                      P2-10                           Ecological Screening                                    j
 Sample ID                                    FP-MW-03S-1             FP-MW-03S-1DL                     FP-PZ-10-2               FP-P2-10-2DL                                      , Value                                        1
 Sam£l["9_Dale                                    8/26/03                 8/26/03                        3/26/2008
 Matrix                                       SOIL (LNAPL)             SOIL(LNAPL)                     SOIL (LNAPL)
                                                                                                                                         3/26/2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
 Units                                               ug/L                   ug/L                            u^L
                                                                                                                                 SOIL (LNAPL)
                                                                                                                                            ug/L                                       ug/L                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
 TCL
 VOCs
                                                                                                                                                                                   •                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ••.              1
 A o & t o n e * « ' i ^^ ^    ' "'i              TBE+oa-'t:                  NA                         2 OE+04 U                                                        , 1.50E*O3                            b
 BoniefWfHp              1.''r "                 ^ZBE+Oa-'v,                  NA                   ' -9je+<oj,                                                                1,30E-^)2                         b'
 Toiuenef ^=8,. '4»^ .«•" '^                - * " 1'1E+04»4.''                NA                      84e+04' X                                                               9.80E+00                          b
Ethyl B e n z e n e
m/p.XYtBnear«^V            . t _ i , s'
                                                  4 1E+04                     NA                         8 8E+04                                                                NSV                             _
                                             t . 62E+04^                      NA                       '-31E+«*'-'                   -    i.. •                               1.30E+01 •                        b
o-X¥ten«-#«gi*r>i%i-            "•,'rr         "-1.8 86+04 J ^                NA                          176+05                                                              1.30E-K)1                         b
Cyclohexane                                                                                              2 OE+04 J                                                              NSV                             ._
Isopropylbenzene                                                                                         1 7E+04 J                                                              NSV                              _
Methylcyclohexane                                                                                 J-      51E+04                                                                NSV                              -
 BNAs                                                                                             II
 l,2iD)i*lon)befizBn*n4 - I ' l "           1 8E+03 U        -•* '- 2 8E+04. JO                          3 6E+03 U                                                            1.40E-KI1                         b
1 "JiDiotilorobenzeneli-' ^ ' i - I *va i e + 0 3 ' j               8 9E+03 UD                           2 OE+03 U                                                            1.50E-K)1         .               b
11 2,4^Trle!hk»DbeniBn» t p * - '           2 5E.rf)3J,-^           1 1E+04 UD                           3 5E+03U                                                             1.10E-K)2             ;               b .
Nart«haiwiejCJrt*','i ^ ' ^               , 1 3E+0S - i              ji'i:.i,3f+0£ft3 .'••'vs^e+osJ,.                                                                         1.20E-K)1 .                           b
2 Methylnaphlhalene                         1 9E+05 E               2 06+05 D                            3 3E+05 J                                                              NSV                     .1 _-
                                            5 7E+03 J
Acenaphlhylene
                                         ' 15E+04J
                                                                    11E+04UD                              13E+04U
                                                                                                                                              '                                 NSV                 '

lAcanaphthono" i--? 1 "                                        "- ' 1 2 6 + 0 4 J C l                     1 9E+04 U                                         '                 2.30E-K)1.                            b
pfeanzo)umn ^ ,        }          ^     . 84E+03J                   8 9E+03 UD                           2 7E+04 U                                                            3.70E+«)                      .       b
iDksthylpmhalator.* . ^^-^ i                2 7E+04'        •       26E+O4J0                             3 OE+04 U                                          :.                2.10E+O2                           b
 Fluowne^^r          _<       '    ? '.     2Jie-i044 > / 226+04JCr                                      2 3E+04 U                                                            3.90E+ffl)                        .b
 Phenanthrena ' " ' ' • . , '    '          7 2E+04.            ^ 77E+04JO                        •..• ^mmem                                                                  6.30E+00                           b
knlhracene ->.. '         > ..              1?E+04J                 186+04-JO,                           3OE+04 U                                                             1.0OE.O1;. ,                      .c
b f n butyWilhalat^ "               i -v 3,5E+03 J ,                1 1E+04UD                                                                                                 1.00E+00 ..                        b
|Flu6rarth9n«i:->.?">- i        /           33e*04-         ",      4 7 6 + 0 4 aO                       2 2E+04U                                         -' ,                6.2OE+O0                          b
 Pyrene                                     9 OE+04                 5 8E+04 JD                           1 9E+04 U                                                              ,NSV
SensoD(a)anth%c«rta^ >                    ' 1 6 6 + 0 4 3 ' ' - / t,S^*04 JO-                            2 2E+04U                                                             2:7(E-02                              b
Chrysene                                    2 3E+04                 2 3E+04 JD                           1 6E+04 U                                                             . NSV                            -   •




faiaffiJtiwlheiyllphttia^ta'*'                    4 OE+04 B                   40E+04^JD                  3 4E+04 U                                                            1.20E-01                              b
                                                  1 8E+03 U
Benzo(b)fluoranlhene                                                          2 2E+04 JD                 6 4E+04 U                                                        .      NSV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                -
Beria>{a)pytwie i '"•'i                           2 7E+03 U                   15e+04JD                   266+04 U                                                    .•       1.40E-02                              b

                                                  2.2E+02 U
                                                                                                                                                      ,                                                                           1
Aroclor 1 2 3 2                                                               NA                         2.26+04 E                        1.8E+04 D                           2.44E-04                              a             1
Aroclor-1260                                      8.0E+03 P                   NA                         1.2E+04 E                        1.16+04 D                           2.44E-04                              a             1
TAL Metals
                                                                 .                                                               '                .                                                     •                         1
Wluminum                                   2 4E+04                            NA                         4.3E+04                                                              8.70E-^                               d     '
Arsenic                                    2 3E+02 J                          NA                         1.7E+03                                                              1.50E+O5                          d
Banurttt S . ^ ^ S . « ,    *, ^           366+04                             NA             - ^mm^mm                                                                         4.0OE-KJ3.                            b         .
Calcium                                    6 7E+05                            NA                         1.4E+06         '                                                      NSV                     ' _
GKronvhim « v / * •* **• i^- '             13E+M                              NA                  iSltt0i5fti5*^S                                                             1.10E-.04                 ..          d
popoer,3>..^ S i r t , - 4 i?^          T  6 6E+03                            NA                  smmem»m                                                                     9.00E+O3                              d             1
Iron                                       2 5E+05                            NA                         3.8E+05     :                                                        i.OOE-KB                              d             1
i ; e a d » S - r ; ? «iA> '< j      j??   12E+05                             NA                   wmsmv^m                                                       .            2.50E403                          d                 I
                                           2 8E+04 J
Magnesium
                                           7 8E+03
                                                                              NA                          6.7E+04                                                               NSV                             -
Manj^anese                                             •                      NA        '         1       1.8E+04                                                             1.20E^        .                       b             1
                                                NA
H d f o w y >^ V . . . ^ - - , * : . * # 3
                                                                              NA            . wmM^^M.                                                                     . 7.70E-01                                d
                                           6.8E+02 U
Nickel
Potassium                                  9 6E+03 U
                                                                              NA.
                                                                              NA
                                                                                                  B . 1.9E+03
                                                                                                  j   5.5E+03J
                                                                                                                                                                              5.20E-K)4
                                                                                                                                                                                NSV
                                                                                                                                                                                                         . d 1
s / a m m n i t " ^ iSiWlSen'^*-.;? -'t..r3;3E+048W
                                                                         " NA
                                                                           NA                 : imwmmimmi                                                                     2.00E-.O4.                            b             1
                                           6.6E+03
Zinc
NotM
                                                     >                                             9.1E+03                                                                    1.20E-.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                    I d                           1
Shading indicates concentration exceeds screening value
Data QuallliefB and Notes on, Data
U The compound was not detected at the indicated concentratiori.

J Data indicates the presence of a compound that meets the identification criteria. The result is less than the quantitation limit but
greater than zero. The concetration given is an approximate value.
possible laboratory contamination of the environmental sample.
D Result is from diluted analysis
NA Not analyzed.                                                                                                             ^
OL Indicates re-analysis following diltution
Screening Levels and Notes
t - Nttw Jaruy Guidanctt for Sadimml Quality Evaluations and Wator Quality Crilwia (NJDEP 1998)
b • US Deportmant of Enorgy Prefiminory Remediation Goals (PRGs) (USDOE 1997)
e - U5EPA Region III Screening Levels (USEPA, 1995)
d-USEPANaUoruri Ambient Water Qu^ly Criteria (USEPA, 2002)                                                          . .          '
NSV - no sawnlng value




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pago / 0 / f


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      500039

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                     DIAMOND HEAD OPEMBLE UNIT 1 FOCUSED FEASIBIUTY STUDY


Table 3 Potential Chemical-Specific Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements
Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site, Kearny, New Jersey                          . '. •
 Act/Authority      Criteria/Issues        Citation                Brief Description                       Applicability                            Comments
Resource         Identification and    40 CFR 261        Defines those solid wastes which       ARAR for wastes or treatment         Applicable for the disposal of
Conservation     Listing of                              are subject to regulation as           residues which are hazardous as      hazardous solid wastes (LNAPL
and Recovery     Hazardous Waste                         hazardous wastes under 40 Cf=R         defined by RCRA and are to be        impacted soils) and LNAPL impacted
Act -                                                    Parts 262-265 and 270.                 disposed of off-site.                groundwater or groundwater that
                                                                                                                                     meets the hazardous waste
                                                                                                                                     characteristic thresholds
StatiB of New    Technical             7:26E-1           Require removal or treatment of        ARAR for the remediation of the      Approval for the onsite biocell
Jersey           requirements for                        recoverable LNAPL where                LNAPL.                               alternative requires approvals /
Statutes arid    remediation of free                     practicable; treatment of residual                                          coordination with NJ's Site
Rules            product.                                LNAPL where practicable;                                                    Remediation Program (SRP). To gain
                                                         containment of potentially mobile                                           approval to use the onsite biocell
                                                         L N A P L where removal or treatment                                        technology, the effectiveness of the
                                                         are not practicable.                                                        method must be demonstrated and
                                                                                                                                     documented for the SRP.

State of New     Groundwater           H.S.A.C. 7:9.6    Establishes standards for the          ARAR for Class IIA aquifers.         This is an early action focusing on
Jersey           Quality Standards     Groundwater       protection of ambient groundwater                                           addressing LNAPL. These standards
Statutes and                           Quality           quality. Used as the primary basis                                          would be applicable to the final
Rules                                  Standards         for isetting humericaJ criteria for                                         remedy for the site. While there are
                                                         groundwater cleanups.                                                       no numeric sioil criteria for LNAPL,
                                                                                                                                     these criteria vyere used to develop
                                                                                                                                     PRGs for the early action.
Prohibition of   Air Quality           N.J.A.C. 7:27-5   Prohibits air pollution and            Potential ARAR for remedial          Provides the air quality and odor
Air Pollution    Standards             and               establishos ambient air quality        alternatives which include           standards associated with potential
and Ambient                            N.J.A,C.7.27-13   standards                              technologies that result In odors    emissions from aeration activities
Air Quality                                                                                     and air emissions-                   associated with the onsite biocell
Standards -                                                                                                                          technology.




                                                                                                                                                             PAGE 1 0 F 12



                                                                                                                                                             500040

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                           DIAMOND HEAD OPERABLE UNIT 1 FOCUSED FEASIBIUTY STUDY


Table 3 Action-Specific Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements
Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site, Kearny, New Jersey         -. •   '•
     ActyAuthority     Criteria/Issues        Citation                Brief Description                          Applicability                            Comments
    Discharge of Groundwater or
    Wastewater
    Federal Clean    General              40 CFR 403         Prohibits discharge of pollutants to    ARAR. Discharge of pollutants          POTW ARARs and thresholds
    Water Act        Pretreatment                            a POTW which cause or may cause         including those that could cause       supei;sede the Federal Standards.
                     Regulations for                         pass-through or interference with       fire or explosion or result in toxic
                     Existing and New                        operations of the POTW.                 vapors or fumes to POTW.
                     Sources of
            *•
                     Pollution                           _
    Water Treatment and Disposal
    Effluent         Discharge            33U.S.C.1251       Technology-based discharge              ARAR for remedial actions which
    Limitations      requirements         Section 301        limitations for point sources of        include discharge of wastewater.
                                                             conventional, nonconventlonal, and
                                                             toxic pollutantis.
    Toxic and         Pretreatment        33 U.S.C. 1251     Establishes list of toxic pollutants    ARAR for remedial actions which        ARAR requirerhents to be
    Pretreatment      standards for       Section 307        and promulgates pretreatment            include discharge of wastewater        established through permit.
    Effluent          discharge into                         standards for discharge into            to POTW.
    Standards         POTWs.                       , .•>     POTWs.
    New Jersey
    State of New      Groundwater         N.J.A.C. 7:9-6     Establishes standards for the           ARAR if disposal of treated            This is ah early action focusing on
    Jersey Statutes   Quality Standards   Grbundwater        protection of ahfibient groundwater ,   groundwater by reinjection is          addressing LNAPL. These standards
    and Rules                             Quality            quality. Used as the primary basis      needed. Also ARAR for                  would be applicable to the final
.   "   •        y                        Standards          for setting numerical criteria for      groundwater quality at the site.       remedy for the site. While there are
                                                             groundwater cleanups and                TBC for this early action.             no numeric soil criteria for LNAPl.,
                                                             discharges to groundwater.                                                     thes^ criteria were considered to
                                                                                                                                            develop PRGs for the early action.
Kearny                Receives            Local Limits       Establishes the standards for           ARAR for the discharge of              All but the No Action alternative
Municipal             wastewater in                          discharge of groundwater through        groundwater to the PVSC.               would require the management of
Utilities             South Kearny and                       the MUA's sewage system to PVSC.                                               groundwater generiated during the
Authority             the Meadowlands                                                                                                       implementation of the early action.
(MUA)                 Area                                                                                                                  Discharge to a POTW wais selected
Passaic Valley        Receives            N.J.A.C. 7:14A     Establishes the standards for the.      ARAR for the disposal of               as the representative process option
Sewerage              wastewaters from    and PVSC           discharge of waters from the            groundwater to the POTW,               for managing the generated ^
Authority             the Kearny MUA      Local Limits       Kearny MUA into their sewage            received by direct discharge and       groundwater. Discharge of the
(PVSC)                                                       system.                                 by truck load.                         groundwater to the Passaic Valley
                                                                                                                                            Sewerage Commission (PVSC)
                                                                                                                                            treatment plant was considered in
                                                                                                                                            this FFS.

                                                                                                                                            Discharge can be via a connection
                                                                                                                                            sewer or by trucldng to PVSC. The
                                                                                                                                            nearest sewer line where the

                                                                                                                                                                    PAGE 2 OF 12




                                                                                                                                                                  500041

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       '.                                                                         DIAMOND HEAD OPERABLE UNIT 1 FOCUSED FEASIBIUTY. STUDY
      :   '   •   •   •   '    •   -        '   •   .       '               •   •      .   .   •   •          •




Act/Authority                 Criteria/Issues           Citation   Brief Description                   Applicability'                   j '       Comments
                                                                                                                                   connection can be made was
                                                                                                                                   identified at the intersection of
                                                                                                                                   Berigen Avenue and Harrison
                                                                                                                                   Avenue; this sewer line is expected
                                                                                                                                   to be activated later this year. This
                                                                                                                                   sewer line is operated by the Kearny
                                                                                                                                   Municipal Authority (MUA).

                                                                                                                                   A permit would need to be obtained
                                                                                                                                   that would specify the requirements
                                                                                                                                   for discharging to PVSC. ^

                                                                                                                                   PVSC has discharge limits for metals
                                                                                                                                   and oil and grease (average of <100
                                                                                                                                   mg/l or maximum of 150 mg/l). The
                                                                                                                                   metal concentrations in groundwater :
                                                                                                                                  . at the site are below the PVSC
                                                                                                                                   limits. There is no data for;oil and
                                                                                                                                   grease in groundwater at the site.
                                                                                                                                   Therefore, this FFS assumes that
                                                                                                                                   some form of treatment would be v
                                                                                                                                   needed to achieve the discharge
                                                                                                                                   limits for oil and grease. The pre-
                                                                                                                                   design investigation would collect
                                                                                                                                   data on oil and grease and the
                                                                                                                                   design would determine the need for
                                                                                                                                   and actual type of treatment for oil
                                                                                                                                   and grease.

                                                                                                                                   While PVSC does not have discharge
                                                                                                                                   limits for Total Suspended Solids
                                                                                                                                   (TSS), the permit that would need to
                                                                                                                                   be obtained for the discharge may
                                                                                                                                   specify a limit We have assumed
                                                                                                                                   that treatment of the discharge for
                                                                                                                                   VOCs and other contaminants will
                                                                                                                                   not be required and that the permit
                                                                                                                                   will set the monitoring requirements.
                                                                                                                                   This. FFS assumes that monthly
                                                                                                                                   monitoring and reporting will be
                                                                                                                                   required.




                                                                                                                                                            PAGE 3 OF 12



                                                                                                                                                           500042

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                         DIAMOND HEAD OPERABLE UNIT 1 FOCUSED FEASIBIUTY STUDY

 Act/Authority      Criteria/Issues           Citation                Brief Description                        Applicability                          Comments
Worker and        Protects workers      P.L. 1983C.315     Notification of presence of              ARAR. Applies to all on-site
Community         and community        ^ . L . 1985C.543   hazardous substances to State            treatment alternatives.
Right to Know                           Executive          Emergency Planning Commissions
Act                                     Order #161         and to local Emergency Planning
                                                           Committees.
Disposal of Hazardous Waste
Federal          General Waste         40 CFR 260          Establishes procedures and criteria      ARAR. Establishes general
Resource         Management                                for modification or revocation of        requirements for hazardous waste
Conservation     Practices                                 any provision in 40 CFR Part 260-        management.
and Recovery                                               265.
Act
Federal          Identification and    40 CFR 261          Identifies solid wastes w h i c h are
                                                                                               -ARAR. Generation of a hazardous
Resource          Listing of                               subject to regulation as hazardous   waste possibly including spent
Conservation     Hazardous Waste                           wastes.                              carbon or contaminated soil.
and Recovery                                                                                    Hazardous waste must be handled
Act                                                                                             and disposed of in accordance
                                                                                                with RCRA. Chemical testing and
                                                                                                characterization of waste required.
Federal           Standards            40 CFR 262          Establishes requirements (e.g., EPA ARAR. Waste that is characterized
Resource          Applicable to                            ID numbers and manifests) for        as hazardous.
Conservation      Generators of                            generators of hazardous waste.
and Recovery      Hazardous Waste
Act
Federal          Standards             4 0 CFR 263         Establishes,standards which apply        ARAR. Transport of waste that is
Resource         Applicable to.                            to persons transporting manifested       characterized as hazardous.
Conservation     Transporters of                           hazardous waste within the United
and Recovery     Hazardous Waste                           States.
Act
Federal          Standards             40 CFR 264          Establishes the minimum national         ARAR. Generation and storage of
Resource         Applicable to                             standards which define acceptable        hazardous waste.
Conservation     Owners and                                management of hazardous waste.
and Recovery     Operators of
Act              Treatment,
                 Storage and
                 Disposal Facilities
Federal          interim Standards     40 CFR 265          Establishes minimum national             Potential ARAR since remedies
Resource         for Owners and                            standards that define the periods of     should be consistent with the
Conservation     Operators of                              interim status and until certification   more stringent 40 CFR 264
and Recovery     Hazardous Waste                           of final closure or if the facility is   standards, as these represent the
Act              Treatment,                                subject to post-closure                  ultimate RCRA compliance
                 Storage, and                              requirements, until post-closure         standards and are consistent with
                 Disposal Facilities                       responsibilities are fulfilled.          CERCLA's goal of long-term-
                                                                                                    protection of public health and


                                                                                                                                                                PAGE 4 OF 12



                                                                                                                                                              500043

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                  DIAMOND HEAD OPERABLE UNIT 1 FOCUSED FEASIBIUTY STUDY


 Act/Authority      Criteria/Issues      Citation               Brief Description                       Applicability                           Comments
                                                                                             welfare and the environment.




Federal           Land Disposal       40 CFR 268      Identifies hazardous wastes which      ARAR. Generated waste will need
Resource          Restrictions                        are restricted from land disposal.     to meet LDRs for offsite disposal.
Conservation                                          All listed and characteristic
and Recovery                                          hazardous waste or soil or debris
Act                                                   contaminated by a RCRA
                                                      hazaridous waste and removed from
                                                      a CERCLA site may not be land
                                                      disposed until treated as required
                                                      by LDRs.
Federal           Hazardous Waste     40 CFR 270      Establishes provisions covering        Potential ARAR. A permit is not       Provides the requirements for
Resource          Permit Program                      basic EPA permitting requirements.     required for on-site CERCLA           properly documenting and
Conservation                                                                                 response actions. Substantive         manifesting hazardous and non-
and Recovery                                                                                 requirements are added in 40 CFR      hazardous waste shipments.
Act                                                                                          264.
Federal           Hazardous           49 CFR 107,     Regulates transportation of            ARAR since response action may       Provides the requirements for
Hazarboiis        Materials           171-177         hazardous materials.                   involve transportation of            properly documenting, manifesting,
Material          Transportation                                                             hazardous materials.                 and packaging hazardous and nonr
Transportation    Regulations                                                                                                     hazardous waste shipments.
Act
State of New      Hazardous Waste     N.J.A.C.7:26C   Establishes rules for the operation    Potential ARAR depending on          Provides the requirements for
Jersey Statutes                       Hazardous       of hazardous waste facilities In the   hazardous waste disposal             storing and handling hazardous
and Rules                             Waste           state of New Jersey.                   location.                            waste onsite.
General
Remediation
Cornprehensive    National            40 CFR 300,     Outlines procedures for remedial       ARAR.
Environmental     Contingency Plan    Subpart E       actions and for planning and
Response,                                             implementing off-site removal
Compensation,                                         actions.
and Liability
Act of 1980 and
Superfund
Amendments
and
Reauthorization
Act of 1986
(SARA)

                                                                                                                                                           PAGES OF 12




                                                                                                                                                          500044

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                          DIAMOND HEAD OPERABLE UNIT 1 FOCUSED FEASIBIUTY STUDY


 Act/Authority      Criteria/lssUesr         Citation               Brief Description                           Applicability                           Comments
Federal            Worker Protection     29 CFR 1904      Requirements for worker protection        ARAR. Under 40 CFR 300.38,
Occupational                                              and for recording and reporting           requirements of OSHA apply to all
Safetyand                                                 occupation injuriesand illnesses.         activities which fall under
Health Act                                                                                          jurisdiction of the National
                                                                                                    Contingency.Plan.
State of New       Technical             N.J.A.C. 7:26E   Established minimum regulatory            ARAR for all remedial actions.
Jersey Statutes    Requirements for                       requirements for investigation and
and Rules          Site Remediation                       remediation of contaminated sites
                                                          in New Jersey.
State of New       Emergency             NJSA 7:26,       Control exposure to air pollution by      ARAR for any remedial alternative
Jersey Statutes    Response Notice       26:20-19         immediate notification to the             having the potential to result in an
and Rules          of Release of                          department hotline of any air             air release. '
                   Hazardous                              release incident.
                   Substance to
                   Atmosphere
State of New       Notification of       NJAC7:21(E)      Immediate notification of any spill       ARAR for remedial alternatives
Jersey Statutes    Spills                                 of hazardous substances.                  having potential for a spill of a
and Rules                                                                                           hazardous substance.
State of New       Restrictions of       NJSA13:1G-1      Prohibits and restricts noise which       ARAR for all remedial action.
Jersey Statutes    Noise                 et.seq.          unnecessarily degrades the quality
and Rules                                                 of life.
State ot New       Investigation         NJDEP's          Provides guidance on the                  ARAR. To be considered during
Jersey Statutes    derived waste         Guidance         disposition of IDW.                       investigation.
and Rules          management            Document
State of New -     Restrictions of       NJAC 7:29-1      Sets maximum limits of sound from         ARAR for all remedial actions.
Jersey Statutes    Noise                                  any industrial, commercial, public
and Rules                                                 service or community iservice ,
                                                          facility.
State of New       General               NJAC 7:9-7       Regulates permit procedures,              ARAR when installing new wells
Jersey Statutes    Requirements tor                       general requirements for drilling         or if existing wells should require
and Rules. ^       Permitting Wells                       and installation of Wells, licensing      modification.
                                                          of wejl driller and pump Installer,
                                                          construction specification, and well
                                                          casing.
State of New       Well                  NJAC7:9-9        General requirements for sealing of       ARAR if any existing wells need to
Jersey Statutes    Abandonment                            all wells (e.g., single cased, multiple   be abandoned and sealed.
and Rules          Procedures                             cased, hand dug, test weMs,
                                                          boreholes and monitoring wells,
                                                          abandoned wells).
• State of New     Drilling Contractor   NJSA 58:4A-5     Well drillers licensing, supervision,     ARAR when additional wells are
 Jersey Statutes   Requirements          et.seq.          inspection and sampling.                  installed.
 and Rules


                                                                                                                                                                   PAGE 6 OF 12



                                                                                                                                                                 500045

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                     DIAMOND HEAD OPERABLE UNIT 1 FOCUSED FEASIBIUTY STUDY


 Act/Authority      Criteria/Issues        Citation              Brief Description                          Applicability                           Comments
State of New      Groundwater          N.J.A.C. 7:26-9   Groundwater monitoring system           ARAR fpr any remedial alternative
Jersey Statutes   Monitoring                             requirements.                           requiring groundwater monitoring.
and Rules
State of tiew     NJDEP Standards      N.J.A.C. 2:90     The Hudson-Essex and Passaic            ARAR for excavation activity.       A Soil Erosjpn arid Sediment Control
Jersey Statutes   for Soil Erosion                       Soil Conservation District governs                                          Plan is required that wilLdescribe the
and Rules         and Sediment                           all soil disturbances greater than                                          soil erosion controls.
                  Control referenced                     5000 fr".
                  at .
State of New      Construction         N.J.A.C. 7:14A    Administered by the Hudson-Essex        ARAR for excavation activity.       Requires the submittal ota Request
Jersey Statutes   General Permit                         and. Passaic Soil Conservation                                              for Authority to Discharge
and Rules         (NJG0088323)                           District for soil disturbances                                              Stormwater to SurfaceWater.
                                                         greater than 5000 ft^.
Off-Gas
Management
Federal Clean     National Primary     40 CFR 50         Establishes emission limits for six     Emission of air pollutants may be    These requirements become ARARs:
Air Act           and Secondary                          pollutants (S02, PM10, CO, 03,          of concern for some remedial         if site air emissions exceed the major
                  Ambient Air                            N02,andPb).                             technologies.                        facility thresholds listed below. This
                  Quality Standards                                                                                                   is npt expected for the developed
Federal Clean     Standards of         40 CFR 60         Provides emissions requirements         ARAR.                                alterriatives.
Air Act           Performance for                        for hew stationary sources.                                                  •     Carbon monoxide, particulate
                  New Stationary                                                                                                            matter. Sulfur dioxides >= 100:
                  Sources                                                                                                               , tons/year
Federal Clean     National Emission    40 CFR 61         Provides emission standards for 8       ARAR.                                •     Nitrous Oxides, VOCs, Total
Air Act           Standards for                          contaminants including benzene                                                • HAPs; >=25-tons/year
                  Hazardous Air                          and vinyl chloride. Identifies 25                                            •     Lead, Any HAP >= 10 tons/year
                  Pollutants                             additional contaminants, as having                                           •     All other contaminants, except
                                                         serious health effects but does not                                                C02 >= 100 tons/year
                                                         provide emission standards for
                                                         these contaminants.
State.of New      Standards for        N.J.A.C. 7:27     Rule that governs the emitting of,      ARAR.                                NJAC 7:27-8.estabiishes permit
Jersey Statutes   Hazardous Air        Air Pollution     and such activities that result in,                                          conditions for'minor facilities. The
and Rules         Pollutants           Control           the introduction of contaminants                                             air emissions thresholds below,
                                                         into the ambient atmosphere.                                                 which there are no permitting and air
State of New      Permitting           N.J.A.C. 7:27-8   Establishes permit conditions for       ARAR if remedial action includes     emission controls requirements are
Jersey Statutes   Conditions for air                     air pbllution control apparatus, for    a technology that would result in    identified in N-J AC. 7:27-8^ Tables A
and Rules         pollution control                      minor facilities.                       air emissions.                       anci;:i3. :         .-...•;
                                       N.J.A.C. 7:27-
                                       22                Establishes permit conditions for -                                          NJAC 7:27-22 establishes permit
                                                         air pollution control apparatus, for                                         conditions for major facilities.
                                                         major facilities, and facilities with                                        Emisslona from the early action are
                                                         operating permits.                                                           expected to be t>elow these




                                                                                                                                                              PAGET OF 12



                                                                                                                                                             500046

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                     DIAMOND HEAD OPERABLE UNIT 1 FOCUSED FEASIBIUTY STUDY

 Act/Authority      Criteria/Issues        Citation               Brief Description                        Applicability                           Comments
State of New      Permitting           N.J.A.C. 7:27-   Controls and prohibits air pollution,   ARAR if remedial action includes      thresholds although confirmatory
Jersey Statutes   Conditions for air   11 and 17        particle emissions, and toxic VOC       a technology that would result in     calculations will be performed during
and Rules         pollution control                     emissions.                              air emissions.                        the design phase.

                                                                                                                                      If emissions exceed the
                                                                                                                                      established reporting thresholds for
                                                                                                                                      minor facilities, then the operation of
                                                                                                                                      the alternative must be permitted
                                                                                                                                      under N.J.A.C. 7:27-8. If
                                                                                                                                      the emissions further exceed the
                                                                                                                                      established SOTA threshold values,
                                                                                                                                      then emission controls would be
                                                                                                                                      required.

                                                                                                                                     To determine if an air permit and
                                                                                                                                     emissions controls are required for
                                                                                                                                     each remedial alterriative, the
                                                                                                                                     maximum potential emissions must
                                                                                                                                     be estimated and compared to the
                                                                                                                                     total and individual contaminants
                                                                                                                                     thresholds (reporting and SOTA) in
                                                                                                                                     Tables A and B. If the emissions are
                                                                                                                                     below the reporting thresholds, then
                                                                                                                                     a Request for Determination
                                                                                                                                     containing the estimated
                                                                                                                                     emissions would be submitted to the
                                                                                                                                     NJDEP to confirm that apermit is not
                                                                                                                                     required. If the emissions are above
                                                                                                                                     the reporting thresholds, then a
                                                                                                                                     permit application must be
                                                                                                                                     submitted and the permit would
                                                                                                                                     establish the monitoring
                                                                                                                                     requirements as well as needed
                                                                                                                                     emission controls for emissions
                                                                                                                                     greater than the SOTA thresholds.

                                                                                                                                     Of note, combustion equipment less
                                                                                                                                     than 1 MM Btu is not required to be
                                                                                                                                     permitted but must be noted in the
                                                                                                                                     Request for Determination. For
                                                                                                                                     equipment greater or equal to 1 MM
                                                                                                                                     Btu, the emissions must be
                                                                                                                                     estimated and included in the air


                                                                                                                                                              PAGE 8 OF 12'



                                                                                                                                                            500047

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                           DIAMOND HEAD OPERABLE UNIT 1 FOCUSED F E A S I B I U T Y J S T U D Y


Act/Authority   Criteria/Issues   Citation   Brief Description   Applicability                                Comments
                                                                                                permit application, which will specify
                                                                                                administrative as well as emission
                                                                                                controls for emissions above the
                                                                                                SOTA thresholds.

                                                                                                Also of note, the emissions during
                                                                                                excavation and frOm the soil
                                                                                                washing operation must also be
                                                                                                estimated and included in the
                                                                                                Request of Determination if found to
                                                                                                be t>elow the reporting thresliolds or
                                                                                                in the permit application if estimated
                                                                                                to be above these thresliolds.

                                                                                                The air pollution control regulations
                                                                                                do hot include specific monitoring
                                                                                                requirements; the permit would
                                                                                                establish the riionitoring
                                                                                                requirements. It is reasonable to
                                                                                                expect that monitoring frequency will
                                                                                                be related to the total emissions
                                                                                                from the early action and how
                                                                                                close they are to the reporting
                                                                                                thresholds.

                                                                                                During the pilot test for air sparging
                                                                                                conducted during the focused Phase
                                                                                                2 RI, it was determined that the
                                                                                                emissions from the test were below
                                                                                                the reporting thresholds. Operation
                                                                                                of the biocell will Involve low
                                                                                                injection rate of air sufficient only to
                                                                                                maintain aerobic conditions. Back of
                                                                                                the envelope calculations are
                                                                                                performed in this FFS to determine
                                                                                                where these ehiisislqns fall relative to
                                                                                                the established thresholds. Tbese
                                                                                                calculations Willie yeri^^^
                                                                                                the deaignwiieri detailed emission
                                                                                                caiculiations^will be perforrned and
                                                                                                the reqije^t for determination or a
                                                                                                permit application (as applicable)
                                                                                                would be prepared and submitted to


                                                                                                                                PAGE 9 OF 12



                                                                                                                               500048

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                           DIAMOND HEAD OPERABLE UNIT 1 FOCUSED FEASIBIUTY STUDY


Act/Authority   Criteria/Issues   Citation   Brief Description   Applicability                            Comments
                                                                                            the NJDEP. During the design,
                                                                                            detailed emissiori calculations will
                                                                                            also be performed for
                                                                                            other components of the remedial
                                                                                            alternatives that may release VOCs
                                                                                            in order to determine the need for a
                                                                                            permit and emissiori controls.




                                                                                                                   PAGE 10 OF 12




                                                                                                                  500049

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                    DIAMOND HEAD OPERABLE UNIT 1 FOCUSED FEASIBIUTY STUDY

Table 3 Potential Location-Specific Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements
Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site, Kearny, New Jersey                         - • .
 Act/Authority     Criteria/Issues       Citation                Brief Description                        Applicability                             Comments
Executive        Floodplain          Exec. Order      Requires federal agencies to            ARAR if remedial activities take       A section of the Northern portion of
Order            Management          No. 11988 40     evaluate the potential effects of       place in or near a 100-year or 500-    the site is within the 500-year
Floodplain                           CFR 2 6:302(b)   actions they may take in a              year floodplain.    .                  floodplain. If the RTA falls within
Management                           and Appendix     floodplain to avoid, to the maximum                                            this area, applicable requirements
                                     A -              extent possible, the adverse                                                   will t)emet.
                                                      Impacts associated with direct and
                                                      indirect development of a
                                                      floodplain.
Clean Water      Prohibits           33U.S.C.1251     Prohibits discharge of dredged or       ARAR for remedial alternatives         The RTA encompasses a significant
Act              discharge of        Section 404,40   fill material Into wetlands without a   which Involve disturbance to           portion of the delineated wetland
                 dredged or fill     CFR 230, 231     permit. Preserves and enhances          wetlands.                              areas at the site, t h i s FFS assumes
                 material into                        wetlands.                                                                      that wetland areas that are
                 wetlands                                                                                                            remediated will be created at a
                                                                                                                                     different location by the owner of the
                                                                                                                                     Diamond Head property. Wetland
                                                                                                                                     restoration is not included in the FFS
                                                                                                                                     and if it will not be undertaken at a
                                                                                                                                     different site by the property owner,
                                                                                                                                     may be required and will become
                                                                                                                                     part of the final remedy for the site.
Policy           Floodplain          EPA 1985         Provides federal policy for the         ARAR for remedial alternatives         Same as above
Floodplains/W    assessment          Statement        assessment of floodplains and           that affect wetlands and )
etiands                                               wetlands                                floodplains.
Assessment
U.S- Army        Army Corp. of       33 CFR 330       Prohibits activity that adversely       ARAR for remedial alternatives        Please refer to comment above on
Corps of         Engineers Permit                     affects a wetland if a practical        which have the potential to affect    approach to wetland restoration
Engineers        Program                              alternative that has less effect is     wetlands.                             assumed in this FFS.
Nationwide                                            available.
Permit
Program              . y

Executive        Protection of       Executive        Requires Federal agencies to'           ARAR for remedial alternatives        Please refer to comment above on
Order            Wetlands            Order No.        minimize the destruction, loss, or      which have the potential to affect    approach to wetland restoration
Protecting                           11990            degradation of all wetlands affected    wetlands.                             assumed in this FFS.
Wetlands                                 •            by Federal activities.
Flood Hazard     Protection of       N.J.A.C.7:13     Protects floodplains through            ARAR if remedial activities are       A section of the Northern portiipn of
Area             floodplains                          permitting requirements for             located in or near a 100-or 500-      the site is within the 500-year '^
Regulations                                           construction and dievelbpment           year floodplain.                      floodplain. If the RTA falls within
                                                      activities                                                                    this area, applicable requirements
                                                                                                                                    willbe-riiet. •: ••'•"yy-    ."••""''" .
Flood Hazard     Delineates flood    N.J.S.A. 58:     Delineates flood hazard areas and       ARAF) if remedial activities are in   A section of the Northern portion of
Area Control     hazard areas        16A-50           regulates use.                          or near a 100- or 500-year            the site is within the SOO-year

                                                                                                                                                             PAGE 11 OF 12



                                                                                                                                                             500050

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                 DIAMOND HEAD OPERABLE UNIT 1 FOCUSED FEASIBIUTY STUDY


 Act/Authority       Criteria/Issues      Citation                Brief Description                    Applicability                            Comments
Act                                                                                      floodplain.                              floodplain. If the RTA falls within
                                                                                                                                  this area, applicable requil-ements
                                                                                                                                  will be met.
Wetland Act        Establishes         N.J.S.A.          Establishes listing and         ARAR. Establishes listing and            Please refer to comment above on
of 1970            wetland             13:9A-1           permitting requirements for     permitting requirements for              approach to wetland restoration
                   reigulated          et.seq.           regulated activities            regulated activities                     assumed in this FFS.
                   activities
Freshwater         Establishes         N.J.S.A.          Establishes listings and        Potential ARAR. Establishes              Please refer to comriient above on
Wetlands           freshwater          13:9B             permitting requirements for     listings and permitting                  approach to wetlarid restoration
Protection         wetlarids                             regulated activities in state   requirements for regulated               assumed in this FFS.
Act              ^ regulated                             freshwater wetlands             activities in state freshwater
                   activities              , •   •   .                                   wetlands




                                                 /




                                                                                                                                                         PAGEUOFIl


                                                                                                                                                        500051

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

TABLE 4 Alternalive 2            ;           •.                                                                                                                                                                               COST ESTIMATE SUMMARY
CONSTkUCTION AND OPERATION OF ONSITE BIOCELL
S(t«:              Oiamond Head Oil Superftind Site                                                               DescripUoa:      '     Aliemaiive 2 coiuiiU orexcBvatiun oTconiamMuicd xiil. cwulruction of an' otuiie biocell, muitc backfilling uf wni»Kled soil, and c^xraiim &
LooiUoh:           Kearny,NewJericy ^..                                                                            i-         •'•'       nKmiUxinBafthecuiuimicicdhiuu:!!. (Cicavau:dKiil&xKndKtv«an:M wtiercl>IAPLi(&Nmdth
Phase:             Feasibility Study (-3()* to\50»)                                                                                      [>ir-iite TSDF.''RK profca durvimri u aniidpnUid U) be 6 years. Capilsl co>ts ocxw in
BucYor:            2009 - ' • '                                                                                                        • Pcriotbc crau dccia in Year 6.                                                                                    '•
Date:              June 4, 2009               -

CAPITAL COSTS:
            DESCRIPTION                                                                                                    QTY                 UNIT          . UNIT COST                         TOTAL

   1 Mobilization/Demobilization             ' .                                          > '.
         Construction Equipment & Facilities                                                              ,                   1                 LS                       $80,000                   $80,000 .                            .   '   •   •   •   '   •       "




         Submittals/lmplcmentation Plaiis     i '                                                                             1                 LS                       $15,000                   $15,000     Wiyfc plan, heallhuid Mjcty pUn. pcnniu, etc.
         Temporary Facilities                                                                        -^                      12                 MO                        $1,000                   $12,000     Office ttwlds, tfomge (iciUtici, unitary fadliuCT.,
         Post-Construction Submittals                                                                     •                   1                 LS                       $I5,000_                  $15,000
         SUBTOTAL                                                                                                                                                                                 $122,000

   2 Pre-Remediation Site Work
          Clearing and Grubbing                   '                           i                                              n                   AC                 •     $3,000,                  $33,000     Sec unurpiions.
          Fcncing/Signs/Galcs                •                                                                              440                  LF                        • $20                    $8,800     Assumes 10% of Ihc pdinmci of Ihe «le win require
                                                                                                                                                                                                               and gales.
             Construction of Sewer Conneclion .         ; ,                                                                 750.                 LF                          $95                   $71,250     See Bssun^>lioia
             Construction of Water Connection                                                                               400                  LF                          $65"^                 $26,000
             Construction of Temporary Electric Service ^                                                                     1 y .              LS             ^        $25,000                   $25,000     Eslimate
             Construction of Temporary Roads and Grave! Lay.Down                                                           67.110                SF                        $0.90                   $60,399
             SUBTOTAL ^               '                                                                                                                                                           $224,449

  * 3 LNAPL In^acied Soil Excavation
         Sheet Pile Installaiion                                                                                                                                             $44                  $924,000     For 2 in^MOcd sreai. approunnic 600 ft by 35 ft deep. Vendor quote from
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Rauo Commictioo.
             Excavation and Hauling ..                                                                                     2,600                CY                           $15 .                 $39,000
             Transportation and Disposal                                                                                   4,160               TON                           $82                  $339,456     Vendor quote boia Lewb Cnvirraini^ual. Cost includes price oT
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ••tabiltz^iiioa     . ,                -       -
             Characterization san^ling                                                                                       3                   EA                         $600                     $1,800    Vendor quote indicaiea I con^Kjaite tannic per 1,600 uxif.
             LNAPL Sheet Pile Removal                                                                                      21,000                SF                          •   ^   '   •   _
                                                                                                                                                                                                    $84,000    Vendor quote bom Ratio Conitniciiori.
             SUBTOTAL                                                                            ,                                                                                               $1,388,256

  ,4 Building Foundation Excavation
          Concrete Foundation Demolition                                                                                    400                 CY                           $65                   $26,bOO
          Concrete Foundation and Rubble Excavation and Hauling                                                             900                 CY                           $25                   $22,500     Sec asauin[»iom.


             Transportation / Recycle Material                                                                             1,440               TON                           $16_                  $23,040     Vendor quote frotn Lewti CnvironinnuaL
             SUBTOTAL

   5 Onsite Soil Berm Excavation
          Excavation.and Hauling                                                                                           8,900                CY                           $12                  $106,800     See Ajtumpuora.
          Stockpiling                                                                                                      8,900                CY                            $5                   $44.500
          SUBTOTAL                                                                                                                                                                                $I5UOO
                   ?         •           •                            •


   6 Dewatering
         Dewatering /LEacHate Sump Pumps                                                                                     .1 .                LS                      $13,600                   $13,600     Pivchue of six amtp pumpi opcrwinff al SO gptn
         2" HDPE Trenching and Piping                                                                                      1,000                 FT                          $18                   $18,000     1000" oricachale piping. Incluifes cost Tor (renctting of pipe. MEANS cost

             SUBTOTAL                                                                                                                                                                              $31,600

   7 Wastewater Treatment (for dewatering water)
         Purchase Treatment System                                                                                                               LS                      $44,100                   $44,100     Vendorquote&DmMapleLearEnviroQmciUBl.                        Includes mobilizaiioncocu.
                                             •        •   •   •   /       .       ,   •    .




           . Equipment Repair and Parts                               '                                                                          LS                      $10,000                   $10,000
             SUBTOTAL                   ^

   8 Construction of Bioremediation Cells '
          Sheet Pile Design and Insolation                                                                    '        129,500                  SF                           $44                 $5,698,000    See Asnnviiora                                          '        •
          Excavation and Hauling of RTA Soil                                                                           42,400 .                 CY                       .-- $15                  $636,000     Asaitno RTA volurne minui LNAH. in^ncted soils. tuildiR| foondatioii.
                                                                                                                                                                                                               and coociete rubble and 10 a (fepth of 7 ft bgs.
             Stockpile RTA Soil                                                                                        42,400                   CY                            $5                  $212,000
             2" Air.Distribution Perforated Pipe                                                                        5,312                   FT                           $28                  $148,736     See
             6" Air Distribution Gravel Layer^-..                                                                       3,273                   CY                          $30                    $98,195     Volunic=RTA ami with OJ ft ihickncss ofmaieriai.
             6" Air IDistribution Sand Layer .                                                                    i     3.273                   CY                           $20                   $65,463     VohimesRTA area with 0,5 ft thickness uT material.
             Air Distribution Non-Woven Geotextile                                                                     353.502                  SF,      .                 $0.25                   $88,376     Assumes one iaya below and above dictribution $>nd/gnvd b)«r.MCANS
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cost£>ata.
           ^ Addition of Wood Chips to Treatment Soil and Place Into                                                    28.408                  CY                           $15                  $426,120     Assume a mion of 3:2 (soil: bulking agent).
             2" Nutrient Delivery System Perforated Pipe -                                                              5.312                   LF                            $8                   $42,496     See assumptions
             12' Nutrient Delivery System Sand Layer                                                                    6.546                   CY                           $20                    $3,273     VohmiBsttrA area with 1 ft tluckness of mttcrial.
             Nutrient Delivery System Non-Woven Geotextile                                                             353,502                  SF                         $0.50                  $282,802     .AssunKS one layer below and above nutrient deUvcry syiiem sand \»ya.

             HDPE Liner Above Nutrient Delivery System                                                                 176.751         •        SF                         $0.80                  $141,401     Asswnes entire RTA to be covered. 60 mil HDPE
             Leachate Drainage Sand Layer                                                                               3^73                    CY                           $20                    $65,463    Assumes 6 in lajcr over RTA.                         ,
             Vegetative Support Layer                                                                                   3,273                   CY                           $30                    $98,195    Assums 6 b lajrr over RTA.
             Seed and Mulch                                                                                               4                     AC                        $2,500                    $10,000    Seed and mulch over cntin: RTA.'
             Misc Valves and Fittings                                                                                      1                    LS                       $10.000_                  $10,000
             SUBTOTAL                                                                                                                                                                            $8,026,520

  9 Bioremediation Delivery System From Treatment BuiWing to Cells
         Steel Building 24'X 24!.                                                                                      •     1                   LS                     • $70,000                  $70,000     Insulated bwkting.
         Concrete Slab 28' x 28' x 6"                                                                                       784                  SF                            $7                   $5,488     Wire mesh reitd'orced concrete
         Electric Installation (480V. 3P, 200A)                                                                              1                   LS                       $20,000                  $20,000     Eslimate             '
         Sanitation Plumbing                                                                                                 1                   LS                       $10,000                  $10,000     Esiimaie                         •
         Process Pliimtoing                                                                                                  1                   LS                       $25,000                  $25,000     Vendn qtxxe bom Maple Leaf &tviTonfnental.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Page1of4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                500052

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

TABLE 4 Alternative 2            '                                                                                                                                                COST ESTIMATE SUMMARY
CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION OF ONSITE BIOCELL
She:              Oiamond MCMI Oil Superfund Siu:                          t>cscriptloni:.      Alternative 2 consists nf uxckVukMi itf cnntwrunutol KVA, cnnstnictitm of nn onsiU: hincutl. onsilc becklttUhg of arncnded Mil, uni iipcntiint k
iWation:          Ktwny, New Jersey                                                           • miHiiiurlniForthecunstnicicd biocell. HxcavMcdMiil from the two uxaswhtTC LNAPL is li)Und in mtmiionng wells will b<:dtKpoi«.-(I of at an
Iluse:            Kcwihility Study (-30% Ui +50*)                          .     '            ' iiir-sitc TSDR The pTo)ecl duntlion a anticipalcd u> be 6 ycart. Capil&l costs occur in Year 0-1. Anniial O&M costs occiir in Year* 1 '6.
Base Year:        3009                                                                          Periodic cmts occur in Year 6.
Date;             June 4.2009

        _' Air Delivery Blower System                                                  1                LS                   $60,400             $60,400         Vendor quote frofn Maple L^nl'Envimmnmta). Purchased.                     '
           Air Delivery Piping. 2" SCH 40 PVC                                        1.850              LF                       $50             $92,500         Piping Irani treaimeni building to the stun of the pcrfomtcij piping. 2IX} t[
                                                                                                                                                                 per cell fcr delivery. 670 ft of delivery pipe lu southern RTA; lltOfl u>"
                                                                /                                                                 \                              nortbcraRTA.                                 . /
             Nutriem Delivery Piping; 2" SCH 40 PVC                                  1.850              LF                        $50            $92,500         Same as above.'
             Nutrient Delivery Equipment                                                1              'LS                   . $6,600             $6,600         SOO gallon pot)f>mpylcne chemical(fen)lizer) tank with UBiufcr pump (10
                                                                                                                                                                 gpm, 40 psi). Purchased
             Equipmeni Repair and Parts Allowance                                      1                LS                    $10,000            $10,000
             Control System w/ Switching Manifold                                      1                LS                     $8,000             $8,000          PLC based control system with telcmcuy, programmed
             Misc Valves und Fittings                                                  1                LS                     $5,000 •          $37,000          Entimate
             SUBTOTAL                                                                                                                           $437,488

  10 Soil Backfill and Compaction
           Buckfill Amended Soil into Cells                                       70.800                CY                        $15           $566,400        ' Inchxles cost of mixing amendi^ soil wiih excavator.
           Surface Grading                                                        19.640                SY                       $2.00           $39,280          Surface grading to achieve appropriaie ttainage.
         . Rc-plact Excavated Berm                                                 8.900                CY                       $7.00           $62,300          Assumes sot) reuse, no imported soil
           SUBTOTAL                                                                                                                             $667,980

  .11 Wa.stcwater Disposal
           Transportation / Recycle LNAPL                                         59,500               GAL                     $0.60              $35,700         Vendor quote fiota Linvu Envirorunenlal.
           PVSC Fee During Construction                                              I                  LS                   $16,131              $16,131         Sec assumfjiioni                ^^.-' ,
           KMUA Fee During'Construction                                              1                  LS                   $96,058              $96,058         Sec a.-aun^tions
           Quarterly Analytical Sampling of Discharge Water                          4                  EA                 $2,016.00               $8,064         Assiuncs analysis Ihrou^ CLP, iusumn quaricrty sanpling requires 1 day
                                                                                                                                                                  for 1 people.
             Quarterly Report Preparation                                                               EA                 $2,016.00               $8,064         Assumes (hat it will require 24 hours to prepare!
             SUBTOTAL                                   '                                                                                        $164,017


  12 Groundwater Monitoring Well Installation
         Groundwater Wells                                                            12                EA                 $3,000.00              $36,000         See assumptions
         Waste.Disposal                 ^~    .             '                          1                LS                    $ 10,000            $10.000
                                                                                                                                               . . $46,000
         - SUBTOTAL                             '
                                                                                                                                            $11,385,250
SUBTOTAL.
                                                                                                                                               $2.846;312         Scope and bid contingency
      Contingency
                                                                                                                                           $14,231,562
SUBTOTAL
                                                                                      2%                                                        $284^63 !•
      Health and Safety
                                                                                      5%                                                        $711,578
      Project Management              v                                               6%                                                        $853;894
      Construction Management
ToUl Capital Costs                                                                                                                          $16.081,6651

Operation and Maintenance Costs
 14 Biocell Operation
         Addition of Nutrients                                                   103,815                Gal                      $2.50          $259,538          Assumes 20 fiiU nuoricni doses (4 times per year of opcraiion). Sec
                                                                                                                                                                  B&siBRptions
             Equipment Repair and Parts                                                1                LS                    $10,000            $10,000        ' Rental of monitoring equipmetiL
             Utilities                                                                60                MO                     $2,000           $120,000
             Vegetation mowing                                                        30 .              MO                       $850            $25,500          Assumes 10 BCTts in need pf mowing wis Tcqmre lOhouiSBiSTS/hcur
                                                                                                                                                                  (labor and equipment) plus SI00 lo mobiliza or iMal SSSOAnowing.

             Operations and Maintenance Labor                                         60                MO                     $8,064           $483,840          Assumes 2 people, 12 hn/wcck openuions staff.
             Monthly Performance Field Screening Labor                                60                MO                     $2,016           $120,960          Assumes 2 people, one i i hr daj^monih.
             Annual Analytical Soil Gas Samples . -                                   30                EA                       $250           . $7,500          Assumes t samplefromeach of the 6 cells for 5 jKvs. assunief sampling
                                                                                                                                                                  can be condiined with routine O&M activities.

             Annual Geoprobe Soil Sampling                                             5             . EA                      $2,000             $10,000       ) Assumes one dayof geoprobe per saniplingcveni.asEumessamplingcanbe
                                                                                                                                                                   confined with routine O&M activities.
             Annual Analytical Soil San:^}les                                         30                EA                        $120             $3:600        . 6 Samples (1 from each ceU) per year lor analysis d'SPLP extract for oil
                                                                                                                                                                 ' and gieasc. Assumes same cost for SPLP VOC analysis.

             SUBTOTAL                                                                                                                          $1,040,938
                                                                                              I
  15 Wastewater Treatment (for dewatering water)
         Quarterly Analytical Sainpling of Discharge Water '                          20                EA                 $2,016.00             $40,320          Assumes CLP, assumes quarterly san^ting ihrougbout operation.

             Quarterly Report Preparation                                             20 '              EA                $2,016.00              $40,320          Assumes that ii will require 24 hours to prepay.
             PVSC Discharge Fee                                                        1                LS              $46,276,000              $46,276
             KMUA Discharge Fee                                                        1                LS              $278,417.00             $278,417
             Utilities                                                                60                MO                   $2,000             $120,000
             SUBTOTAL                                                                                                                           $525,333

  16 Verification Sampling
           Groundwater Sampling                                     . _,               3-            EVENT                     $8,064            $24,192          Assumes CLP analysis..
           Geoprobe Soil Sampling .                                                    3               EA .                    $2,000             $6,000          Assumes one day of geoprobe per sanplitig event, assumes sampling can be
                                                                                                                                                                  combined with routine O&M activities.
             Analytical Soil Samples                r                                 18                EA                        $120             $2,160       ' Assumes 6 .samples per event for analysis of SPIP extract for oil and grease,
                                                                                                                                                                  Assumes same cost as for SPLP VOC analysis.

         Waste Disposal                                                                1                LS                    $10,000_           $10,000
         SUBTOTAL                                                                                                                                $42,352
 7 Qosure
         Sheet Pile Removal                                                           ).56o             SF                            $4   •    $518,000          Vendor quote ttom Ratio Construction.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Page2 of 4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                       500053

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

TABLE 4 AHernalive 2                                    ,      )                                                                                                                         COST ESTIMATE SUMMARY
CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION OF ONSITE BIOCELL
Silj: -   . D i u r a d H C T d Oil Superfund Silt . ,  ,                             I>t«i<pliin:        •Altem^ve 2 cooibu of excavaiioo of coolxminued uM. crtislniclion of «n onsiie biocell, onsite backfilling of tfneoded wii. and operaoco &
LM^UOO;       Kcinny. New Jersey          :                                                               . mDniloriogoflhccocuDTJCIedbioceH. Excaviuedsoil&wnlhelwoarealwtoeLNAPLiifbundinmooilcaingwdhwillbejispoiedofalan
Pha««:   • Fe»sibilitySludy(-30%U)*iO%)               . ,                                                   off-jittTSDF. •Theiirojeaduraliooiiu«iciti^lobe6>eaii. Capital coeu ocoa m Year 0-1. Annual 0 4 M cosu occur in Yeara 1 .*.
BiM Ye«r      20)9 '                                      . .                                               Periodic eosu occur in Year 6.
Date:         JiJne4.20W

             ShMi Pile Salvage                                                           • 129.500                 SF--                     -$n    . -$1,424,500          Vendn quote borhRaUDCunstfuctitn. (Vendor credl)
             SUBTOTAL                                                                                                                                 -$906,500


SUBTOTAL                                                                                                                                                  $702,123


      Conlingcncy                                                                          . 25%                                                          $175.«!         Scope sod bid cooungency


SUBTOTAL                                                                   ''                                                                             $877,653


      Health and Safety                    ^       /                                       -   2*                                                          $17,553
      Project Management                                                                       6%                                                          $52,659
      Technical Support"^                                                                      10%                                                    ,    $87,765

Total 5 Year Operating O&M Costs                                                                                                 '                    $1,035,631                                               •   '   '




Periodic CesU


      DESCRJKIION                                            YEAR          .                   QTY               UNIT           UNIT COST                 TOTAL                                            Noms


      Remedial Action Report                                       1                            1    i             EA                  $15,000             $15,000
  ,   SUBTOTAL                    •                 "                                                                                                      $15,000


      Contingency                                                                              25%                                                          $3,750


SUBTOTAL                                                                                                                                                   $18,750


      I^oject Management                                                                    . 6%                                                            $1,125
                                                                                                                            '
Total Periodic Costs                                                                                                                                       $19,875                                -        .
Present Value Analysis
                                                                                                                                                                                .    .    •   .   -




      Cost Type                                              YEAR                                                                                     TOTAL                                                NOTES
                                                                                                                                                       COST
      Capital Cost .        .                                      0                                                                                 $16,081,665
      Aniiual O&M Cost                                          1-6                                                                                   $1,237,312
      Periodic Cost                                t            6      .                                                                                   $19,875                                                               /       •




                                                                                                                                                                          •Discount Pacta based on OMB App C 30-)ear (CM 2009
TOTAL PRESENT VALUE OF ALTERNATIVE                                                                          DISCOUNT                                 $17,338,852
                                                                                                              FACTOR
                                                                                                               (2.7%)«                                                                                         i


/Vssuniptions:
1 'Prc-Design Investigation
      Assumes thai Ihe co«t will be similar to the Pttase 2 RI costs.
3 Pre-Remediation Site Work                                                      ••                                           ,                                                                                            • .       '
 '    Vegetation wiU be cleared east and north of the lantMi!] to accanunodiite site npcrationj, locating facilities, and constructing temporary access roads.
      Sewer connection lo KM\JA/FVSC sewer is based on the distance from the inicnection of Harrison and Bergen Ave to the proposed onsite waste water ireatnteni facility location. AsBumes that KMUA wiU have
      compleiedlheconstnictionoftheirsewer line to which the sewer from Diamond Head will connect before the itail'of remedial activities. Assumes a 4 ft deep trench with p ^ bedding material imported. Estimated
      length of piping ii 750 ft, 8 in diameter.
    Assumes a water connection to the 24 in water main running along the southern side of Harrison Ave. Estimated length of piping ii 400 ft. 2 in diameter.
    Assumes the northwest section of the site will require a gravel layer to support onsiie equipment and vehicles. Assumes a new temporary road and turn around area will be required to allow access to aQ cells (see site
    plain view figures). ,
4 LNAPL Impacted Soil Excavation
    The sheet pile wall for the two areas where LNAFL is found in monitoring wells is estimated to be approximately 600 ft by 35 ft deep. Assumes AZ36 Sheet Pile and A572 Grade SO Steel will be used- Cost is for
    single use around these areas.
5 Building Foundation Excavation
    . Assumes existing building foundation is 100 ft x 50 ft x 2 ft. Also assumes that brick and concrete nibble located in the 0-0.5 ft bgs interval throughout triangle RTA area will be removed.
      Assumes excavations and stocVpiling can be completed at a rate of 1.000 CY per day.
6 Onsite Soil Berm Excavation                                                                                                 ^      .             •                                                r ••
   , Assumes area of berm requiring removal is 24,000 SF with a height of 10                                                                   ft.                                                         /
7 Dewaiering                                                                                                       •                      ^                   _                                         . <
      Pumps are assumed to dewatcr excavation at the rate of 200 gpm.                 .,
8 Wastewater Treatment                              '      ,
      Inchtdes the cost of purchase of the treatment systeip. Costs are based on vender: quote for Mapple Leaf Environmental,
9 Construction of Bioremediation Cells                                                                                •     •      * •                ,
     Sheet pile wall covers perimeter of RTA and inchides four partitions for a total length of 3.700 ft. Depth esttiiated al 35 ft. RTA divided ittto approximately 30,000 SF cells as shown in the plan view figure. Assumes
     AZ36 Sheet Pile and AS72 Grade 50 Steel will be used. Vendor quote from Ratto Construction are for leaving the sheet pile wall in place for 5 years. Quote accounts for pulling of the sheet pile and saWage vahie.


      Air and nutrient perforated piping - 940 ft in cell, I, 900 ft in cell 2, 808 ft in cell 3, 1,040ftin cell 4. 880 ft in ccB 5. 744 ft in ceU 6,
10 Bioremediation Delivery From Treatment Building lo Cells
      LNAPL quantity assumes 2% LNAPL in water from initial dewatering of the RTA (3.418 million gallons).
12 and 15 Wastewater Disposal                   •           /
      Refer lo Table in Appendix A for basis for LS.
13 Groundwater Monitoring WeQ Installation,
     2" wells, 2 wells in the northern area, 10 wells in the southern area '
14 Biocell Operation



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pages Of 4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 500054

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

TABLE 4 Alternative 2                                                                                                                                                        COST ESTIMATE SUMMARY
CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION OF ONSITE BIOCELL
.Sllet               Dianamd Head Oil Superfund Site                                             Attcrniiive 3 consists of excavation of coniatninatcd soil, consttiKlion of an onsite biocxil, onsite backtilling of Binen^
I.IK1UI00:           Keaniy, New leney                                                           mocuioring of the umsmicud biocell. Excavated soil 6fnin the two m u where LNAPL is fountl in morotoring wcQs will be disposed of at m
Plvue:               F^uibilily Study (-30% to ^30%)                                             off-site T5DF. The project duration is anticipated to be 6 ^ars. Capital costs ocav in Year 0-1. AnnualO&Mcostsoccur in Yean 1-6.
BueYean              2009                     '                                                  Periodic cosu occur In Year 6.
Dale:                Jiine4,2009'

         Assumesthetidditionby volume of the following nutrietvls. 0.015% N, 0.001% P. and 0.0005% K.. AssumeaTfour dosages per year.
         Note: Estimated costs do not inchide decommissioning of constructed biocell.    .     '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P a g e 4 of 4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 500055

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     APPENDIX i n  .•
•ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD
          INDEX




                         500056

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 DIAMOND HEAD;OIL REFINERY DIV. SITE
                     V     OPERABLE UNIT ONE
                      ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD FILE
                          INDEX OF DOCUMENTS



1.0     SITE IDENTIFICATION

1.2    Notificat;iori/Site Inspection Reports

P.      100001 - Report: Hazard Ranking System'DoGumentation
        100038   Package, Diamond Head Oil Refinery Div., Kearny,
                 Hudson County, New Jersey, Cerclis Id No.
                 NJD092226000, Volume 1 of 1, preparedfciyRegion 2
                 Superfund Technical Assessment and Response Team,
                 Roy P.. Weston, Inc., prepared for U.S.
               s Environmental Protection Agency, Region 2, July
           . . ' 2000, . .

1.4     Site Investigation Reports

P.      100039^ Letter of Transmittal, to Mr. James A. Laridon,
        100061  Architect, from Mr. John C. Mahle, Jr., P.E.,
                Johnson Soils Engineering Company, re: Proposed
                Hotel Development, Harrison Avenue, Kearny, New
                Jersey, June 19, 1981. (Attachment: Report:
                Proposed Hotel Development, Harrison Avenue,
                Kearny, New Jersey, Soils Investigation,
                submitted by Johnson Soils Engineering Company,
                Palisades Park, New Jersey, submitted to Mimi
                Development, Kearny, New Jersey, June 1981.)

P.      100062 - Report: Site Characterization Plan for the Former
        100095   Diamond Head Oil Refinery Site, Hudson,Meadows
                 Urban Renewal Development Corporation, Kearny,
                 New Jersey, prepared by Killam Associates, Inc.,
                 Consulting Engineers, October, 1988.

     P. 100096 - Report:. Report for Harbor Consultants, Inc. to
        100138 . Conduct a Non-Tidal Wetland Delineation on a
                 Track Designated as: Block 294", Lots 3, 15 and
                 14, Kearny, New Jersey, prepared by Nova




                                                            500057

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 Consultants LTD., John F. Szczepanski, PHD.,
                 Principal Investigator/President, September 1990.

P.      100139 - Letter to Ms. Jeryl Turco-Maglio, Hudson Meadows
        100150   Urban Renewal Corp., from R. Brian Ellwood,
                 Ph.D.v, Vice President, and Mr, Robert L. Zelley,
                 CPG, Project Hydrogeologist, Converse Consultants'
                 East, re: .ferial Photograph Analysis, Hudson
        V        Meadows - Diamond Head Oil, Block 285, Lot 3, 14,
                 and 15, Kearny, New Jersey, (91-37238-01),
                 November 12, 1991. (Attachments: Aerial
                 Photograph Analysis, Block 2 85, Lots 2, 14, and
                 15, Kearny, New Jersey, April 28, 1947.; April 16, -
                 1959; January 14, 1963; March 23, 1969; April 9,
                 1978; November 25, 1982, and March 8, 1990.);


3.0     REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION

3.3     Work Plans                                                          -

P.      300001 - Report: Response Action Contract, United States
        300162   Environmental Protection Agency, Region 6,
                 Contract No. 6-8-W6-0036, Work Assignment No. 112-
                 RICO-02KK OCN 02-4664, Revised Work, Plan, Diamond
                 Head Oil, Remedial Investigatidn/Feasibility
                 Study, Volume I./ of II, . prepared by CH2MHILL,
                 Inc., prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection
                 Agency, December 11, 2002. ^

P.       3 00163 - Report: Final Phase 2 Focused Remedial
      -' 300205    Investigation/Feasibility Study, Contractor
                   Quality Control Plan for the Diamond Head Oil
                   Superfund Site, Kearny^ New Jersey, prepared by
                   CH2MHILL,,prepared for U.S. Environmental
                   Protection Agency, Region, 2, December 2007..

P.      300206 - Report: Final Phase 2 Focused Remedial
        300413   Investigation Uniform Federal Policy, Quality
              • Assurance Project Plan. (UFP - QAPP) for the ,
                 Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site, Kearny, New
                 Jersey, prepared by CH2MHILL, prepared for U.S.
                 Environmental Protectio;n Agency, Region 2,
                 December 20 07.                                 ,
                                    •   •   (   "   ,   •   .   -   •   .




P..     3 00414 - Report: Final Phase 2 Focused Remedial
        300511    Investigation/Feasibility Study Health and




                                                                                500058

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 Safety Plan for the Diamond Head Oil Superfund
      •.('   '   Site> Kearny, New Jersey, prepared by CH2MHILL,
                 prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection
                 Agency, Region 2, December, 2007.

P.    3 00 512 - Report: Final Phase 2 Focused Remedial
      3 00667    Investigation Sampling and Analysis Plan Addendum
 '               1 for the Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site,
                Kearny, New Jersey, prepared by CH2MHILL,     •
                prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection
                Agency, Reg,ion 2, December 2 007.

P.    300668 - Report• Final Attachment A, Phase 2 Remedial
      3 00690  Investigation Site Management Plan for the
               Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site, Kearny, New
               Jersey, prepared'by CH2MHILL, prepared for •
               U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 2,
               December, 2007.

3,4   Remedial Investigation Reports

P.    300691 - Report: Draft Phase 1 Remedial Investigation
      301760   Technical Memorandum, Volume 2 Appendices, for
               the Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site,/ Kearny, New
               Jersey, prepared by CH2MHILL, prepared for U.S.
               Environmental Protection Agency, Region 2,
               June 2004.

P.    301761 - Report: Final Phase 1" Rismedial Investigation
      302470   Technical Memorandum, Volume 1, for the Diamond
      ,'       Head Oil Superfund Site, Kearny, New Jersey,
               prepared by CH2MHILL, prepared for U.S.
               Environmental Protection Agency, Region 2,
               February 20 05; .   "

P.    302471 - Report: Draft Phase \2 Focused Remedial    -
      3 03104 , Investigation Technical Memorandum,. Volume 2
               Appendices, for the Diamond Head Oil Superfund
                Site, Kearny, New Jersey, prepared by CH2MHILL,
             , prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection
               Agency, Region 2, July 2008.




                                                            500059

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

p.           303i05 - Report: Final Phase 2 Focused Remedial
             3 032,93  Investigation Technical Memorandum, Volume 1, for
                       the Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site, Kearny, New
                      - Jersey, prepared by CH2MHILL, prepared for U.S.
                       Environmental Protection Agency, Region 2,
                       February 2009.
     .   •      .           •   -                                                       \




                    •   .           :   )   .   •   .   •   •   .   •   ,   ;   .   ^       •   ;   .   ,   .   •   •   -    .




4.0          FEASIBILITY STUDY

4.3          Feasibility, Study Reports

P.           400001 --Report: Revised Draft Phase 2 Focused Feasibility
             400045   Study Technical Memorandum, LNAPL Interim
                      Remedial Measure Technology Screening and
                      Evaluation for the Diamond^Head Oil Superfund
                      Site;, Kearny, New Jersey, prepared by CH2MHILL,
                      prepared for U.S.- Environmental Protection
                      Agency, Region 2, February 2009.           /

P.           4 00 04 6 - Report: Draft Final Operable Unit 1 Focused
             4 00204    Feasibility Study for the LNAPL Source Area for
                        the Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site, Kearny, New
                        Jersey, prepared by CH2MHILL, prepared for U.S.
                        Environmental Protection Agency, Region 2, June
                        2009.


8.0          HEALTH ASSESSMENTS

8.1          ATSDR Health Assessments

P.           800001 - Memorandum to Ms. Grisell Diaz-Cotto, ERRD/NJRB,
             800036   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 2,
                      from Mr, Arthur Block, Sr. Regional
                      Representative, Department of Health & Human
                      Services, Public Health Service, Agency for Toxic
                      Substances and Disease Registry, re: Final Public
                      Health Assessment for Diamond Head Oil Refinery
                      Division, Kearny, Hudson County, New Jersey,
                      October 2,.2 002. (Attachment: Report: Public    '
                      Health Assessment for Diamond Head Oil Refinery
                      Division, Kearny, Hudson County, New Jersey, EPA
                      Facility ID: NJD092226000, prepared by UiS.-
                      Department of Health and Human Services, Public
                      Health Service, Agency for Toxic Substances arid
                      Disease Registry, Sef'ptember 12, 2002.)


                                                                            4


                                                                                                                            500060

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX IV:
S m T E LETTER




                 500061

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      DEPARtMENTOF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
JONS. CORZINE                -                                                                                     M A R K N . MAURIELLO
  Governor                                                                                                                .,    ^
                                                                                                                         Acting Commissioner


                                                                                    EP 2 2 2009
             Mr. Walter Mugdan, Director ',
             Emergency and Remedial Response Division
             U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
             Region II
             290 Broadway
             New York, NY 10007-1866

             Re:    Diariiond Head Oil Superfund site
                    Record of Decision ;


         . Dear Mr. Mugdan:                                                 (          ,

             The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) completed its review of
             die "Record of Decision, Operable Unit 1 - Light Nonaqueous Phase Liquid Source
             Area, Diamond Head Oil Superfund site, Kearny Township, Hudson County, New
             Jersey" prepared by the U.S. Etivironmental Protection Agency (EPA) Region II in
             September 2009 and concurs with its selected remedy to address iJie light nonaqueous
             phase liquid (LNAPL)soiirce area..                      y >.,

             The response action described for the LNAPL source area represents the first operable
             unit for the site. It is considered an interim actioii with no operation and maintenance as
             defined in the National Contingency Plan.

             TaQ selected.reniedy described in the Record of Decision involves the excavation of the
             LNAPL source areas, construction of an on-site biocell for treatment of wastes, and off-
             site disposal of the most highly contaminated areas within the excavated material. The
             major components of the selected response action that DEP coricufs with include:

                    Isolation of the remedial target areas with cut-off walls, and excavatiori of the
                    principal threat LNAPL areas, a total of approximately 45,825 cubic yards of
                    material; .

                    For the highly contaminated portion of the excavated material that is not
                    amenable toi on-site treatment, transportation and off-site disposal facility (with
                    treatment as required to meet land disposal requirements);




                           New Jersey is an Equal Opparlunity Employer, Printed on Recycled Paper and Recyclable


                                                                                                                          500062

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        For the lesser contaminated LNAPL iotiaterial amenable to on-site treatment,
        construction of a biocell within the excavated area to facilitate biodegradation of
        the LNAPL wastes, including the iristallatibn of piping for air and nutrient
        distribution and a collection system for air and water that may accuniulate in the
        biocell;      : •

        Introduction of nutrients and bulking agents to the lesser contaminated LNAPL <
        material to, enhance permeability and the conditions forbiological activity,
        followed by placement of this augmented LNAPL material inthe biocell for
        treatmentiand capping; and '             = , !                            '

        Operation of the aeration, nutrient distribution, and water collection systems for
        the biocell for an estiinated five-year period; and , . '        , ,. •

   .•   Performance sampling and finalconfirination sampling to demonstrate that the
        LNAPL wastes have been destroyed through biological degradation, at which
        tirhe the biocell components will^be dismantled.

This iriterim action is protective of human health and the. environment in the short term
and is intended to provide adequate protection until a final ROD is signed, complies with
those federal and state requirements that are applicable or relevant and appropriate for.
this limited-scope action, and is cost-effective. Although this interiih action is not,
intended to address fuUy the statutory mandate for permanence and treatment to the
maxirnum extent practicable, this interim action does utilize treatment and thus supports
that statutory mandate. The selected remedy also meets the statutory preference for the
use df remedies that involve treatment as a principal element.

DEP appreciatestiheopportunity to participate in the decision making process to select an
appropriate remedy arid is looking forward to future cooperation with EPA in further
remedial work at this site, ,                              V

If you have any questions, please call me at 609-984-3078.

                               /       Sincerely,




                                       Edward Putnam, Assistant Director
                                       Publicly Funded Remediation Element
                                       Site Remediation Program



C: Irene Kropp, Assistant Commissioner, Site Remediation Prdgrarn, DEP
   Carole Petersen, Chief, New Jersey Remediation Branch, EPA Region II




                                                                                         500063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         APPENDIX V
                                                                   RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY
                                   Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site
                                          Kearny, New Jersey

INTRODUCTION
    .'   •                                 '       '   •       '   '       •           .   •   •           •   '        •               !           •       •




This Responsiveness Summary provides a summary of the public's
comments and concerns regarding the Proposed Plan for the Diamond
Head Oil Refinery site, and EPA's responses to those comments. At
the time of the public cbmment period, EPA .proposed a pref'erired
approach of a first phase, or operable unit, addressing the LNAPL
source area, a.s an Interim Action for the site.

The Selected Remedy described in this, document. irivolves the
excav^ation of the LNAPL source areas, construction of an on-site
biocell for treatment of wastes, and off-site disposal of the most-
highly contaminated areas within the excavated material.
,            y^.                   •                       •           .       .   '   .           "   "           _.       •                           •               '        •   .   -   '   .   '   •




All comments summarized in this^i document have'been considered in
EPA's final deicision for the selection of the remedy^ for the site.

This Responsiveness Summary is divided into the following
sections :•                  ' •.                    ,-

I.   BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS:    This
section provides the history of community involvement and
interests regarding the Diamond Head Oil Superfund site.
                   .   '   •   '   '   .       .                                                   .                            '   .       i   '               '   ,       .•




II. COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY OF MAJOR.QUESTIONS, COMMENTS, CONCERNS
AND RESPONSES: This section contains summaries of oral comments
received by EPA at the public meeting and EPA's responses to these
comments.            r

The last section of this Responsiveness Summary includes
attachments, which document public participation in the remedy
selection process for this ^site.- They are as follows:

Attachment A contains the, Proposed Plan that was distributed to
the public for review and comments;      ••   .

Attachment B contains the public notice that appeared in The
Observer; and




                                                                                                                                                                                     500064

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Attachment .C contains the transcripts of the public meeting.

EPA received no written comments during the public comment period.

I.    BACKGRdUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS       " -   ' •

 On,July 14, 2009, EPA-released the Proposed Plan and supporting
 dpciamentation for the Interim Actiori to address,the light    '
' nonaqueous phase liquid (LNAPL) source area at the Diatnond Head
 Oil Refinery site. EPA made, these documents available to the
 public dn;the Administrative Record repositories maintained at the
 EPA Region II office (290 Broadway, New York, New York) and the
 Kearny Public Library (318 Kearny Avenue, Kearny, New Jerseys
 07032). EPA published a notice of availability involving these
 documents in The. Observer .'newspaper, and opened a public cbrnment
 period on the documents from Jtily 14, 2009 to August 12, 2009. On
 July 22, 2009, EPA held a public meeting at the main, couricil
 chambers in Kearny Town Hall, to inform local officials and
 interested residents" about ;the Superfund process, to present the
 preferred remedial alternative for the site, solicit oral comment,
 and respond to any questions.

The oral comments received from the public and EPA's responses can
be found in the next sections of _this summary. All recorded
comments for the Diamond Head Oil site's Proposed Plaii have been
included as an attachment to this Responsiveness Summary. For.,
readability and clarity, EPA'grouped, where possible, similar     .
comments into one general comment; therefore, a single response
may answer several comments.                 i

II.    COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY OF MAJOR QUESTIONS, COMMENTS,
       CONCERNS, AND RESPONSES

PART 1: Verbal Comments

A public meeting was held on July 22, 2009, at 6:00 P.M. at the
main council chambers in Kearny,Town Hall, 402 Kearny Avenue,
Kearny, New Jersey. Following a brief presentation of the
investigation findings, EPA presented the Proposed plan for the
site, received comments from meeting participants, and responded
to questions regarding.the remedy proposal under consideration.

Comment: A resident asked what are the areas that would be sent
for off-site disposal.                       .

Response: The 45,000 yards that were identified as the worst part
of the site' would be subjected to bioremediation, which is a
                                   2            .   .'   •




                                                              500065

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

standard method of addressing petroleum-contaminated sites. About
3,000 yards of soil containing free-phase oil would be sent for
off-site disposal.                  '                    •

Comment: The same resident asked about what type of place this
waste would be sent. to.

Response:   The material would probably go to a hazardous waste
landfill.                                  ,

Comment: The same resident asked if the material would go to a
TSDF (Treatment, St:orage, and Disposal Facility) first and then to
a landfill.                      '                       / ^•

Response: It would probably go to a RCRA Subtitle C facility that
.could have the capacity to treat the material on premises, and
 then put it in the landfill.                            ' ,

Comment:   The same resident asked if there was a concern about
metals with regard to disposal.

Response: The material will be tested during remedial design to
determine the proper disposal method. Based on EPA's knowledge df
the site, metals are not likely to' be a detertnining factor.    \

Comment: The same resident asked about the levels of PGBs
detected at the site..

Response: PCBs .were detected at generally low concentrations and
in very few locations -less than ten, across the fifteen-acre,
site, rang;ing in concentration from one to less than. 100 parts per
million'.

Comment: The same resident asked if soils at the site were TSGA-
regulated (Toxic Substances Control Act).

Response: Based upon EPA's current \knowledge of the site, the
soils would not be TSCA-regulated. Samples collected in the early
1980s showed elevated levels of PCBs (higher than we are seeing
today); however, when the facility closed, tons of wastes were
removed, most likely containing some of-the material with the
higher F'CB levels. ; .

PART 2: Written Comments'                                         '

No written comments were received from the public during the
public comment period.                          '".''




                                                            500066

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ATTACHMENT A
PROPOSED PLAN




                500067

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Superfund Program                                                  UiS. Environmental Proteetlon
 Proposed Plan                                                      Agency, Regibn 2
                                                                                                     ^   ^   ^   ^

                    Diamond Head Oil Refinery Superfund Site                                                         •G
                                                                                                                     z
                                             Kearny, New Jersey

 July 2009



 EPA AJWOUNCES PROPOSED PLAN                             MARK YOUR CALENDAR

 This Proposed Plan identifies the preferred             PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD:
 alternative for aii Early Action to address the light   July 14,2009 - August 12. 2009, U.S. EPA will accept
                                                         written comments on die Proposed Ptan during tfa& public;
 nonaqxiebus phase liquid (^LNAPl^) source area at       cotmnent period.^.
 the Diarnond Head Oil Refinery site, and provides
 the rationale for that preference. For this actipn,     PUBLIC MEETING:.
 also referred to as Operablei Unit 1 (OUl), EPA is      July 22i 2009 sa 6:00 P . N k . ' -                ^
                                                         U.S. EPA will hold a pubUc meeting to explain the; -'
 recommending'construction of an on-site biocell to
                                                         P r o v e d Plan and alt of Ac alternatives pr^ented in' dic^
 facilitate the biodegradation of the LNAPL source       Feasibility Studjr.- Oral and written comments wiU also b<^
 area. Not aU the wastes are expected to be              accepted at the meeting. The meeting will be held at Ae
 effectively treated within the bioceU, so this Early    main council chambers in Town Hall, 402 KeamyAvenue,
 Action also includes the excavation and off-site        Keamy,,New Jersey,
 disposal of the more highly contamiriated niaterial
                                                         For more infonnation, see the Administrative Record
, withiii the LNAPL source area. This action would       at the foUowuig locations:
 be taken while remedial investigations to determine
 the fill! nature and extent of contamination for the    U.S. EPA Records Center, Region II
 site are completed. : ^                ,                290 Broadway, 18* FIOOT
                                                         New YOTk, New Ywk 10007-1866^
                                                         (212-637-4308)
 This proposed plan summarizes the data                  Hours Monday-Friday- ?"A.M. to 5 P.M.
 considered in making this early action
 recommendation. This document is issued by              Kearny Pnblic Librarj^
 EPA, the lead agency for site activities. EPA, in,      3 i 8 Kearny Avenuff
                                                         Kearny, New^ Jersey 0703Z     •^
 consultation with, the New Jersey Department of         (201-998^2666).      "    • • '
 Environmental Protection (NJDEP), the supiport
 agency for site activities, will select the final OUl   117(a) of the Comprehensive Environmental
 remedy after reviewing and coiisidering all             Response, Compensation and Liability Act
 information submitted during a 30-day public            (CERCLA, or Superfund), and Sections 300.430
 comment period|. EPA, in consultation with
                                                         (f) and 300.435(c) of the National Oil and
 NJDEP, may rnodify the preferied alternative or
                                                         Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan
 select another response action presented in this
                                                         (NCP). This Proposed Plan summarizes
 Proposed Plan based on new infortnation or public
                                                         information that can be found in greater detail in
 comments. Therefore, the public is encouraged to
                                                         several reports, included in the Administrative
 review and comment on aU the information
                                                         Record, in particular, the Jime 2009 report     .
-presented in this Proposed Plan.
                                                         Operable Unit 1 Focused Feasibility Study for the
                                                         LNAPL Source Area (FFS Report). EPA and
 EPA is issuing this Proposed Plan as part of its        NJDEP encourage the public to review these
 cornmunity relations program under Section              documents to gain a more comprehensive




                                                                                                  500068

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    understanding of the site and Superfiind activities     aboveground storage tanks and possibly
    that have been.conducted there.                         subsurface pits were used to store oily wastes.
                                                            These wastes were intermittently discharged '^
    SITE DESCRIPTION                                        directly to adjacent properties to the east and the
                                                            wetland area on the south side of the site, creating
    The Diamond Head site, listed as 1401 Harrison          an "Oil Lake."
    Avenue, Kearny, New Jersey, is characterized by
    contamination from a former oil reprocessing            In 1976, the New Jersey Department of
    facility located near the Hackensack                    Transportation (NJDOT) purchased several lots
    Meadowlands. Figure 1 shows the site location.          from PSC Resources, Inc., as part of its plans for
    The site is comprised of a 15-acre unoccupied           construction of 1-280. In 1977, NJDOT removed
    parcel that includes wetland areas and drainage         over 10 million gallons of oil and oil-contaminated
    ditches, a small wetland/pond, a vegetated landfill     liquid and over 230,000 cubic yards of oily sludge
    area along the western border, and the iremnants        from the area of the Oil Lake. The liquid wastes
    of the former Diamond Head Oil Refinery on the          were shipped to waste-oil recycling facilities. The
    eastern portion of the site. The parcel is bordered     oil-contaminated sludges from the bottom of the
    by Harrison Avenue (also called the Newark              Oil Lake ^yere excavated and placed in a series of
    Turnpike) to the north, entrarice ramp "M" of           disposal cells, one atop the MSLA 1-D Landfill,
    Interstate 280 (1-280) to the east, 1-280 to the        and a series of smailler cells-within the right-of-
    south, and Campbell Distribution Foundry to the         way (ROW) to the highway, next to the then still-
    west.                    '          .                   operating oil-reprocessing facility. The details of
                   I-
                                                            these disposal efforts are not well,documented,
    The land use surrounding the site is industrial or      but a siniple liner and a clay-based capping
    open space/wetlands; the nearest residential area is    material were to be part of the disposal efforts for
    a half-mile to the west. To the south, a Municipal      the sludjges.
    Sanitary Landfill Authority ( M S L A ) landfill,                       •   •   '   -   -




    identified as the I-D Landfill, is situated south of    While the surficial Oil Lake was removed and
    1-280.                                                  filled, the NJDOT also reported finding an     ^
                                                            "imderground lake" of oil-contaminated
    The 15-acre parcel is fenced. The prior site            groundwater extending from the eastern limits of
    operatioiis took place on the eastern half of the       the 1-280 right-of-way to Frank's Creek, west of
    paj-cel; the landfilled area was once an access road    the site.
    to the 1-D Landfill, and a landfill mound remains
                                                            From the close of operations in 1979 imtil 1982,
    fi-om those activities that rises 10 to 15 feet above
                                                            the abandoned site was not completely fenced. In
    the rest of the site. Surface water drains through a
                                                            1982, during the dismantling of the.oil
    drainage ditch that eventually discharges to
                                                            reprocessing facility, approximately 7,500 gallons
    Frank's Creek, which in turn, discharges to the
                                                            of materials were apparently pumped out of the
    Passaic River.        - .
•   •                                            •   ( '
                                                            tanks and disposed offsite, and 27 tons of
                                                            contaminated soil were reportedly removed from
    SITEfflSTORY
                                                            the site, It was sampling undertaken during this
    The oil reprocessing facility operated under            cleanup effort that first identified hazardous
    several company names, including PSC Resources,         substances, including polychlorinated biphenyls
    Inc., Ag-Met Oil Service, Inc., and Newto\yn            (PCBs) in waste material collected from the site.
    Refining Corporation, from 1946 to early 1979.          Aerial photographs from 1982 show that the oil
    All of these companies were owned by Mr. Robert         reprocessing facility infrastructure had been
    Mahler. During facility operations, multiple            dismantled. The buildings and facilities associated




                                                                                                500069

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  with previous site operations were constructed on       activities that started in the 1940s began to shrink
  the eastern half of the site, and some rernnant         and divide the wetland areas, and thb eventual Oil
  concrete building and tank foundations remain. In       LakCi estimated in 1977 at between six and seven .
   1985, the refinery property was sold toMimi            acres, appears to have formed in a remaining
  Urban Development Corporation, which                    lowland area suripunded by properties filled for
  subsequently changed its name to Hudson                 industrial development arid by what would become
  Meadows Urban Development Corporation.                  the MSLA 1-D Landfill. With the construction of
                                                          1-280, including the placement of the ROW berms,
  The property sat idle for a number of years, at
                                                          an isolated wetland, frequently ponded, remains
  least in part because of the alleged contamination.
                                                          just south Of the former Diamond Head Oil
  EPA was asked by NJDEP to evaluate the site for
                                                           facility.
  inclusion on the National Priorities List (NPL) in
  1999. The site was added to the NPL of
                                                          Two factors have a significant influence on the
  Superfiind sites in September 2:002.
                                                          water table at the site. The first is the presencie of
  In 2002, E P A began a remedial mvestigation (RI),      wetlands along the southern site boundary that
  to determine the nature and extent of the problems      include areas of surfece wateir, arid the second is
  posed by the site. In addition to the LNAPL             the presence of an LNAPL plume in the southeast
   findings discussed below, the RI found soil,           comer of the site in the area of the former lagoon.
  groundwater, sediment and surface water                 Although lighter than water, the density x)f the
  contarnination attributable to the site. The RI also    LNAPL has the effect of depressing the water
  included a number of test trenches thj-ough the         table and influencing groundwater flow. Excepting
  landfill portion of the site to assess the natuire of   these areas, groundwater is first encountered at
  the material buried there, and has collected            the site under unconfined conditions at a depth of
  borings along the 1-280 ROW berms to confirm            one to two feet below the ground surface.
  the presence of the buried sludges. Site studies
' are ongoing; for example, iiew grovmdwater              Site Hydrogeology
  monitoring wells were installed earlier in 2009 on
  a number of neighboring properties to fiilly assess     The stratigraphy at the site consists of a relatively
  the extent of the groundwater problems posed by         uniform vertical sequence of unconsolidated
  the site. Field investigations for the                  materials as follows, from top to bottom:
  comprehensive remedial investigation of the site
  are expected to be complete in 2010, at which           •   A highly variable (in content,and thickness)
  time EPA can proceed, vyith evaluating remedial             layer of anthropogenic fill across the site,
  alternatives for the entire site.                           consisting of typical demolition-type debris,
                                                              including wood, brick, metal, glass, plastic and
  SITE CHARACTERISTICS                                        concrete mixed in a matrix of poorly sorted
                                                              fine to coarse sand and gravel or silt, sand, and
  Site Hydrology                                              gravel.

  The nearest surface water body is Frank's Creek,
                                                          •   A sand unit about five feet thick on the
  and as a result of I-280's construction, all drainage
                                                              western side of the site and pinching out until
  on the north side of the highway now travels by a
                                                              it is not present on the eastern side of the site.
  man-made drainage swale, a distance of about 600
  feet to the creek, which in turn discharges to the
                                                          •   A sility clay unit, up to eight feet thick in
  Passaic River. Prior to the 1940s, the area south
                                                              sections of the site, that appears to be
  of Harrison Avenue was wetland. Landfilling
                                                              continuous throughout the study area.




                                                                                                 500070

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         lagoon occupied the southeastern section of the
•   A distinctive peat layer of varying thickness        site and extended eastward. Figure 2 shows the
    but considered continuous across the site.           boundary of the Oil Lake compiled from historical
                                                         aerials of the site.
•   A silt and sand unit approximately 15 to 20
                                                         There is evidence of oil contamination in nearly
    feet thick beneath the peat.
                                                         every boring installed within the 15-acre fenced
                                                         property and in many borings to the southeast.
•   Laminated sih and clay unit, the fiill thickness     Because of this "smear" of oil contamination
    of which was not observed in any of the study        across the site, the RI studies performed to date
    borings to date (as deep as 50 feet).                have used the following methods to document the
                                                         nature and extent of the LNAPL, and to identify
•   Bedrock, which also has not been encountered         the more severely contaminated areas of the site:
    to date.
                                                         •    A geotechiucal measurement tool called laser-
Shallow groundwater flow direction above the                  induced fluorescence (LIF) allowed for the .
silty clay and peat layers is consistent with surface         subsurface mapping of borings that contain
water flow directions, to the south and west. In             -LNAPL. LIF can rapidly identify an oil
the waterbearing unit below the peat, groundwater             "fingerprint," including both extent and
flows from northeast to southwest, consistent with            relative concentration.
regional trends in groundwater flow.
                                                         •    Soil borings were collected throughout the site
                                                              down to the laminated silt and sand imit, as
The ongoing RI studies will resulf in a more
                                                              much as 50 feet deep, and the presence of oil
comprehensive understanding of stratigraphy and
                                                              staining or separate-phase oil in the soil
groundwater;
                                                              borings was documented. These results were
Nature and Extent of LNAPL Source Material                    compared with the LIF sample points to
                                                              calibrate the LIF data to site-specific
The RI studies to date have outlined two areas as
                                                              conditions. -
potential source areas where LNAPL may be
continuing to release contamination to the               •    A number of monitoring wells, meant to
environment:                                                  measure groundwater contamination, have
                                                              thicknesses of floating product in the tops of
•   the former oil reprocessing section of the site,
                                                              the wells, with as much as five feet of LNAPL
    once containing two buildings, multiple
                                                              floating in some wells.
    aboveground storage tanks (ASTs), drum
    storage areas, and possibly underground pits;        •    Samples were collected of contaminated soil
    and                                                       and oily wastes and sludges and sent for
                                                              laboratory analysis to identify potential
•   remnants of the Oil Lake, estimated in 1977 to
                                                              contaminants of concern and to establish an
    cover an area of six to seven acres, located
                                                              analytical profile of the LNAPL.
    over the southern section of the site and
    extending outside the site's fenced boundaries       Using these methods, several characteristics of the
    to the east and south.                               LNAPL were established:
Currently, iri the oil processing section of the site,   •    The LIF study concluded that LNAPL is
only the foundations of one building and two                  present in the subsurface throughout most of
ASTs are visible. No remnants of the Oil Lake are             the investigated area, though the LIF showed
visible, but historical information shows that the            wide variations in the intensity of the LNAPL




                                                                                             500071

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    signal, indicating substantial variation in            considered to present a risk for leaching
    concentration across the site.                         contairiiriarits to groundwater.
     " J    _       •   .   .   .•   •   .   .


•   LNAPL was measured in wells in three, areas        Principal Threat Evaluation of LNAPL
    of the site, one in the former process area, and
                                                       Based on the LNAPL studies performed to date,
    two within the footprint of the OilLake.
                                                       portions-of the LNAPL are more mobile, are likely
    These areas are identified on Figure 2.
                                                       to have a higher toxicity, and' are at a; miieh
•   The vertical occurrence of LNAPL can be            greater concentration at the site. These high-level
    fiirther separated into two depth intervals: (1)   wastes forrii the"principal threat" posed by the
    at the water table (approximately two feet         site, lliaving developed an understanding of the
    below ground surface), sometimes with an           nature and exterit of the LNAPL, the RI studies .
    extended smear zone,into the satiirated fill-      fiirther identified characteristics for the principal
    containing material and soU to about lO feet       threat L N A P L , consistent with EPA guidance.
    below ground surfacd; and (2) as a distinct
                                                       EPA defines principle threat wastes as "those
    deeper interval at depths of 10 to 16 feei
                                                       source niaterials considered to be highly toxic or
    below ground sirrface withiri the silty/clayey
                                                       highly mobile that generally cannot be reliably
    soil; The bulk of LNAPL-containing soil is
                                                       coritained or would present a significant risk to
    located near the water table within the fill
                                                       human health or the environment should exposure
    layer.
                                                       occur. They include liquids or other highly mobile
•   LNAPL appears to contain more diesel range         materiaiis (e.g.^ solvents) or materials that have
    organics than gasoline range organics. The         high concentrations of toxic compounds." By
    following compounds or classes of compounds        contrast, low-level threat wastes are defined as
    were detected in the LNAPL: benzene,               "those materials that generally can be reliably
    toluene, ethyibenzene, and xylenes, as well as     contained and that would represent a low risk in
    a number of other volatile and semivolatile        the event of a release. They include materials that
    organic compounds (VOCs and SVOCs)                 exhibit b w toxicity, low mobility in the
    consistent with a petroleum matrix. In             environrrierit, or are near health-based levels."
    addition, two PCBs (Arochlor-1232 and
    Arochlor-1260) and a variety of metals,            The following lines of evidence based on site-
    including lead and cyanide were also identified    specific data were used to interpret whether the
    in LNAPL-zone samples.                             LNAPL source material at the Diamond Head site
                                                       represents a principal and/or a low level threat:
•   Despite the large thickness of LNAPL found
    in some rnonitoring wells and its relatively       •   Assessment of the presence of LNAPL in the
    high saturation, LNAPL is extremely viscous            soil column through soil borings and
    and is relatively immobile under ambient               interpretation of LIF results, placing particular
    gradierits. This is indicative of a highly             emphasis ori LNAPL foimd at or near the
    weathered LNAPL, where much of the more                ground surface and, therefore, posing a direct-
    mobile components of the site releases have            contact threat;
    degraded or already traveled away from the         •   Corriparison of LIF results to areas where
    site, leaving the less mobile fractions.               LNAPL was visually observed in the pore
•   Within LNAPL, there are pockets of less                spaces of soil cores collected from soil
    weathered LNAPL of high saturation that                borings, and to groundwater data to indicate
    present a leaching concern to gjroundwater.            where the highest mass of wastes were
    These are LNAPL areas that may be                      located, and where those high-concentration




                                                                                            500072

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    wastes were associated with elevated                           '    as operable units. This first operable unit has been
    groundwater concentrations; and                        ^            identified as an early action to address the
                                                                        principal threat LNAPL. A second operable unit
•   Areas where a measureable thickness of                             'wiUaddress residual soil contamination
    LNAPL was found in monitoring wells and
                                                                        attributable to the site including lower-level threat
    piezometers during RI studies.          ,
                                                                        LNAPL, the on-site landfilled area, the ROW
  Using these lines of evidence, LNAPL detected at                      berms, and groundwater and sediment
  the site was separated into areas where LNAPL                         contamination.
  material is considered to represent a principal
  threat, and areas where LNAPL can be corisidered                     ENFORCEMENT
 , to represent a lower-level threat, and for which
  appropriate measures will be Considered during                       Diamond Head Oil Refinery, Inc., and its affiliated
  fiiture feasibility studies. Figure 2 shows the areas                companies are no longer in business. Hudson
  identified as a principal threat using these lines of                Meadows Urban Development Corporation ,
  evidence (shaded in orange). The total area is                       (HMUDC) is the land owner for the former
  roughly 176,000 square feet. This area includes                      Diamond Head Oil facility, and Kearriy Township
  the two areas of the site where monitoring wells                     and NJDOT retain ownership to the remaining
  contain measurable thicknesses of L N A P L                          land associated with the site., At the start of the
  (shaded in yellow). The thicknesses Of the                           RI/FS, EPA concluded that HMUDC was not
  principal threat LNAPL varies. Based on an                           capable of fimding the cost of the necessary
  average depth of seven feet below ground surface,                    studies; the RI/FS has been federally flinded.
  a volume of 45,825 cubic yards, including 2,593
  cubic yards where LNAPL floating product is                          SUMMARY OF RISKS ATTRIBUTABLE TO
, fOund in wells, constitutes the principal threat                     LNAPL SOURCE AREAS
  LNAPL (outlined in red on Figure 2). v
                                                                       The focus of this Early Action is to address Light '
A noncontiguous area within cloverleaf of 1-280                        nonaqueous phase liquid (LNAPL) that
(also identified on Figure 2) appears to meet some                     constitutes a principal threat at, the site. The
of the characteristics of a principal threat as                        principal threat LNAPL is physically similar to
described in the FFS, but it is not as near the                        free oil product. Oil products are toxic to
surface, and groundwater contamination is not as                       ecological receptors and humans through direct
clearly attributable to this area. This area is not                    contact, incidental ingestion, and iiihalation
included within the definition of a principal threat                   pathways. Potential exposure to ecological''
fortius Early Action; further studies of this area                     receptors and humans from the high-concentration
will be carried out as part of the site-wide RI.                       LNAPL that is present at the site could result in
                7        •   '   •   ••   •   •   •   ••       -
                                                                       adverse health effects. It is, therefore, important
While fiirther studies of the landfilled area of the                   that steps be taken to reduce or eliminate the
site are required, the history of site activities and                  volume of LNAPL present at the site. Reducing
the test trenches already installed support EPA's                      or eliminating the L N A P L at the site would reduce
conclusion that the landfill is not a source of                        potential exposure to free product and is an
LNAPL. EPA will fiirther evaluate the landfill as                      iinportant early step in mariaging the site risks;
part of a site-wide RI.                                                however, it is not expected to elirriinate the overall
                                                                       risks and hazards to ecological receptors or
SCOPE AND ROLE OF ACTION
                                                                       humans because of residual contamination that
In order to remediate Superfiind sites, work is                        would remain on the site. This residual
often divided into rernedial phases, also referred to                  contamination will be addressed in subsequent




                                                                                                             500073

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

actions and will be accompanied by full ecological    This proposed action would address the principal
and human health risk assessments.                    threat Wastes that have been identified to date at
                                                      the site; thereby addressing; the: most, hiighiy
In addition to removing the potential exposure to     contaminated material that, withoiit eariy
LNAPL at the site, reducing or eliminating the^       attention, would resiult in ongoing contariraiatioii '
L N A P L would also limit its potential migration,   of curreritly uncoritariiinated areas. The RAOs
which would aid in investigating and selecting a      would be achieved by attaining the remediation
remedy for the remainder of the site.                 "goals of no liieasurable thickriess of LNAPL in
                                                      monitoring wells, and no potbritial for LNAPL-
A list of chemicals of potential concern identified   cOritarriinated soil to leach oil arid grease to
to date can be found in Table 1. Further              groundwater, as measured by a synthetic
information about the nature and exterit of           precipitate leachate procedure (^PLP) leaching
contamination found at the site is included in the    test. Because there are no Federal or State
Adnainistrative Record.                               cleanup staridards for LNAPL, EPA established
                                                      these remediation goals based upon the toxicity
Based upon the results of the site studies to date,   and mobility and the principal threats to address
EPA has determined that actual or threatened          this continuing source.
releases of hazardous substances from the site, if
not addressed by the preferred remedy or one of       SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES
the other active measures considered, may present
a current or potential threat to huinan health and     The RAOs identified above are primarily focused
the environment.                        i              on addressing the LNAPL mass and do not
                                                       specifically address the co-located chemical
REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES                            •contamination in soil at the site: Some, though
                                                       not all of this chemical contamination is associated
The following remedialaction objectives for the
                                                       with LNAPL; therefore, by rediicing the mass of
principal threat LNAPL/wastes address the human        LNAPL, the Early Action would also reduce some
health risks and environmental concerns at the         of the co-located dhemical contamination and the
Diamond Head Oil site:                                 unacceptable risks to potential human and
                             . /    •   •   .   •
                                                       ecological receptors associated with both the
•   Remove or treat priricipal threats, consistent     LNAPL and co-located chemical contariaination at
    with the NCP, to the extent practicable;           the site.
•   Prevent current and fiiture migration of          While the effects of the selected technologies on
    LNAPL and associated chemical contaminants        the CO-located chemical contamination cannot be
    to the various media at the site including^       quantified at this time, the effectiveness of each
    groundwater and seeps to surface water; and       ahemative is presented in terms of LNAPL source
•   Prevent human exposure through direct             reduction and the technology's potential to reduce
    contact with the principal threat LNAPL.          concentrations of other chemicals present at the
                                                      site.
The first two RAOs are intended to address the
principal threat LNAPLand the contamination            The principal threat LNAPL to be addressed by
that may be released from this material. The third     this proposed action encompasses two areas
RAO is intended to address risks to potential          (outlined in red in Figure 2), and identified in the
fiiture site workers/users as a result of exposures   •FFS report as the "remedial target area." The
to this material.                                      thickness of the principal threat LNAPL varies
                                                       from between s k and 12 feet, and at its deepest.




                                                                                             500074

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

appears to have penetrated as much as six inches         Altemative 2: On-Site Biocell
into the silty/clay layer that underlies the site. The   Capital Cost:                           $16,080,000
total volume of these areas was estimated in the
FFS at 45,825 cubic yards.                               Annual Biocell Operations Cost:           $207,000

The RI included several treatability studies Of          Annual operation and maintenance                  $0
technologies that are commonly used for                  (O&M) Costs:
petroleum-based LNAPL: in-situ air sparging and          Present-Worth Cost:                     $17,340,000
LNAPL pumping. For both technologies, the
viscosity of the LNAPL was an impediment to              Constmction Time:                       1 year
successflil performance. Consequently, neither of
these technologies was carried forward in the FFS,       Remediation Time:                       5 years
althoughthe biodegradation treatment process at
work in air sparging is present in Alternative 2.        Under this altemative, the remedial target areas
                                                         would be isolated with a sheet pile wall, and the
Detailed descriptions of the remedial alternatives       principal threat LNAPL areas excavated. Some of
can be found in the FFS report. The alternatives         this material, as discussed more flilly below,
are:                                                     would be removed for off-site disposal. The.
                                                         remaining excavated material would be augmented
Alternative l:No Action                                  with nutrients and bulking agents to enhance
                                                         permeability and the conditions for biological
Capital Cost:                            $0
                                                         activity. The area within the sheet pile walls
Annual O&M Cost:                         $0              would be converted into a biocell by installing
                                                         piping to supply air and distribute nutrient
Present-Worth Cost:                      $0              additives, along with a collection system for air
                                                         and water that may accumulate in the biocell. The
Construction Time:                       NA
                                                         augmented LNAPL material would then be placed
                                                         in the biocell for treatment, and capped.
The Superfiind program requires that the "no-
action" ahemative be considered as a baseline for        The biocell would require continued operation of
comparison with the other alternatives. The no           the aeration^I nutrient distribution, and water
further action ahemative does not include ariy           collection systems, including collecting and
physical remedial measures (beyond those       v         treating water accumulated in the biocell, and
response actions afready completed) that address         maintenance of the cover, until the remediation
the LNAPL contamination at the site.                     goals are achieved. The FFS describes
                                                         performance sampling and final confirmation
Because this altemative would result in                  sampling that would be required to demonstrate .
contaminants remaining on site above health-based        that, the LNAPL wastes have been destroyed
levels, CERCLA requires that the site be reviewed        through biological degradation, at which time, the
every five years. If justified by the review,            biocell components would be dismantled. The
remedial actions may be implemented, to remove           FFS estimates that the biocell would require five
or treat the wastes.                                     years to achieve the remediatioii goals.

                                                         Areas where a measureable layer of floating
                                                         LNAPL product is found in monitoring wells may
                                                         not be amenable to effect treatment in the biocell,
                                                         or may exteiid the time frame required for




                                                                                             500075

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

treatment beyond the projected fiye^year time            Altemative 3: On-Site Soil Waishirig
period. Under this altemative, these areas would
be excavated and transported for off-site disposal.     Capital Cost:                         $18,560,000
These highly cpiitaminated soils and sludges may
                                                        Annual Q&M Costs:                               $0
need treatrnent yiastaijilization to allow for
transportation. The quantity of material that           Pres^nt--Worth Cost;                  $18,560,000
would not be suitable for the biocell carmot be
determined until remedial design; for cost-             Construction Time:                  yeai"
estimating purposes, the FFS assuriied, at
minimum, that the floating product area,                 Under this alternative, the remedial target areas
approximately 2,600 cubic yards of the 45,825            would be isolated with a sheet pile wall, and the
cubic yards within the remedial target areas,            principal threat LNAPL areas excavated. The
would, be disposed of in this fashion. Although          excavated material would then be treated on site
additional treatability work during remedial design      using soil washing. The excavated soils and
will refine the arnount of material to be shipped off    LNAPL wastes would be placed in a slurry reactor
site for disposal, the volume coiild be much larger      vessel and'combined with a washing fluid, a
than 2,600 cubic yards; the effectiveness of the         combinaition of water, surfactants and co-solvents
process in achieving cleanup goals Within given          that would "wash" (desorb or dissolve) the
time periods will be amajor factor in this               LNAPL from the soil particles. This technology
determination. For example, removing a larger            requires a water treatment facility to treat the -
volurne of material for off-site disposal may            LNAPL and contaminants of coricern in the
reduce the time to meet cleanup goals and enable         washing fluid so it can be reused. The separated
more rapid reuse of the site:            /               wastes from soil washing would be taken off site
                                                         for fiirther treatirient and disposal. The treated
While this altemative would resuh in contaminants        soil material would be tested for compliance with
remauling within the remedial target areas above         the cleanup goals, and retumed to the excavated
health-based levels, the action is expected to           areas.
address the priricipal threat LNAPL as a final
action. A subsequent Record of Decision will be          The FFS describes confirmation sampling required
required to make a final determination about the         to demonstrate that the LNAPL wastes have been
underlying constitiients that would remain within        removed from the treated soils prior to returning
the treated soil; therefore, the need for a review of    the material to tlie excavation. The FFS estimates
the sitie every five years, as required by CERCLA        that soil Washing could be implemented in
if contaminants remain above health-based levels,        approximately orie year..
would be made at that time. If justified by the          As with Alternative 2, areas where a measureable
RI/FS, remedial actions niay be implemented to           layer of floating LNAPL product is found in
remove or treat such wastes.                             monitoring wells may not be amenable to soil
                                                         washing, and this altemative assumes that these
                                                         areas would be excavated, treated as necessary,
                                                         and transported for off-site disposal. For cost-
                                                         estimating purposes, the FFS assumed that, at
                                                         minimum, the floating product area would be
                                                         addressed in this fashion.

                                                         While this altemative would result in contaminants
                                                         remaining within the remedial target areas above
                                                         health-based levels, the action is expected to




                                                                                            500076

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 address the principal threat LNAPL as a fmal                       remaining within the remedial target areas above
 action. A subsequent Record of Decisiori will be                   heahh-based levels, as any underlying constituents
 required to make a final determination about the                   within the excavated area would also be removed.
 underlying constituents that would remain within'                  A subsequent Record of Decision will still'be
 the treated soil; therefore, the need for a review of              required to make a final determination about the
 the site every five years, as required by CERCLA                   need for five-year reviews for other areas of the
 if contaminants remain above health-based levels,                  site.
 would be made at that time. If justified by the
 RI/FS, additional remedial actions may be                          EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES
 implemerited to remove or treat such wastes.
                                                                    Nine criteria are used to evaluate the different
 Altemative 4: Excavation and OfT-Site                              remediation^ahematives individually and against,
 Treatment/Disposal                                                 each other in order to select a remedy, (see Table
                                                                    above, "Evaluation Criteria for Superfund
Capital Cost:                              $19,450,000              Remedial Altematives"). This section of the
                                                                    Proposed Plan profiles the relative performance of
Annual O&M Costs:                                         $0
                                                                    each altemative against the nine criteria, noting
Present-Worth Cost:                        $19,450,000              how it compares to the other options urider
                                                                    consideration. The nine evaluation criteria are .
Construction Tirne:                   1 year                        discussed above. The "Detailed Analysis of
 Under this altemative, the remedial target areas                   Altematives" can be found in the FFS.
 would be isolated with a sheet pile wall, and the
 principal threat LNAPL areas excavated. As with                    1. Overall Protection of Human Health and
 Alternatives 2 and 3, dewatering would be                             the Environment
 required prior to excavation, and the removed
 water would need to be treated prior to discharge.                 Given the limited Scope of this early action, the
 The excavated material would then be stabilized                    remedialaction objectives only consider
 on site to allow for transportation for off-site                   protectlveness of actions to address the principal
 disposal. The excavated areas would be backfilled                  threat LNAPL. Site-wide protectlveness will be
 with clean fill.                                                   considered in a subsequent decision document.
                                                                    The no action ahemative is not considered
 Sampling would be performed during remedial                        protective because it does nothing to mitigate the
~ design to delineate the extent of the remedial                    LNAPL as a continuing source of contamination
 target areas, but no performance monitoring                        or as a direct contact threat.
 would be required. The FFS estimates that this
 ahemative could be implemented in approximately                    Altematiye 1, the "No Action" ahemative, is not
 one year.                                                          protective of humari heakh and the environment.
                                      ,/          ,   •    .
                                                                    The remaining altematives are considered
 Because this altemative would create a "clean                      protective, because they remove the LNAPL
 island" in the center of the site, the sheet pile wall             through treatment or off-site disposal.
 would be left in place at the end of the action.
 The excavated area would be graded to create a
                                                                    2. Compliance with ARARs
 recharge area that would inaintain a positive
 gradient from within the sheet piled areas to the
                                                                    Ahematives 2, 3 and 4 are expected: to satisfy
 outside to prevent recontamination of the area by
                                                                    appUcable or relevant and appropriate
 other contaminants of concern.
                                                                    requirements ( A R A R S ) that pertain to the
 This altemative would not result in contaminants

                                                               10




                                                                                                       500077

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                           EVALUATION CRITERIA FOR SUPERFUND REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES
      Overall Pmtactiveness o f Human Health a n d the Environment evaluates whether and how an alternative'
      eliminates, reduces, or controls threats to public health and the environment through institut»nal controls, engheering
      controls, or treatment
      Compliance with ARARs evaluates whether the alternative meets federal and state environmental statutes,
      regulations, and other requrrements that are legally applicable, or relevant and appropriate to the site, or whether a
      waiver is justified.
      Long-term Effectfveness a n d Permanence considers the ability of an altemativa to mantain protection of human-
      health and the environment over tima
      Reduction o f Toxicity, Mobility, o r Volume o f Contaminants through Treatment evahstes an aRemative's use of
      treatment to reduce the harmful effects of pnncipal contaminants, their abSity to move in the environment, and the
      amount of contamnatton present
      Short-term Effectiveness considers the length of time needed to implement an altemative and the risks the altemative
      poses to workers, the community, and the environment durmg implementalton.
      Impleitientabillty considers the technicat and administrative feasibility of implementing the altemative, including factors
      such as the relative avaaabtlity of goods and services.
      Cost includes estonated capital and annual operations and maintenance costs, as we8 as present worth cost* Present
      worth cost is the total cost of an altemative over time in tenns of todays dollar vaiueu Cost estimates are expected to ba
      accurate within a range of •••50 tb -30 percents-'                 '    - --
      State/Support A g e i K y Acceptance considers whether the State agrees with the EPA's analyses and
      recommeTKlatiorts, as descnbed in the Rl/FS and Proposed Plan. , . ' ~     > ' -
      Cotmmuniiy Acceptance considers w h ^ e r the loc^ community agrees with EPA's analyses and preferred alternative!
      ;G6mmerits received on the Proposed Plan are an important ir\dicator of community acceptarice. .                '
principal threat LNAPL and comply with the
substantive requirements of the appUcable laws
and regulations. EPA has developed site-specific                         3. Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence
remediation goals that are consistent with the                           The No, Action akernative offers no long-term
expectations of the New Jersey Teclmieal                                 effectiveness or permanence. For Alterriatives 2
Requirements for the remediation of free product                         and 3, the potential risks from the principal threat
(NJ.A.C 7:26E-1). The Resource Conservation                              LNAPL woiild be reduced, altlio^ugh both
and Recovery Act (RCRA), 40 CFR 261, is,                                 altematives can be expected to leave some
applicable for assessing the disposal requireriients                     residual LNAPL in the remedial target areas.
of potentiaUy hazardous soUd wastes, such as the                         Altemative 4 eliminates principal threat LNAPL
LNAPL-contaminated soils; Based upon the                                 within the remedial target areas. As discussed
available, documentation, EPA has concluded that                         earlier, this action only addresses LNAPL that is
the LNAPL wastes are not listed hazardous waste,                         considered a principal threat; under aU the active
nOr do they exhibit hazardous characteristics;                           alterriatives, lower-level threat LNAPL would
therefore, they do not require treatment to meet                         remain on other areas of the site.
R C R A Land Disposal Restrictions.
                                                                         Other than water from biocell dewatering during
It should beriotedthat the active ahematives                             operation, no treatment residuals are expected
require the disturbance of the on-site wetlands.                         from Ahemative 2. Treatment residuals, in
Restoration of the wetlands is not included in                           addition to waterfrOmdewatering, are expected
these ahematives, as a significant full-scale                            from Ahemative 3; the concentrations of.principal
remediation effort is expected to follow this Early                      threat LNAPL and associated contaminants are
Action. Therefore, wetland restoration will need                         expected to be high in these residuals (e.g., filter
to be considered as part of the overall remedial                         cake and blowdowii water from soil washing).
action for the site.                                                     The residuals from Altemative 3 are assumed to
                                                                         require off-site treatment and disposal. There are

                                                                   11




                                                                                                                      500078

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

no treatment residuals for Altemative 4, as this              associated with the No Action altemative.
ahemative involves the excavation and off-site                Ahematives 2, 3 and 4 would present some short-
disposal of all the waste. •                                  term risks to the community (dust, emissions, soil
                                                              erosion); however, these risks can be controlled
For Ahematives 2 and 3, at the end of the                     through engineering controls. Risks to workers
implementation period, an isolation barrier would
                                                              during implementation also can be controlled
not be needed around the treated soil, as the
                                                              through safety procediires and the use of personal
treated soil is expected to be of similar
                                                              protection. As noted earUer in this Proposed Plan,
characteristics to the surrounding soil, including
                                                              there are no residences within half a mile of.the
some residiial LNAPL and some underlying
                                                              site. Short-term concenis would relate to any
constituents that would not be treated.
                                                              potential impacts on industrial and commercial
Under Ahemative 4, an isolation barrier, around               neighbors.                                        ' '
the perimeter of the remedial target areas would
                                                              All of the ahematives involve excavation. Risks
need to be maintained between the new backfill
                                                              to commercial and industrial neighbors can be
and the surrounding soil. This isolation barrier
                                                              controlled through engineering controls such as
would be needed as the remediated area is
                                                              soil erosion controls, dust suppressants, and the
expected to contain no L N A P L and no other
                                                              implementation of spill prevention and response
contaminants compared to'the surrounding soil.
                                                              procedirres. Risks to workers also can be
The surface would need to be graded to drairi
                                                              contro lied by using safety procedures and
clean surface water toward remediated soil such
                                                              protective equipment.
that there is a slight positive gradient,from within
the remedial target areas to the outside. Thus,               Short-term risks associated with Ahemative 4
while Altemative 4 provides more long-term ^                  would be the greatest because of its larger
permanence by addressing all the LNAPL and all                transportation component (both contaminated soil
the underlying constituents not treated by                    and clean backfill need to be transported from and
Altematives 2 and 3, it achieves a level of                   to the site). The short-term risks are expected to
remediation - a "clean island" in the middle of still-        be the lowest for the biocell constmction and
contaminated soils - that requires more rigorous              operation.
efforts to maintain.
                                                              This Early Action will be the first of several
4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume                 remedial actions for the site; therefore, one short-
   of Contaminants Through Treatment                          term consideration would be whether this action
                                                              delays or otherwise hmits future remedial
Ahemative 1 provides no reduction in toxicity,                decision-making. Altemative 2 appears to pose
mobility or volume. Ahematives 2 and 3 wOuld                  the highest likelihood of confounding future
reduce the toxicity, mobihty and volume of the                remedial planning because of its longer operational
contaminants m the remedial target areas through              phase. The biocell may also take additional time,
treatment. For Altematives 2 and 3, the treatment             beyond the projected five years in the FFS, to
is permanent.                                                 reach the remediation goals, and a longer time
                                                              period may interfere with other remedial planning
Ahemative 4 does not use treatment - rather, the              or with the timely reuse of the property. As
toxicity and volume are transferred from the site             discussed above, urider Long-Term Effectiveness
through off-site disposal                                     and Permanence, Altemative 4 poses the plausible
5. Short-term Effectiveness                                   scenario of a "clean island" within an area with a
                                                              long history of industrial use, where a future
There are no short-term effectiveness issues                  remedy may heed to choose to either to maintain


                                                         12




                                                                                                  500079

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

this cleaner zone at high expense, or allow it to be         .:!.    Cost,                            ."•••
recontaminated.
                                                               The estimated present worth costs of Alternatives
6. Implementability                                            2, 3 and 4 are $ 17,3 miUiori, $ 18.4 rriilhOri arid
                                                               $ 19.5 milUon, respectively. There areriocosts
There are rio impleiheritability issues associated             associated with Altemative 1.
with the No Action altfematiye. Alteriiatives 2, 3
and 4 are considered implementable froin a                     8.    State/Support Agency Acceptance
coristmetabiUtyperspective. Possible challenges
common to all three ahematives include the                     The State of New Jersey concurs with EPA's
difficulty of installing sheet piles in clayey soils,          preferred ahemative in this Proposed Plan.
excavation dewatering and water treatment,
phasing cell construction, and uncertainties in the            9.    Community Acceptance
depth to and variabiUty of the native clay layer.
Because of the complexities of the equipment and               Community acceptance of the preferied alternative
process^ the soil washing technology is expected               will be evaluated after the public commeiit period
to have a higher potential for delays associated               ends and will be described in the Record of
with equipment problems. Portions of the                       Decision, the document that formaUzes the
principal threat LNAPL soils are clays and oily                selectionof the remedy for the site, ^
wastes that will pose significant materials handUng
challenges; therefore, preparation of material for             PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE
placement in the biocell and for the feed to the soil
washing process is critical for both altematives,;             Based on an evaluation of the various ahematives,
ahhough probably more so for the soil washirig                 EPA and NJDEP recommend Alternative 2, the
process. As described in Ahematives 2 and 3, the               on-site biocell along with excavation and off-site
most highly concentrated areas of the site, where              disposal of the more highly coritaminated material
floating product is found, canriot likely be treated           as the preferred ahemative to address the principal
through either the biocell or through soil washing,            threat LNAPL. This ahemative involves isolating
and would need to be transported off site for                  the remedial target areas with sheet pile walls, and
disposal.                                                      excavating the priricipal threat LNAPL areas, a
                                                               total of approximately 45,825 cubic yards of
Equipment and speciaUsts are commercially                      material. The more highly contaminated portion
available and sufficiently proven for all three                of this material, including all Uquid LNAPL at a
ahematives, ahhough fewer vendors are available              . minimum, will be transported off site for disposal.
for competitive bidding for the soil washirig                  The remaining excavated material would then be
technology.                                                    augmented with nutrients and bulking agents to
                                                               enhance permeabihty and the conditions for
Ahemative 2 would require operation over a                     biological activity, and the area within the sheet
longer period (five years of operations are                  • pile \yalls would be converted into a biocell by
estimated) than Ahematives 3 and 4. The O&M                    installing piping for air and nutrient distributipn
activities needed for this ahemative are routine,              and a collection system for air and water that may
and failure of a component of the altemative is not            accumulate in the biocell. The augmented
expected to resuh in any significant threats to                LNAPL material would then be placed in the
pubhc health or the environment.                               biocell for treatment, and capped.

                                                               Operation of the aeration, nutrient distribution,
                                                               and water collection systems for the biocell would
                                                        13




                                                                                                    500080

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                1



be required for an estunated five-year period.                                                  Superfund activities that have been conducted
Performance sampUng and final confirmation                                                      there;
samphrig would be conducted to demonstrate that
the LNAPL wastes have been destroyed through                                                    The dates for the public comment period, the date,
biological degradation, at which time the biocell                                               location and time of the public rrieetmg, and the
components would be dismantled.                                                                 locations of the Administrative Record files, are
                                                                                                provided on the front page of this Proposed Plan.
In addhion to liquid LNAPL, soils with LNAPL                                                    Written comments on the Proposed Plan should be
concentrations that are found during the remedial
                                                                                                addressed to the Remedial Project Manager,
design to be unsuitable for treatment in the biocell
                                                                                                Grisell V. Diaz-Cotto, at the address below.
(based on factors including the effectiveness of the
technology to achieve cleanup goals, the projected
                                                                                                E P A Region 2 has designated a pubhc liaison as a
time period to do so, engineering concems, etc)
                                                                                                point-of-contact for the community concems and
would be excavated and treated via stabilization, if
                                                                                                questions about the federal Superfund program in
needed to allow for transportation, and
                                                                                                New York, New Jersey, Puerto Rico, and the U.S.
transported for off-site disposal.
                                                                                                Virgin Islands. To support this effort, the Agency
The preferred ahemative would achieve the                                                       has estabhshed a 24-hour, toll-fi-ee number that
remediation goals that are protective for the                                                   thepubhc can call to request information, express
principal threat LNAPL, but a subsequent decision                                               concems, or register complaints about Superfund.
is still necessary to address the underlying
constituents within this material. Thus, the need                                                   For further information on the Diamondhead site,
for institutional controls, such as a deed notice or                                                please speaii with*.
covenant, would be determined as part of a fiiture                                                  Grisell V. Dfaz-Cotto       Wanda Ayala
remedy,                                                                                             Remedial Project            Community Relations
         ;   "                 .   .   ;   •   ,   •                               •   '

                                                                                                    Manager                      Coordinator
The preferred altemative is beUeved to provide the                                                  (212)637-4430 '              (212)637-3676
                                                                                                    Email: diaz-cotto.grisell@epa.gov
best balance of trade-offs among the ahematives
based on the information available to EPA at this                                                   U.S. EPA
time. EPA believes that the preferred ahemative                                                     290 Broadway 19"' Floor
would be protective of human health and the                                                         New York, New York 10007-1866
environment, would comply with ARARs, would
be cost-effective, and would utihze permanent '                                                     Written comments on this proposed plan should be
                                                                                                    addressed to Ms. Diaz-Cotto
solutions and ahemative treatment technologies to
the maximum extent practicable. The selected                                                        The public liaison for EPA's Region 2 is:
ahemative can change in response to pubhc
comment or new information.        ^                                                                George H. Zachos
                                                                                                    Regional Public Liaison                                       •   ;


                                                                                                    Toll-free (888) 283-7626
Consistent with EPA Region 2's Clean and Green
                                                                                                    (732)321-6621
Pohcy, EPA will evaluate the use of sustainable
technologies and practices with respect to any                                                      U.S. EPA Region 2
rernedial ahemative selected for the site.                                                          2890 Woodbridge Avenue, MS-211
                                                                                                    Edison, New Jersey 08837-3679
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
  • 1             •    -   •                           •   .   -       .   •   •




EPA encourages the public to gain a more
comprehensive understanding of the site and the

                                                                   •                       14
                                                                                                    •   '.                     •   •   .         ~)   .   •   .




                                                                                                                                            500081

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                             Source: Hagstrom Union/Hudson/Essex County Atlas, 1990
                                                                   Hudson County, Page 5, Grid C-7




                                                                                Figure 1 - Diamond Head Oil - Site Location Map
                                                                                           Vacant Lot Adjacent to 1235 Harrison Avenue
                                                                                           Kearny, NJ 07032 (Hudson County)
See Also: USGS 7.5' Quadrangle; Elizabeth, NJ; Pholorevised 1981
40° 44- 50- lat. 74» DT 55 S" long (NAD 83)




                                                                                                                           500082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

500083

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              •   .   \   •      '   '




                                                                                            , Table 1
                                                             Summary of Chemicals of Potential Concern for the HHRA
                                                                              Diamond Head Rl/FS, Kearny, NJ
                             ,.          '                                                                                                ,   '   N.


                                                                                                                                                        Subsurface Soil (2 to 12
                                                                                                                     Surface Soil (0 to 2 feet            feet below ground
      Surface Water                                       Groundwater                               Sediment         t>elow ground surface)                    surface)

Chlorobenzene                                Benzene                                     Benzene '                  Benzene                            Benzene          ^
Chloroethane                                 Chlorobenzene                               Dichlonjbenzene-1,4        Ethyibenzene                       Bromomethane
Dichlorobenzene-1,4                          Chloroethane                                Ethyibenzene               Tetrachloroethylene                Carbon tetrachloride
pichloroethane-1,2                           Dichlorobehzene-1,3                         Tetrachloroethylene        Trichloroethylene                  Ghtoroform
Dichloroethylene-1,2 cis                     Dichlorbbenzene-1.4                         Trichloroethylene          Xylenes, total                     Dibromoethane-1,2
Tetrachloraethylene                          Oichloroethene-1,2 trans                    Xylenes, total             Acetophenone                       Dichlprobenzene-1,3
rrichlproethylene                            Dichloroethylene-1,2 cis .    -.            Acetophenone               Ben20(a)anthracene                 Dichlorobenzene-1,4
Vinyl chloride                               Ethyibenzene                                Benzo(a)anthracene         8erizo(a)pyiene                    bichloroethane-1,2 V
                                             Methyl isobutyl ketone (4-methyl-2-
Benzo(a)pyrene                               pentanone)                                  Benzo(a)pyrene             Benzo<b)flupranthene               Dichloroethylene-1,2 cis
Benzo(b)fluoranthene                         Tetrachloroethane-1,1,2,2                   Benzo(b)fluoranthene       Benzo(k)fluoranthene               DichloFopropane-l ,2
BHC, beta                                    Tetrachloroethylene                         Benzo(k)fluoranthene       Olbenzo(a,hjanthracene             Ethyibenzene
                                                                                                                                                       Methyl isobutyl ketone (4-
BHC. delta                                   Trichloroethylene                           Cresol-p                   lndeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene             niethyl-2-pentanone)
Bariunn            '                 '       Vinyl chloride                              Dibenzo(a,h)anthracene     Methylnaphthalene-2                Tetrachloroethylene
Beryllium                                    Xylenes, total                              lndeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene     Iviaphthalene                      Trichtorxjethane-1,1,2
Cadmium                                      Acetophenone                                Methylnaphthalene-2        Aldrin                             Trichloroethylene
Chromjum                                     Cresol-o                                    Naphthalene                BHC, alpha                         Vinyl chloride
Iron     r .•                                Cresol-p                                    Aldrin                     BHC, beta                          Xylenes, total
Lead                                         Cresol-parachloro-meta                      BHC, alpha                 Di^dtin                            Acetophenone
Manganese                                    Dimethylphenol-2,4                          DDT-4,4                    Heptachlor Epoxide                 Benzoi(a)anthracene
Thallium                                     Ether, bis-chloroisppropyl                  Dieldrin                   Pcb-aroclor 1016                   Benzo(a)pyrene
           ,                                 Methylnaphthalener2              ^          Heptachlor Epoxide         Pcb-aroclor 1242                   Benzo(b)nuoranthene
                                             Naphthalene                                 Pcb-aroclor 1242           Pcb-aroclor 1248                   Benzo(k)flupranthene
                                             Nilrophenol-4                               Pcb-aroclor1248            Pcb-aroclor 1260                   Dibenzo(a,h)anthracene
                                         "'' PCP (Pentachlorophenol)                     Pcb-aroclor 1260           Aluminum                           lndeno( 1,2,3-cd )pyrene
                                             Phenol                                      Aluminijm                  Antimony                           Methylnaphthalene-2
                                             Phthalate, bis(2-ethylhexyl) (DEHP)         Antimony                   Arsenic                            Naphthalene
                                             Trichtorophenol-2,4,6                       Arsenic                    Barium                             Aldrin                •
                                 '           DDD-4,4                                     Barium                     Cadniium                           BHC, alpha
                                             Dieldrin                                    Cadmium                    Chromium                           Dieldrin
                                             Heptachlor Epoxide                          Chromium                   Copper                             Heptachlor Epoxide
                                            Aluminum                                     Copper                     Iron                               Pcb-aroclor 1016           ^
                                            Antimony                                     Iron                       Lead                               Pcb-aroclor 1242
                                            Arsenic                                      Lead                       Manganese                          Pcb-aroclor 1248
     ^ .                                     Barium                                      Manganese                  Mercury                            Pcb-aroclor 1254
                                             Chromium                                    Mercury                    Nickel                             Pcb-aroclor 1260
                             '               Lead                                        Silver                     Selenium                           Aluminum
                                             Manganese                                   Thallium                   Silver                             Antimony
                                             Nickel                                      Vanadium                   Thallium                           Arsenic
                                             Selenium                                    Zinc             i'        Vanadium                           Barium
                                            Thallium                                                                Zinc                               BerylliuiTi
 •    —        )        ••       .          Vanadium                                                                                                   Cadmium
                                                                                                ,   •   •   "
                                                                                                                                                       Chromium
                                                                                                                                                       Copper
                                                                                                                                                       Iron
                                                                                                                                                       Lead
                                                                                                                                                       Manganese
                                                                                                                                                       Mercury
                                                                                                                                                       Nickel
                                                                                                                                                       Selenium
                                                                                                                                                       Silver
                                                                                                                                                       Thallium
                                                                                                                J
                                                                                                                                                       Vanadium
                                                                                                                                                       Zinc
                       1,
                                                      '




                                                                                                                                                                              1of 1




                                                                                                                                                                  500084

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ATTACHMENT B
PUBLic NOTICE




                500085

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

12                                                                                                         ThaObMnw                                                                              Wadnssday, iulif 15, 2009



          Kearny Vice Squad busy this summer, drug busts abound
                                                                           From the I k s k of Chief John Dowie
    On five, separate occa-             veillance in the area of                      by the detectives, they      which was found to contain        meii trom the car and subse-        Street after oni; showed
sions during the montli of              Kearny and Belleville Pike                    found 82-small packages of   five smaller bags of niari-       quently seized several bags         signs of being under the in-
June and twice so far in                and followed him to the area                  heroin. Both men were then   juajia - packaged for sale.       of marijuana and numerous           fluence of an intoxicant.
July, persons attempting to             of Seeley and Kearny Av-                      placed under an arrest.      The man was placed under          '•Ecstasy" pills from the trio.   Ai^er confirming their
sell drugs in the Town of               enue where he met with an-       On June 11 at 5:30 p.m.,                  arrest for possession with             Detective^ later searched suspicions and confronting
Kearny were detected and                other person operating a      Officer Mike Andrews con-                    intent to distribute.             a Jersey City apartment the two men, the officers
apprehended by members of               vehicle with out-of:State     fronted four men on Chest-                       On June 15 at 9 p.m..         rented by the men and un- discovered that between
the Kearny Police Depart-               plates.                       nut Street after a call                      vice detectives raided a          covered a large amount of them, the men had 14 pack-
ment at various locations                  The detectives saw what concerning possible drug                        Keamy residence near the          Ecsta-sy, cocaine, Ketaminc, 3gc.>i of hcr^iin oiid, .>cv cii'
throughout the town.                    they believed to be a drug use in the area and saw a 20-                   Belleville Pike .iflerreceiv-     !'. .nnaUohydc, a»iU scales an
                                                                                                                                                                                    Xanax pills. One man had '
   On June 8, at 11:30 a.ni.,           transaction taking place in year-oid man attempt to                        ing information regarding         well as packaging materials.
                                                                                                                                                                                    five outstanding warrants.
Dct Sgt. John View, Det.                the vehicle and approached conceal a plastic bag.     s                    drug-distributioii      opera-         On June 26 at 8 p.m.,
                                                                                                                                                                                     • On July 7 at 9:30 p.m..
Brian McGarry and Det.                  to confum their suspicions.      Officer Andrews took                      lions. Detectives arrested a      vice detectives executed a
                                                                                                                                                                                    Officer Neil Nelson was oii
Michael Gonzalez placed a               On the seat they saw a large contro) of the man and re-                    204year-old Keamy maii            search warrant at a Prospect
                                                                                                                                                                                    toot patrol in ihe area o{
suspicious person iihder sur-           plastic bag; Once recovered . covered the plastic bag.                     and recovered marijuana, a        Place home and uncovered
                                                                                                                                                                                    Keamy and Johnston Av-
                                                                                                                   scale, packaging materials        cocaine, steroids, scales,
 The School Business Admlnistititor/Board Secretary of the Harrison                                                                                                                 enue when he saw an 18-
                                                                                                                   and a handgun for which the       packaging materials, hypo-
 Board of Education, in the County of Hudson, State of New Jersey, by                                              siispect was charged.             dermic needles, currency ycar-old Newairk man that
 autfiority of said Board, solicits sealed bids for student transporta-                                                On June 22, at 11 p.m.        and a handgun. They ar- he knew to be wanted by
 tion. Bids to be received at the Business Office bf the Harrison Board                                            inembers of the \ ice unit        rested the 30-year-old resi- police.
                                                                                                                   placed a vehicle under sur-       dent of the home who has                Officer Nclsiin placed
 of Education, located at 517 Hamilton Street, up to 10:00 A.M.
                                                                                                                   veillance in the area ol Bel-     ail cxiensive criminal his-        the man under arrest and
 prevailing time on July 28,2009.                                                                                                                    tory.
                                                                                                                   grove Drive and saw what
                                                                                                                                                                                        conducted a search, which
                                                                                                                   they believed to be drug ac-.        On July 3, at 4:30 p.m.
                     STUDENT TRANSPORTATION SERVICES                                                                                                                                    produced         a   plastic     bag
                                                                                                                   tivity taking place in the ve-    members of the Directed
                                                                                                                   hicle.                       '                                       found        to contain        sev en
                           2009-2010 School Year                                                                                                     Patrol Unit placed two
                                                                                                                      After confirming their         known drug offenders under         smaller bags of marijuana
                                                                                                                   suspicions, detectives or-        .sun'eillance in the area of       packaged for sale.
 Specificatioiw are available upon request at Uie Business Office of the Harrison
 Board of EdueaUoo; located at 517 Hamilton Street, Harrison, New Jersey, 07029.                                   dered the three Jersey City       Keamy .Avenue and Boyd
 Ail bids must be submitted on the bid form contained In the speeiiications.
 Bids which are not submitted on such form may be rejected.
 Bidders are required lo comply with the requirement of N.J.S.A. 10:5-31 ct seq.
 and N.J.A.C. 17:27 AHinnative Action.
 TbB Board oi Education reserves tlie right to reject any or ail bids.
                                                                                                                                          PIMhed ParentHoocT
 By order oi Ui8 Harrison Board of Education.
                                                                                                                                           of Metropolitan New Jersey

 Date: July 6.2009

                                                                                                                                               SAVE $ 2 r
                                                                                                                                              HEALTH CARE SERWOr^A
                                                   ^        ^
                                                                                                                            • AppcwilMwnte and Walk-in» Welconw           -EiamyBcyContiacapUpa- ^
            UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
            INVTTES PUBUC COMMENT ON THE PROPOSED REMEDY
                FOR THE DIAMOND HEAD OIL SUPERFUND SfTE
                                                                                                                            •BrttCoMnt                                    'futmgA'^tltiim$t1iarSeaaaf
          Tlie U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) wtH h M a putJic meeting on
          July 22,2003 at 6:00 pm at Keamy Town Hafl, 402 Kearny Avenue, Kearny, New                                                                                       TtansmHtBd-WadiliBt
          Jersey to discuss the preferred remedy tor the Diamond Head Oil Supertund Site
          and ttie tiasis tor Itiis preference. The preferred remedy, whicii is d6scnt>ed in
                                                                                                                               T                                          'HIVTeXinB
          the Proposed Ran tncfudes.the construction of an on-site biocati to tacilitata the
          tuofU^ACiaiion o l tiitt hgnt nao-afyiihOii-. piiati*, iri^uiti aoujc^ ared.

          Before selecting the final remedy, EPA wi6 consider oral commertts presented at
          ttte public m e t i n g and written comments received on « before August 12, 2009.                                                        WtANAPPOIRfligfrW                                 <'.'
          Copies of the Proposed Plan and the Administralive Record for the site are
                                                                                                                                                     VWt uf a t tmniMipmniAa^
          sp/aHaUe d the foflowtng locations:                                                                                                                                            '•>«,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ^'
          Kearny Public Library
          318 Kearny Avenue
                                                                US EPA Records Center
                                                                ZSOBroadvray, 18'"Roor                                     t.»mm              fe.as5^%r sss.-. sssu.. aaswu
          Keamy, M l 07032                                      New YotK Now York 10007-1866                                                         •                  •mni.—         - mi^mmm ^lymmmi^aKmmm
          201-91                                                212-637-4308
                                                                By Appointment Only
          Written comments siwuld tia sent to:

          Qriseli Diaz-Cottl>
          Remedial Prqect Manager
          U.S. EPA. Region 2
          l^ew York Remedaeon Branch; 19'" Floor
          ftewYort<,NY 10007-1866
                                                                                                                          $20g$l?:i$20^%
                                                                                                                                Save $20 on your Hat
                                                                                                                                visit with this coupon
                                                                                                                                                                                Save $20 on your first
                                                                                                                                                                                visit with this coupon
          diai-cottaorisetKaeoa.aov'
          (v)   212-637-4430
          (fax) 212-637-4429

          F o r further i n f o i m a t i o n , please contact W a n d a Ayala, C o m m u n i t y
          Involvenient Coordinator at 212-637-3676.




                                                                                                                                                                                 500086

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      ATTACHMENT C .
PUBLIC MEETING TRANSCRIPT




           6



                            500087

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                Page .1
       UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
       •pUBLie MEETING        / .         [
        -   -   - • .   -   -   -   - •   -   -   - .   • -   -   . -   -   •   -   •   .   -   -   -     -   -   •   -   —   .   -   X   .




 3      IN RE: '

 4                      DIAMOND HEAD. OIL SUPERFUND SITE                                                              .

 5

 6
 7                                                                      July 22, 2009
                                                                        6:00 p.m.
 8
 9
10     Meeting held in the above-entitled matter at
11      Ke.arny Town Hall, 402 Kearny. Avenue, Kearny,

12     New Jersey, before Linda A. Marino, Registered

13      Professional Reporter, Certified Court

14     Reporter, and Notary Public within and for'the

15      State of New Jersey.

16-
17
18
19
20
21.
22
23
24
25


                                          Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      39 West 37th Street * New York. New York 10018 ,,                                                 (800) NYC-HNK * Fax; (212) 869-3063

                                                                                                                                              500088

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                          Page 2
 1     P R E      S E NT
 2
 3     WANDA AYALA,    . .                  • ^ ..
             Community Involvement Coordinator, EPA
 4
 5     GRISELL V. DIAZ.-COTTO,
             Remedial Project Manager,--EPA
 6
 7
 8
       OTHER REPRESENTATIVES
 9
10                ANDREW B. JUDD,                                              /
                         Hydrogeologist, CH2M Hill
11
                  CHUCK NACE,
12                       Environmental Toxicoloist, EPA
13                JOHN PRINCE,        ,      '                             •
                        . Section Chief, EPA
14^
15

1&
17                                          o O o
18                                . .;

19
20
21
22.
23'
24
25


                               Fitik & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      39 West 37lh Street * New York. New York 10018            (800) NYC-FINK * Fax„(212) 8(i9s^()(i..<

                                                                                        500089

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                                          Page 3
  1                                   • MS. AYALA:                                              Good evening.                                                  My

  2                   name is Wanda Ayala, and I am the

  3;                  Community Involvement'Coordinator

. 4                   aissigned to the Diamonid Head Oil
                                                                                                                                                               - >'   '
.5
                      Superfund Site.                                               I'm.here tonight with
  6               '   ' . •   -   •   '   .   •     -   i   '   '   •   •   •   ,   •   •   '    •   .   .   .   .   .   ,   •   .   :   .    •    •   :   ;




  7                   John Prince, our Superfund manager; with

  8                   Grisell Diaz-Cotto, . who is the remedial

  9                   project manager;, with Chuck Nace, who's

 10                   an EPA risk assessor; and with Andy

 11               -Judd, who'S' a contractor for the site.
 12                                           We're here to present the
 13                   proposed plan for the Diamond Head Oil
 14                   site, to discuss the pre'ferred remedy
15                    for the site, to go over our
16                    recommendations for addressing the
17                    contamination, and'to discuss"our
18                    rationale for this recommendation.
 19                                           The public comment period for
20                    this.-'proposed plan started on July 14-,
.21                   and it's for thirty days and we are

22                    required to receive public comments..

23                    All comments will be duly noted tonight .

_24                   by our stenographer, Linda. -•                                                                                                           '      ;

25                                            It is important that everyone

                      here know that EPA's community
                                                  Fink & Gamey Reporting and Video Services
       39 Wesi 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                                                                                        (800) NYC-FINK * Fax; (212) 869-3063

                                                                                                                                                                          500090

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Page-, 4
    1                involvement program is committed to

    2                promoting communication between the

    3,               public and the agency.                   Active public

•   4                involvement and transparency is crucial,

    5                to the success of any public project,

    6                and our community involvement activities

    7                at this site are designed to inform you,

    8                involve you, and include you in the

    9                decision making process since this is

10                   your community.
                                                                   •   .   •   •   '   1




11                               I'd like to thank you all for
12                   being here tonight.                  And I was going to
13                   set some ground rules, but since we have •
14                   a public of two, I ask that if \you have
15                   any questions, that you keep them until
16                   the end of the presentation.                      And
17                   whenever you ask a, question, you need to
18                   state your name because Linda needs to"
19                   record it.           Federal regulations require
20                   that we have a transcript of.this
21                   meeting to help us capture your input.
22                         '     Now I'd like to turn it .over to
23                   John, who will walk you through the ^
24                   Superfund process and information about
25                   the site.


                                ' Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
         39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018   /       (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-3063

                                                                                           500091

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                               Page 5
  1                     , ..: MR. PRINCE:' Thank y o u , Wanda.

' 2                            MS. AYALA:                     You're welcome,                                      -

  3-                           MR. PRINCE.:                       Soy; this first slide

  4               is a summary of the whole Superfund -
                    '    •       •                    .                   •     •   '   •   )   '     .    .   •   •   '   •




  5               process, and we can get you a cut "of
  6               it.        Ajid I'm not going to. try and'go
  7               through all the pieces because we don't
  8               need to talk about all the pieces.                                                               I'm
  9               going to hit on some of .the. highlights.
'lO.              And the print ;is too small anyway:,- So,,
11                we'll not try and do any more than is
12                necessary.
13                             So, let me tell you a little bit
14                about Superfund.                Congress, the U.S.
                                          .   •   .       .   .       -   / '




15                Congress, created the Superfund program "^
16                in 1980 to deal with uncontrolled

17                releases of hazardous substances at many

18                sites that have been identified in the

19.               past, say, ten years. ,
20                            . Prior, to that, there were a
21                number of states, including New Jersey,
22                that already had kind of an
23                infrastructure for dealing with
24                hazardous waste sites, and^, iri fact, the
•25               Superfund law is modeled, at least in


                               Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
       39^We.st37thStrcet*NcwYork, New York 10018                 .                                 (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-3063

                                                                                                                               500092

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                          Page 6
 1               part, on.law that already existed in New

 2               Jersey.
 3                              But that certainly wasn't the

.4               case across the country, so Congress
                        >   '      •   .         •   •    •   •




 5
                 wrote an unified set of instructions - for
 6
                 EPA to have resources, enforcement
 7
                 authority, and expertise to start
 8
                 addressing these sites around the
 9
                 country.          And then EPA ramped up to have
10               the skills over the followirig years; the
11               skills to actually be able to address
12               these sites.                •
13                              Superfund really has two
14               functions; an emergency response
15               function, and a long-term cleanup
16               component.                And we come in and address
17               sites when we're invited.                        In other
.18              words, we don't make,our own decisions,
19               the states really say:                       Here's a problem
20               that we feel is large and complex and
21               maybe beyond our funding or staffing
22               abilities.                          ':
23                              And they invite us in.
24                              For the Diamond Head site itself,
25               we did not have any emergency response


                                Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      39We.st37thStrect* New York, New York 10018,                 (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-3063

                                                                                        500093

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                    Page 7
,1               role.             The site had been sitting idle,

 2              •for a number of years before New Jersey

 3               asked EPA to consider the site for
                   i   •       •   ,    •   .   •   -         '        •       •   •        •



                   \       .                    ,         •        -       •           "    .   .   .   •   .   .




 4               listing in: 20.02. •
 5                                 Now," .having been placed on the
 6               Superfund list doesn't mean that there
 7.              needs to be a cleanup'.                          What it means is
 8               that a site is -- has.enough unknown
 9               components and enough contamination that
10               may or may not be, say, moving of£ of
11               the site' for EPA to need to come and do
12               a study.
13                                 And, so, in .this long-term
14               cleanup phase, the first stage of bur
15               work is kind of an exhaustive study
16               called the Remedial Investigation and
17              , Feasibility Study.                          That looks at the
18               nature and extent of the contamination- •
19               and then evaluates remedial options for
20               cleaning it up.
21                                 I just want to touch on two other
22               parts-of the Superfund program, as
23               opposed to all of these parts, and that
24               is the enforcement component of the law
25               and then how we actually select a


                                       Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      39Wcst37thStrcet.*Ncw York, New York 10018 '                                         (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-3063

                                                                                                                    500094

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                       Page 8

 1                remedy.

 2                                           Superfund has very strong

 3                enforcement components that allow us to

 4                get information to identify potentially

. 5               responsible parties, companies that

 6                might have done spilling or that sort pf

\7                thing, and also allow, us to pursue land

 8                owners under certain circxomstances to

 9                either reimburse EPA for the cost of

10                cleanup or, in some cases, have parties
                                                      '        .   •   .       •   '       •   .       ,   '




11                roped into a -- some kind of an
12                enforceable agreement, whereby we would
13                oversee that party to actually perform
14                the work.
15                                           In this case, EPA -- the /
16                companies, rather, that had created the
17                site in the first place were all out of
                         '   •   •   •   •   •             '               '           •           .           ;   '




18
                  business long before we got involved,
19
                  and there really isn't an opportunity to
20
                  that we know of there.                                   And at the
21
                  beginning of our investigation st.age,
22
                  when the site was first listed, we
23
                  concluded that there really wasn't a
24
                  viable party that could step in and do
25
                  this work. /So, the work's been done >


                                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      39 West 37th Sircel * New York, New York 10018                                           (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-3063

                                                                                                                       500095

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                     ,                                               ' •Page 9

 1                  with ---theiwork is being- done'using

 2                  federal funds.. .

 3                             Now how we select a remedy, I'll
 4                  touch on that, describe some details of.
 5                  the site, little .of the site history,
 6                  and then we'll moVe on to Grisell's

, 7                 portion of the presentation-                                                  ,

 8                             When EPA feels it has enough

 9                  information about a site to proceed to
10                  select a remedy. Congress actually put a
11                  check on us!; we can't just go and do                        x       ^
12                  that by ourselves, we. need to prepare
13                  something called a Feasibility Study,
14                  which doesn't describe one option but
15                  actually looks at a variety of remedial
16                  choices for cleaning up the site.
17                   ,         And then we need to come and
1.8                 present that into a community, in a
19                  written form -- that's the proposed plan
20                  -- and at a meeting like this so that we
21                  can get input.             We then get that,
22                  feedback in writing or recorded tonight
23                  and need to evaluate it.                                                 ',
24                             And, using our preferred remedy , ' '"'
25'                 and that information, we make a finding.


                                Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      .•^9 West 37lh Street * New York, New York 10018          (8(K)) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-.^()(,3

                                                                                        500096
            .   I

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  •. . .                                           /•' .             ' , ^.   Page-'10

 1                 something called a Record of Decision.
 2                 That is a written document that                                  i-
 3 ,               memorializes the remedy for the site and
 4                    •             •           •




               ; any responses to the public's input that
                                                                              ~ ^




 5                 might have affected the remedy or, you
 6            /     know; our sort of response to that.
 7                              We do .that in partnership with
 8                 the State of New Jersey.                 They're our
 9                                                                                                  -;
                   sister agency in this case.                   So, they
10.                have already seen and endorsed our

11                 preferred' pla.n for the site.

12                              So, let me switch gears.- We're

13                 going to talk about the site itself.                             '-'•

14                 I'm going to refer to some figures, and

15                 we will start by putting ourselves on

16                 the street map. .

17                              This is -- we'll get a better

18                 resolution in a minute, but this is

19                 Harrison Avenue and this is Route 2 80

20                 along the bottom, and we are in a
21                 section of. Kearny that is very sparsely v
22                 populated and the nearest homes are
23                 probably about half a mile away.
24                              This' is bringing us in-a' little
25 •               closer.         Again, here's Route 280 on the


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
       39 West 37lh Street * New Yt)rk. New York 10018           (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-306.^

                                                                                           500097

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

\   •   ."   .   -                                           • ' _                                            '. ' . P a g e 1 1

        1.                -; , bottom, here's Harrison Avenue, and the

        2                        activities --which I'd! bring up

        3^                       another picture in a minute -- the

        4                        activities of the site took place right
        5                       here in the center.

        6                                      This^'is an entrance ramp for 2 80,
•'"'r'                           this is a place balled the Campbell
        8                      • Foundry, and thi's is the relatively new
        9                       Wal-Mart facility.- Water, surface
    10                          water, drains this way to something
                                       /                ,,       ,   ••   •   •   .             '   •            '   •   ,




    11                           called Frank's Creek, which is right
    12                          here, and Frank's Creek discharges into
    .13' •                      . the Passaic. River.
    14                                         Now, this land was marshlands; if -
    15                          you go back maybe two hundred years, and
    16                         , it has slowly been filled over time.                                                         "   •




    17                           It's generally been used as industrial                                                                   V




^ 18                            property, including tihe facility that we
    19                        ' are focussing on, and then landfills.

    20                                         And'the one other feature- that I

    21                          will point out because we're going to
                                           f        -        '                        •   __




    22                           talk about it.a little later is this

    23                          landfill here, which is called the 1-D

    24                          landfill.           It's one of the MSLA

    25                           landfills.              It's about? 95 acres, and                                                    •   ,   .




                                               Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
                     39We.st37thStreet * New York. New York KK) 18                             (800) NYC-FINK * Fax; (212) 869-3063

                                                                                                                             500098

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                Page 12
             ;   '    •   •                  .   '   •     .   '   -   '   •




 1                   it's just across 280 from the'site.
2,        .^                   Now we'll go one step closer and                                     .         \

3                    we're on to -- you can look at these

 4                   figures here or the figure up on the

 5                   board.     This is a current photograph.                                   .

 6                   And by showing this piece, though, I

7                    don't want, to mislead you; this is
 8                   narrowing into a little parcel, but I
 9                   don't want to give the impression that

10                   that's the whole of the site.                         That's
11                   the whole of the, sutjject of tonight's.
12                   meeting, but: for reasons you'11 see in a

13                   minute, our investigations have gone                           .
14                   outside of this parcel.                                            /   •




15                             This piece is about fifteen acres
16                   on the -- the facility sat right here,,                            \

17- •                on the sort of eastern edge of the lot.
18                   And there's a number of landfill pieces                                                      '-

19                   that'-- sort of surrounding the edges o f

20                   it how.      And we'11 go through some                                         •   . .       ^




21                   history, and you'll learn a little, bit                                        . - .

22                   about those.
23                             So, I*m goirig to talk about --

24                   with regard to site history, I'll just

25'                  talk'about four things:.I'll talk


                               Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      39 West 37lh Street * New York, New York 10018               (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-3065

                                                                                                500099

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                          Page 13
         r
                                                                         '   •   •   '   '   '   '




                          ..about>' obviously,-Diamond Head Oil
         2                        Refinery; the neighboring landfilling
                                                                                                                                          i
         3                .businesses;, .the construction of 1-280';
         4                        and then sort-of the end o£ the Diamond

         5                        Head facility that took place in '79.
    •




         6                                     So, Diamond Head Oil Refinery was
        •7                •       one of a number of companies that
         8                        operated up and down the eastern --;the
                      r   .   •            •          •   ...   •   '.                               -        ,           •   .   •   •




         9 '                      East Coast; of the United States that
        10                        were in the business of collecting waste
/       11                        oil from gas. stations and other places,
        12                        and then reprocessing it through some
        13                        magic into material that they could

        14                        reuse.        And,they -- these variety bf
                                                                                                                                              . ,
        15                        companies, most of which were owned by
        16                        essentially one entity, would send this
        17                        waste oil to facilities like this.                                                                            1



        1.8                                    And here is an aerial photograph
        19                        from 1976, and here is about a four-acre
        20                        piece, of land that is jiist a little bit
        21                        elevated that was the Diamond Head

        22                        facility, which started operating in the
        23                        1940s and finished its run in 1979.

        24                                     Now, the key feature from'the

    '25                           point of view of this facility is>


                                               Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
               39 West 37ih Street * New York, New Yi>rk 1(«)18                                          ,"       (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-30r>3

                                                                                                                                          500100

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                      /'' . ,                ,                             Page 14
    1                 obviously, there's, lots of tanks and
                                                                                                                              \
    2                 businesses --,the business' pieces df

    3                 equipment.                   They would bring in this

    4                 waste oil and they would re-refine it.

     5                which is essentially, we think, kind of

     6                sending it back to the refinery to sort

    , 7               it out into usable components.                                          It

     8                seemed that most of it 'was going into a

     9                kind o,f heating oil and then being

    10                resold.                                                                                       '

    11                            But what I want to point out is

    12                this black feature here, which runs

    13                quite a bit, off of that fifteen-acre lot                                                     .   ••'




    14                that you see above me.                            And it's

    15                essentially a mixture of oil and water.
           ^          We call this the oil lake.:                                    It's about
    16
    17                -- it's been estimated that it was about

    18                six to seven acres in size.
•    ^




    19         J                  We don.'t know exactly how it got

    20                there, whether they were actually

    21                storing some of this waste oil.in this

    22                sort of open water area behind the

    23                facility or whether it was just sort of
                                   •   ^   .   •            •   .   .                                      .    ,




    24                running out of their facility because it

    25                was sloppy or whether possibly they
                                                                         '   ,   :    •   •            '




                                       Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
          .^9 West 37lh Street* New York. New York 10018                             (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-.50(i3

                                                                                                               500101

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

•   •       ....y
                                                               r        ,             ,   •       '-           .           .                                                                                            Page 15
        1                                              could refine certain of their waste oils                                                                                                                     ,        ,-•!           .   .'   ,




        2                                              into reusa.ble pfpdu^ts and then they
        3                                              just ended up with stuff they had to get

        4      •                                       rid bf and maybe that's what.this is.

        5                                              We don't really know.\ But, obviously.

        6                                              it's .gone quite a distance from the
        7                                              original land.

        8                                                              So, I'm going to also.point out

        9 ^                                            one other feature here, and that is this
10                                                     - - I ' m going to run a line right down
11                                                     here, sort of top to bottom.                                                         This is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ••      ..•                      , • )



12                                                     that 1-D Landfill that I mentioned
13                                                     before, and this is an access road to
14                                                     get up onto that landfill.                                                  There's
15                                                     access roads on either end of it.
16                                                                     And, so, this end of that                                                                                                                                    I   •




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ^
17                                                     fifteen-acre: lot is actually filled --
18                                                     sort of a long filled area, and it's
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r

19                                                     pretty clear that this was -- it was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     /
20                                                     filled wit:h municipal waste.- We've done
21 . ;                                                 some test, pitting, and it's pretty clear

22                                                    ; It's filled primarily with municipal .

23                                                     waste, and they built it up so they

24                                                     could have access to the landfill.
                          .   '   .   •       !                    •          •           ^                                                     •                   •                   •       "   .   .




25                                                                     Now, starting in 1976 and ending
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 "1
                    , '                   •   •   •    .                    - .   -       :   —   :    -   -       .   -   •   —    ,   -   .       .   .   .   .   ^   -   .   .   .   .   -               -   •




                                                           -           Fink & Carney,Reporting and Video Services
                    39West37thStreet*New York, New York 10018                                                                       (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-30(>3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         500102

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                           Page 16
 1         \      a couple years later,'the New Jersey
 2                Department of Transportation began the
       J                                 '   "   -   •   ,   •   •   •   /   '       '   '   -    ,




 3                construction of 1-280, which now fills                                              .,

 4.               the southern end of our area of                                                               '               . .• '

 5                interest.

 6                            In 1976, they got to this part of
 7                the site and concluded that they
 8                actually owned quite a bit of tzhis land
 9                where the oil lake was.                        They concluded
                                                                                                                    -   •   •   •   '




10                they couldn't build on the oil lake.

11                They had to get rid of it, so they paid
12                to have it pumped out.                                 ;
13                            It took about, I think, ten                                             •'    ,




                                                                                 J

14                months.         It was somewhere in the
15                neighborhood of eleven million gallons -
16                of oil and water that were removed:                                        It
17                was ptomped into tanker trucks and taken

18                to other facilities that did this sort
19                of waste oil business.
20                            When they got the lake pumped
21                out, there was a layer, of kind of a ,
                                                       =
22                inessy slu^dge at the botjtom, and they

23             _ concluded that they couldn't build on

24                that, either.              So, that material was                                                                  1




25                scraped off..              It totalled approximately


                               Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      39 West 37th Street * New York. New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-306.V


                                                                                                           500103

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     '.,..'                                         ,   '   '   '           .     .   •
                                                                                                                      Page 17
      1                       230,000 cubic yards, of material.                                           And

      2              - from DOT's-records from the time).they

      3                       redeposited it In-the ground in a couple

      4                       of locations.
                                  •   •   '   )    ,   •    '




      5                                           The largest piece is actually up                                                 -   •




      6,                      on top of the 1-D'landfill.                                       There are
      7-                      several other --I'll refer t o this
      8                       finished picture over here.                                       There is
      9                       this landfill piece that I mentioned.                                                    ^

     10                       before; there may be some of that
     11              1- material in here, although we hayen' t.                                                             ' '            -.

     12                       seen it.                     And then there's something in
     13                       this right-of-way to the highway that's
^i
     14                       actually owned by DO'T that's a mound,.

     15                                           And we've done some sampling of

     16                       it, and there is something that looks

     17                       like sliidge in it, so that apparently is                                                        r
     18                       where a good portion of that material

     19                       went as well.                     And we still have some

     20                       investigations of that material to do of

     21                       our own to figure out whether we need to
             /.               '                                 •               •   -




     22                       take an action with regard to that as

     23                       well..                                            "       \
     24                                           One of the comments that we've

     25                       read in DOT's records contemporaneous


                                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
           ,39 West .37th Street* New York, New York 10018                                      (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-.M)63

                                                                                                                       500104

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                        Page -18

 1                 with this act;ivity was after the removal

 2                 of' the oil lake arid after the removal of

 3                 the sludge, they indicated that there

 4                 was still a layer of this oily petroleum:

: 5                material in the ground, and it's that

 6                 matjerial that's really the focus of our

 7                 action that we're discussing tonight.

 8                 They saw ,it -- they called it the

 9                 underground oil lake..                 So, that's really

10                 what we're focussing in on with this

11                 action.                                        ,

12                             That's about all that I wanted to                        /

13                 cover,      except that Diamond Head,, the

14,                company, closed down in 1979.                      The owner

15                 had some legal troubles about the same

16                 time, and we think that there'..s some

17                 connection between those two; the

18                 closure and his legal troubles.                      And the

19                 place was actually demolished a couple'

20                 years later, and during that -- it was •

21                 really a cleanup, the first cleanup that

22 .               took place at the site.

23                             And during that work, some

24                 environmental samples were collected,

25                 and those environmental samples were the- .


                                Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
       39 West 37th Street* New York, New York 1(X)18 '      -.   (,800)NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-.1063

                                                                                        500105

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       • • • ~   • . -      .   {   •   "   '    •        "   ,    •




                                                                                                                       Page 19
 1                , first evidence that -- in the record
         i
 2                  that indicate that, in fact, wHat

 3                  Diamond Head was bringing to-the site

 4                  wasn't just petroleum waste, it was some
    5               other things,, with PCBs and other

 6                  volatile components that were probably                                                                -

 7                  getting mixed into his products, and
    8               some of which, obviously, are --have
 9                  ended up in the ground.                                                 ,'
10                               So, we're looking at, as a
11                  consequence, this relatively large area                                                                       -

12                   for the whole RI/FS.                                We're looking at
13                  the groundwater.                 We have, a lot of"
14                  information but need a little bit more
15                  on the soils' in the whole of this area-.
16                  And then we need to really understand
17                  about surface water, movement of this
18                  material, over time, and whether there's
t

                    a component of that.
19
                                 But that's to come.                                    Right now.
20
                    we're focussing oh really this one area.
21
                    which Grisell is going to tell us about
22
                    by describing the details of the RI/FS
23
                    to date and what we found and then what
24
                    our proposal is to address it.
25                                                                                                                                V

                                                                                                                         )


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
        39 We.si 37th Street * New York, New York KX) 18                                        (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-306.1

                                                                                                                       500106

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                    Page 20
 1                           MS. DIAZ-COTTO:           Good evening.
 2               I'm going, to give you a preview pf what

 3               I'll be presenting to you tonight.

 4                           The first thing I'll be

 5               discussing is the Remedial Investigation

 6               study to date, its findings and

 7               conclusions.             Then I'll provide you with

 8               information with regarding the priricipal

 9               threat waste, the remedial objectives

10               for this waste, and the risks

11               attributable to the.site.                   '

12                           Following, I'll explain the

13               rationale for the remedial phases

14               approach that we are following for the

15               site.       I will then proceed with the

16               presentation of the remedial

17               alternatives, the evaluation of these

18               alternatives, and, filially, , with the

19               recommendation for- the preferred
20               alternative.
21                           Let me start, however, with the
22               definition of a term I'11.be using

23               throughout my presentation; LNAPL.

24                           LNAPL stands for Light Nonaqueous

25               Phase Liquids, which are liquids that


                              Fink & Ciirney Reporting and'Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York. New York 10018           (8(K)) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212),869-3063

                                                                                     500107

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 108 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                              Page'21
, 1               are sparingly soluble in water and less

  2               dense than wateir.                   For example, oil is ,

, 3               an LNAPL because it flows on top of

. 4               water and: does not mix with water.

  5                                In 2002, EPA began a Remediai

  6               Inv.estigation to determine the nature

- 7               and extent of the problems posed by the

  8'              site.            The Remedial Investigation

  9               studies,to date have outlined, in '

 10               addition to all the findings that I'll

 11               be' discussirig later-, two areas of

 12               potential source areas where LNAPL may ,

 13               be continuing to release contamination

: 14              to the environment..

 15                                This area is outlined in red.

 16               The processing section of the site, once

 17               containing two buildings, multiple

 18               above-ground storage tanks, as you can

 19               see there, driim storage areas,, and

 20               possibly underground feeds.                         And second,
                           .   .   .   •   •   •   •   .    '     ^           •   .   '   •




 21               the remnants of the oil lake, estimated

 22               in 1977 took over an area of six to

,23               seven acres, located over the southern

 24               sect:ion of the site and extending

 25               outside the site's fenced boundaries to


                                   Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
       .39We.st37thStrecl*New York. New York 10018                    (8(K)) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-3063

                                                                                              500108

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 109 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

i.,' -

                                                                                                                                                                  Page 22
         1                the east and south. >

         2                             There is evidence of oil
         3                contamination in nearly every boring .

         4                installed withiii the fifteen-acre fenced,

         5               property and in many borings to the

         6                southeast.                              Because of this layer of bil

         7                contamination across the site, the RI

         8                studies performed to date have used a
                                          :   .       •   {   .       •   •   •             ,       '   •       ,'       '      ' . .   •   . • . - .




         9                number of different methods to document

    10                    the nature and extent of the LNAPL and

    11                    to identify the more severely

    12                    contaminated areas of the site.
                                                  .   .           ,               .   " \       ,           •        .                                  ,   ••'




    13
                                       Using these meters, several
    14
                          characteristics of the LNAPL were
    15
                          established.                                        First, LNAPL is' present in
    16
                          the subsurface throughout most of the
    17
                          investigated area, albeit under
    18
                          substantial variation and conceritration,
    19
                          across the site.
    20
                                       Second, LNAPL was measured in
    21
                         wells in three areas of the site; one in-
    22
                          the former process area, and two within
    23
                          the footprint of the oil lake.                                                                                This
    24
                         means that when the well cap is moved,
    25
                         w.e find a thick layer of oil rather than

                                        Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services ,
             39 We.sl .37lh Street * New York. New York 1(«)18                                                               (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-3063

                                                                                                                                                                  500109

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 110 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                            Page 23
 1               water. •
                                                                           :L •
 2                           Third', the vert:ical distribution
 3               of LNAPL exists at two intervals; first

.4               at the water table approximatiely two

 5               feet below ground surface, arid, second,

 6               as distinct deeper internal depths at

 7               teri to sixteen feet below ground surface

 8               within the silted soil.                                          However, the
                               '   •   •   '   .   -   •   .   '   .   ,   ^                    •   '




 9               bulk of LNAPL-coritaining soil is located
10               near the water table within the filled
11               layer.
12                           Many of those compounds were
13               found in' the LNAPL, including benzene
14               and other petroletom compounds,' PCBs, and
15               a variety of metals.                                          Within the LNAPL,
16               there are pockets of less weathered
17               LNAPL of a high saturation that present
18               a lisaching concern to groundwater.
19               These are LNAPL areas that may be
20               considered to present a risk for
21               leaching contaminants to groundwater.
22               This highly contaminated material is
23               what we. are focussing on with this                                                    i
24               proposed action-.
25                           In addition to the LNAPL findings


                              Fink & Carney Reporting,at;d Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                                  (800).NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-.3063

                                                                                                            500110

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 111 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

.)                                                                                                                                        Page 24.
 1                     discussed before, the remedial

     2                 investigation found soil, groundwater,
                           - '   •   •       '           • '                       '       •    -         •   .   .   .   '   '   '   •




     3
                       sediment, and surface water
 4
                       contamination attributable to the site.
     5
                                             Evidencfe based on site-specific
     6
                       data concluded that LNAPL detected at
 1
                       the site was separated into areas ,where^
     8
                       LNAPL material-is considereid to
     9
                       represent a principal threat and areas'
10
                       where LNAPL can be considered to be- a.
11
                       lower level threat and for which
12
                       appropriate measures will be considered
13
                       in future feasibility situdies.
14
                                             The tojtal area of, the principal
15                 1                     '       •   •         •   .   .   •   •   •   .




                       threat of LNAPL is roughly .176,000                                                                    ,
16
                       square feet, a volume of 45,82 5 cubic
17
                       yards, including 2,593 cubic yards where
18
                  . LNAPL floating product is found in wells
19
                       constitutes the principal threat LNAPL.
20
                                 ^ Remedial action objectives, which
21
                       are a general description of what the
22
                       :response action is expected to
23
                       accomplish, were developed for the
,24
                       principal threat LNAPL wastes to address
25
                  "~the human health risks and environmental

                                 "^ Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
         39 West37thStrcet*New York, New York 10018                                            (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-3063

                                                                                                                                          500111

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 112 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        '   '   :       •    •       '   •                       •   -   ^       •                '           •   '   '     '   •       •       : • ' •           .        •    '   •   •    '    '   '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page 25
 1                  '                            concerns of the Diamond Head Oil Site.                                                                                                                                                   . -.

 2                                                                   The focus ,;of this early action is
 3                                           t:6 address LNAPL that constitutes a
                                                                                      .   •   •                                             •             ,           < : • "                         -           .           "




 4                                           principal threat at the site.                                                                                                                  The                                            • 7.



 5                                           principal threat LNAPL is physically                                                                                                                                                         ,

 .6                                          similar to free oil product-.                                                                                                              Oil
 7                                           products are toxic to ecological

 8                                           receptors and humans through direct
 9                                           contact, incidental ingestion, and

10                          < inhalation pathways,                                                                                      ;
                                                                             r                            •                         '                         '                                                       •           •   •         .            \




11                                                                   Potential exposure to.ecological
                                 •           '   .   .   •   )




12                                           receptors and humaris: from the high
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ' '           "
13.                                          concentration LNAPL that is present, at
14                                           the site could result in adverse health
15                                           effects.                        It is, therefore, important

16                                           that steps be taking taken to eliminate
17                                           or reduce the level of LNAPL at the
18                           •               s i t e . , :                                            •                   •;• •                                                              •'           .   •           •




19                                                               Reducing or eliminating the LNAPL                                                                                                                                                  .   ••




20                                           at the site would-reduce potential

21                                           exposure to free product, and that's an

22                                           important early step in managing the
23                                           site; risk.                             However,,it is not expected

24                                           to eliminate the overall risks and                                                                                                                                                                                  •   ;




25                                           hazards to ecological receptors or


                                                                     Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      39 We.st 37th Street * New York, New York 1(K)18                                                                                                            • (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-.^()63

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          500112

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 113 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 2 6
   1               humans because of residual contamination

   2               that will remain on the site.                   This

   3               residual contamination will be addressed

   4               in subsequent actions and will be

   5               accompanied by full ecological and human

   6               health risk assessments.

   7                           In addition to removing the

   8               potential exposure of LNAPL at the,site,

  .9               reducing or eliminating the LNAPL will

  10               also limit the potential migration,

  11               which would aid in investigating and

  12               selecting a remedy, for the remainder of'

  13               the .site.
  14                           The first operable unit has been

  15              'identified as an early action to address
  16               a principal threat LNAPL.                 A second
  17               Operable Unit will address residual soil
  18               contamination attributable to the site,
  19               including lower level, threat. LNAPL, the
' 20               on-site landfilled area, the 1-280
  21               right-of-way berms, and groundwater arid
^ 22               sediment contamination.

  23                           Site studies are ongoing.                 For
  24               example, new groundwater monitoring

  25               wells were installed earlier in 2009 on


                                Fink & Gamey Reporting arid Video Services
       39 West 37th Street * New'York, New York HM)18 .         (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (2 12) 869-306.^

                                                                                       500113

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 114 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                    Page 27
 1               a number of neighboring properties to

 2                fully assess the extent of the

 3               groundwater problems posed by.the site.

 4                Field investigations for the

 5                comprehensive Remedial Investigation of

 6                the site are expected to be complete in

 7                2010> at which time EPA can proceed with

 8                evaluating, remedial alternatives for the

 9               ,-entire site.

10                            While further studies of the

11                landfill site are required, the history

12                of,site activities and the test trenches
13                already installed support EPA's
14                conclusion that the landfill is not a
15                source of LNAPL.
16                            Now let's go to the remedial
                                                                              r
17               alternatives for the site.
18                            The Superfund program requires
19                that the no action alternative be
20                considered as a baseline for comparison
21                for the other alternatives.                  The no
22                further action alternative does not
23                include-any physical remedial measures
24               beyond those response actions already
25               completed that address the LNAPL


                               Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West .37lh Street * New York. New York. KM) 18         (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-3063

                                                                                     500114

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 115 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                              Page 2 8
 1               contamination at the site.

 2                           Because this alternative will

 3               result in contaminants remaining on the

 4               site above health-based level, CERCLA

 5               requires that the site be reviewed every

 6               five years.                   If justified by the review,

 7               remedial actions may be implemented to,'

 8               remove or treat the wastes.

 9                           The second alternative is on-site

10               biocell.         Under this alternative, the

11               r'emedial target areas would be isolated

12               with a sheet pile wall and the principal

13               threat LNAPL areas excavated.                             Some of

14               this material would be removed for ^

15               off-site disposal.                            The remaining

16             ' excavated material would be augmented

17               with nutrients and bulking agents to

18               enhance permeability and the conditions

19               for biological activity.

20                           The area within the sheet pile

21               walls would be converted into a biocell

22               by installing piping to supply air and
                                   '   •   '   •   '   .   V   .



23               distribute nutrient additives, along

24               with a collectiori system for air and

25               water that may accumulate in the


                              Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * Fax; (212) 869-3063

                                                                                              500115

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 116 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                   Page 29
    1               biocell.              The augmented LNAPL material,

    2               would be placed in the biocell for
    3               treatment and capped.
    4                              After performance sampling and
    5               final confirmation sampling to
                               •   •       •      ^    •        '   .    •       •   '   . •   •




    6               demonstratie that the LNAPL wastes have
    7               been destroyed through biological
    8               degradation, the biocell components will
    9               be dismantled.                    Area,s where a measurable
10                  layer of floating\ LNAPL product is found
11                  in monitoring wells may not be amenable
1



12                  to effect treatment in the'biocell.

13                  These areas will, therefore, be
                    excavated and transported for off-site
14
                    disposal.
15
                                   Soil washing.            Under this '
16
17                  alternative, the remedial target areas

18                  would be isolated with a sheet pile wall

1?                  and principal threat LNAPL areas

20                 .excavated.                 The excavated material would

21                  then be treated on site using soil

22                  washing.

23                                 The excavated soils and LNAPL

24                  wastes would be placed in a slurry

25                  reactor vessel and combined with a


                                       Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
        39 West 37th Street * New York. New York l(K)18             •   '[ (8(M)) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-3063

                                                                                                   500116

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 117 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                      Page 3 0
 1                washing fluid that would wash the LNAPL

 2                from the soil particles.                This

 3                technology requires a water treatmer;t

 4                facility to treat the LNAPL and

 5                contaminants of concern in the washing

 6                fluid so it can be reused.                 The treated

 7                soil material would be,tested for                               '

.8                compliance with the cleanup goals and

 9                returned to the excavated areas.

10                            As with-Alternative 2, areas

11                where a measurable layer of floating

12                LNAPL product is found in monitoring

13-               wells may not be amenable" to soil

14                washing, and this alternative assumes

15                that these areas will be excavated,

16                treated as necessary, and transported

17                for off-site disposal. •

18                            While this alternative, like

19                Alternative 2, would result in

20                contaminants remaining within,the

21                remedial target areas above health-based

22-               level, this action is expected to.

23                address the principal threat LNAPL as a

24                final action.             A subsequent Record, of

25                Decision will be required to make a


                               Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      39 West 37th Street * New York. New York 10018           (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (2"l2) 869-.^063


                                                                                      500117

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 118 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                     Page 31

                   final determination about the underlying^

. .2               constituents that 'will remain within the

  3                treated-soil.'

  4                           Therefore, the need for a review

  5                of the site every five years will be

  6                made at that time.                If justified by the

 . 7               Remedial Investigation, additional

  8                remedial, actions may be implemented to

  9                remove or treat such w a s t e s . '          .

 10                           The fourth alternative,

 11                excavation and off-site disposal.                     Under

 12                this one, the remedial target areas

 13                would be isolated with a sheet pile..wall

 14                and the principal threat LNAPL areas

 15                excavated.                                                 '

 16                           As with Alternatives 2 and 3,

 17                dewatering will be required prior to

 18                excavation, and the removal water would

 19                need to be treated prior to discharge.

- 20               The excavated material will then be

 21                stabilized on site to allow for                          ^

 22..              transportation for off-site disposal.

! 23               The excavated areas will then be

; 24               backfilled with clean fill.

 25-                    ^     Sampling would be performed


                               Fink,& Carney Reporting and Video Services
        39West37.thSlrcct*New York, New York 10018             (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-3(i63

                                                                                      500118

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 119 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                    Page 3 2
  1               during remedial design to delineate' the,

  2               extent of the remedial target areas, but

  3               no performance monitoring would be

  4               required.          ,The Feasibility Study

  5               estimates that this, alternative could be

  6                implemented in approximately;one year.

 • 7                          Nine criteria/ as you see there:

  8               Overall protectlveness of human health

^, 9              and the environment; long-term

 10               effectiveness, short-term effectiveness;

 11                implementability; cost; and the rest-

 12               They're used to evaluate the different

 13               remediation alternat:ives individually

 14               and against each other in order to

 15               select a remedy.               They provide profile .

 16                their relative performance of each

 17               alternative against the nine criteria,

•18               noting how it compares to the other

 19               options under consideration.

 20                        . Once the alternatives have been

 21                fully described and-individually

 22                assess.ed against t:he^ nine criteria, a

• 23               comparative analysis is conducted to

 24                evaluate the relative performance of the

 25                alternatives in relation to each.


                               Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
       39 West 37th Street* New York, New York 10018           (800) NYC-HNK * Fax: (212) 869-3063

                                                                                    500119

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 120 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                   Page 33
, 1                specific evaluation criteria.

 2                                 The purpose of: this comparative

 3                 analysis is to identify the advantages

 4                 and disadvantages of: each alternative

 5                 relative to orie another so the tradeoffs

 6                 that will have to be balariced Nto select

 7                 a remedy are fully .understood.

 8                                 The proposed plan that you have a ,
 9                 copy of outliries: this process, the
10 .               process that we went through, in
11                 selecting an alternative;; however, a
12                 full presentation of both individual and
13                 comparative analysis of alternatives is
14 '               included in the feasibility studies for
15                 this site.
'l6                                Based,on this Evaluation of the
17                 various alternatives, EPA and the New
18                 Jersey Department of Environmental
19                 Protection recommend Alternative 2, the 1
                          '•   '                          •   ^   •   •    •   ,




                                                  \   •                                       '•




2V                 on-site biocell along with excavation
21
                   and off-site disposal of the more highly
22
                   contaminated material as a preferred
,23
                   alternative to" address the principal
24
                   threat LNAPL.                                                      ^
25
                                   I will iri a moment ask Andrew

                                   Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
       39 West 37th Street * New York, New York HH)18                     (800) NYC-FINK *,Fax: (212) 869-.3063

                                                                                                   500120

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 121 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                          Page 34
  1               Judd to present you with the technical

  2                details of the preferred alternative.

  3                However, I would like to remind you that
       A
  4              ,although this first operable unit has

  5                been identified as an early action to

'. 6               address . the principal threat 'LNAPL, a

  7                second operable unit for which studies

  8                are ongoing will address residual soil

  9                contamination attributed to the site,.

 10                including lower level threat LNAPL, the .

• 11               on-site landfill area, the .right-of-way                                        L

 12                berms, and groundwater and sediment

 13                coritamiriation.
 14                           MR. PRINCE:              Wanda, let's have          —
 15                any parts of Andy's presentation that.
 16                come up as response to questions, we'll
 17               have him present that.

 18                           Why "don' t we open the floor?
                                                                      •   •           '




 19                           MS; AYALA:           So, we'll open up the                      -. , .

 20                floor to questions and comments.

 21                           MR. BARONE:              You said Alternative

 22                2, right?                                                  '
 23        I                  MS. AYALA:           State your name.

 24                           MR. BARONE:              My name is Joe

 25                Barone.


                               Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
       39We.st 37th Street* New York, New York 10018            (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-3063

                                                                                          500121

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 122 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                                                                           "   t   •


           ; : ; , . •        •       •   •   '   :   •    •-    .   ;       v           • •   . ' ^ .            ' ; " • . ' • • •    •   ,   .     • / . . . ' " '     ^      • ^ , : -

                                                                                                                                                                                                Page 35;
       '
 1                                                                   Just so I understand, Alternative

 2                                        2 is an: on-:site; cleanup?;                                                                                  •'•'                                     ' ( • .   '       .




 3         •                                                         MR. PRINCE:                                                      Y.es'.\ .                                                   ^,

 4                                                                   MR. BARONE:                                                      Arid- then you .said f
,5                                        there's some areas that you would send
             '   ;       .        •                                      .   ;   .   '           .       ,        •        •                                                       '        .




 6                                        fo„r outside disposal.
 7                                                                   What areas would tliat be?                                                                           ' ,

 8                           • ! '•                       •' \       MR., ,PRINCE: ; The material that --
                                          the 45,000 yards that we identified that
10                                        constituted this sort of worst part of
                         ^.. ."-...-                                                                         ..                                    ....
11
                                          the site, there.are.certain sections of
12
                                          it that are essentially pure oil.
13
                                                                     And bioremediation is kind of the
14
                                          standard method of dealing, with
15
                                          petroleum-contaminated sites..                                                                                               Even
16'
                                          though there are lots of contaminants on
17
                                          this site, this action is primarily
18
                                          focussing in on that flowing material or
19                                        that^ more highly contaminated mateirial,

20                                        and it's a lot of petroleum..

21                                        '                              So, we think that bioremediation

22                                        or this biocell is the best fit for the

23                                        site.                      But because some of it is so

24                                        heavily contaminated, we think it will
25    -                                   actually slow the whole process down and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       /


                                                                         Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services                                                                                            ^
      39 West 37th Street* New York. New York 1()018                                                                                                            (8(H)),NYC-FINK * Fax: (212), 869-.3063

                                                                                                                                                                                                500122

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 123 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Page 36
 1                stretch it out a bit.                        So, as a way to

 2                sort of balance that out, our plan is to

 3                pull the worst of if out and then --

 4                it's still a pretty large quantity, but

 5                a relatively large quantity would then

 6                be subject to this biocell treatment on

 7                the site.                       '

 8                            So, how miuch is that?                  It's
-9                probably at least that 3,000 yards of
10                material that's around those couple, of

11                wells where there's"literally -- you
12.               know, you open.the well cap and there's
13                five or six feet of oil and water
                                                           I
                                                        - ^y    -

14
                  because there's so. much oil. in. the
15
                  ground there.
16
                              MR. BARONE:              And what type of
17
                  place would you send it to, a landfill?
18
                              MR. PRINCE:              It would go to a
19
                  facility -- it would need to be
20
                  solidified first, because we couldn't
21
                  ship a liquid waste like that, and there
22
                  would be a component of it that would be
23                liquid waste. 'And then EPA has
24                regulations governing the disposal of
25                that sort of material.:


                               Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      39 Wesi 37lh Street * New York. New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-.^0(i3

                                                                                           500123

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 124 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                 Page 37'
.1                                        My guess is that it might have to
                                  J           •   -   '   '   •        -   •   •   •   •       •   .   . • ,



 2               go to a hazardous waste landfill and may
 3               require treatment before it: can even get
                  .   .   .   •       .   '                        f


 4              "into that landfill.                               But we won't know
 5               that^ until we actually --
 6                                        MR. BARONE:             So, a TSDFl. first and
 7               then to a. landfill?

 8              ,,                        MR. PRINCE:             It would probably go

 9               to Subtitle C facility that could have .

10               the treatment component right: there and

11               then,put in the landfill.                                             We're not
12               certain -- there is some hot -- you seem
13              •to know something about the structure
14             ^construction of landfill.
15                                        MR. BARONE:             A little bit. '
16                                        MR. PRINCE:             So, let me speak to
17               that.
18                                        There is a possibility that you
19               could take this contaminated soil, ship
20               it to a facility off the site, have it

21               treated, have it meet the standards for
22.              putting it into a Subtitle D landfill,

23               but that, would require us to find some

24               off-site treatment facility, ship it

25               there, get it treated there, _and' then


                                          , Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      39West37thStreet*New York, New York 1(M)18                                           (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-.3063

                                                                                                                  500124

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 125 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                      Page 3 8
 1                send it to another place to have it

 2                disposed of,.           ,                           r.

 3                            And our experience with that

 4                multiple step process is it ma.kes more .

 5                sense to just send it to a place where

 6                you could treat it and put it in the

 7                ground right there.

 8                            MR. BARONE:              There's no concern

 9                about metals?

10                          • MR. PRINCE:              I suspect that when

11                we test this material to determine what

12                to do with it for off-isite disposal,

13                metals will probably not be a                             /

14                determining factor.                   •

15                            MR.; BARONE:.            Thank you. :

16                            MS. A Y A L A :      Any other questions?

17                Comments?                            '.

18                            MR. BARONE:              You said something

19                about PCBs.

20                            What kind of levels are we

21,              .talking about?

22                            MR. PRINCE:              Andy, what's•the •

23                highest level of PCBs>we've seen?

24                            MR. JUDD:          Generally, low.
25                Numerically, it's in the less than a


                               Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      39 West 37th Street * Now York, New York 10018        "   (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-306.?

                                                                                       500125

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 126 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          .   .   •                                   ,   -                   •                             '   •   '       •   •       •       '




                                                                                                                                                                                •Page 39;

    1                   hundred and tens range.

     2                                MR. BARONE:              S o . it's not TANSLA                                                                                            '

    3                   regulated?                                                                                                                                                  I \

     4                        ,\-     MR. PRINCE:             No, for disposal, it

     5                  wouldn't be TANSLA regulated, and for

     6                  managing the site it wouldn't require
     7             :' - u s . •. .

     8                                MR. JUDD:              At very few locations
•




     9                  also across the.fifteen acres we've •
    10                  evaluated; less than ten locations, I
    Ii                  think less than five locations we have
    12                  found' PCBs.          .                                                                                 .
                    -    "^ .                       ."            '                                                                 '                               ' ' '
    13             ^^                 MR, BARONE:             All right.
    14                                MR. PRINCE:             These earlier                                                                                                                 ; -
    15                  samples that I mentioned collected in.
    16                  the early eighties, when the facility

    n                   came down, there's tons of wastes that
                                              ' •        .                        '                           .                                                                         ^    •   "




    18                  were removed at the time, and quite a                                                                                                       :
    19 '                bit of it had PCBs in it.                                                                                               ,,                                  /
    20                                So, it's possible that some of
    21                  them -- some of the higher level

    22                  material went off at that time.                                                                   We

23                      don! t. know.

    24                                MR. BARONE:             That's it.                                                  That's

    25                  all I have.                           '                                                                                                     ^
                                                                                                                                                                            1

                                                                          ,   :       ;   _       .   .   .       .   '                 :           -       .       -   '       •                    .   ^




                                      Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
           39West37thStreet*New York, New York l(X)t8                                                 (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-.3063

                                                                                                                                                                                500126

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 127 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                     Page 40
                              MS. AYALA:            Any other questions?
                   Comments?                    ,      • •

 3                            This concludes our public

 4                 meeting.        Thank you for coming., Have a
 5                 good night.
 6
 7                             (Time noted:           6:48 p.m.)
 8
 9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23

•24
25


               ,   ,           Fink &,Carney Reporting and Video Services
      39 West 37lh Street* New York, New York 10018     ' ,    (800) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-306.<

                                                                                      500127

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 128 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                       Page 41

 1                              C E R T I F I C A T E ^

 2      STATE OF NEW^^YORK                     )

. 3                                             ).ss-. :

'4      COUNTY OF NEW YORK                     )

: 5                             I, LINDA A. ,MARINO, a Registered
 6                 Prof ess ioiial Reporter, Certified Court
 7               : Reporter, and Notary Public within and

 .8                for the State of New York do hereby

 9                 \Certify:.

10                              I reported the proceedings in the
11                 within-entitled matter to the best of my
12                 ability, and that the within transcript
13                 is a true record of such proceedings.

14                              I further certify that I am npt

15                 related, by blood or martiage, to any of

16          , ' the parties in this matter and that I am

17                 in no way interested in the outcome, of
                   this matter.

19                             IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have
                                              •'.•    ^   ••   •      ^    - ^ n y ^ ) '    •-   -I
20                 h e r e i ^ i t o , s e t my hand t h i s                -^''-'         day of
21,                       't-c :£u                   2,009.
                     ,/                                                                                  J
22
23                                      .// . / / h
                                                  ' Vw
                                                     / J ^n
                                                          :_       ,v\i;

24                                        LINDA A. MAklNO, RPR,                            CCR

25


                                Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      39 West .37th Street* New York, New York I (K) 18 ,                        (8(K)) NYC-FINK * Fax: (212) 869-3063

                                                                                                       500128
