LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES, CALDWELL TRUCKING COMPANY SITE, FAIRFIELD TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/108431
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: b2f1bb96ab3045c308879a7169f8a983f49d69fb998c4be10e89ccfe288b3a91
Source PDF pages: 10
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

               Explanation of significant Differences

                   Caldwell Trucking Company Site           SDMS Document
                   Fairfield Township, New Jersey

Introduction                                                  I0843i

The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
presents this Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) to
explain modifications of the remedy selected in the Record of
Decision signed on September 25, 1986 (1986 R O D ) , for the
Caldwell Trucking Company Superfund Site (the S i t e ) . In
particular, this ESD covers that portion of the selected remedy
addressing contaminated soils and waste materials at the Site.
The modifications will bring the remedy into compliance with land
disposal restrictions (LDRs) required by the Solid Waste Disposal
Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery A c t ,
and the Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments (RCRA). The ESD
will also document and explain the increased cost of the remedial
action. EPA, supported by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy (NJDEPE), is responsible for
cleanup activities at the Site.

This ESD is issued in accordance with Section 117(c) of the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability
Act (CERCLA), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 9617(c), and Section
300.435(c)(2)(i) of the National Oil and Hazardous Substances
Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 C.F.R. § 300.435(c)(2)(i).
The ESD and documents which form the basis for the decision to
modify the response action will be incorporated into the
Administrative Record maintained for the Site in accordance with
Section 300.835(a)(2) of the NCP. The Administrative Record is
available for review during business hours at EPA Region I I ,
26 Federal Plaza, New York, New York 10278, (212) 264-8770, and
at an information repository in the Town Clerk's Office,
230 Fairfield Road, Fairfield, New Jersey 07004, (201) 882-2700.

Public Comment

EPA will open the Administrative Record for the Site to accept
comments on this ESD for a 30 day period from February 18, 1993,
to March 19, 1993. EPA placed a notice informing the public of
the comment period in the Caldwell Progress on February 1 8 , 1993.
All written comments should be directed to Richard J. Robinson,
Remedial Project Manager, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
26 Federal Plaza, Room 711, New York, New York 10278.

Site History, Contamination Problems, and Selected Remedy

Caldwell Trucking Company (Caldwell) was a sewage hauling firm
located at 222 Passaic Avenue in Fairfield Township, New Jersey.
The Site consists of 11 acres comprising Lot 17 of Block 2201,
and Lot 20 of Block 2302 on the Fairfield Township tax map, and
also those areas affected by the plume of contaminated ground
water. The West Essex Regional High School is located
approximately 200 feet to the east. Approximately 45 small



                                                             oa?    OAl-r

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    businesses are situated within one mile of the Site, and the

m   nearest major residential area is approximately 1000 feet to the
    northeast.
    Caldwell disposed of residential and commercial septic waste, as
    well as industrial waste, in unlined lagoons on the Site from the
    early 1950's until about 1973. When the lagoons were full,
    Caldwell backfilled them and dug a new series of lagoons,
    sometimes over pre-existing lagoons.
    Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study
    In June 1986, EPA completed a Remedial Investigation and
    Feasibility Study (RI/FS) for the Site. The RI/FS was conducted
    to identify the types, quantities, and locations of contaminants,
    and to develop ways of addressing the contamination problems.
    The RI delineated the horizontal and vertical extent of the
    contamination in the former lagoons, and confirmed the presence
    of a downgradient contaminant plume. Metals, primarily lead,
    cadmium, and mercury, volatile organic compounds (VOCs),
    polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and polychlorinated
    biphenyls (PCBs) were detected in on-site subsurface soils.
    Lead, PCBs, and PAHs were also detected in on-site surface soils.
    Lead is the primary metal of concern in both the surface and
    subsurface soils. Ground water is contaminated with VOCs,
    including trichloroethylene and 1,1,1-trichloroethane.
    Based on the results of the RI/FS, site remediation was divided
    into four portions or remedial components. Remedies for the
    first three components were selected in the 1986 ROD. The first
    component involves remediation of Municipal Well No. 7. The
    second concerns the supply of an alternative potable water source
    to residents potentially affected by the ground water
    contamination associated with the Site. The third component
    includes cleanup of the soil and sludge contamination at the
    Site. The remedy for the fourth and final component, which deals
    with the remediation of the contaminated ground water associated
    with the Site, was selected in a Record of Decision signed on
    September 28, 1989 (1989 ROD).

    Selected Remedies
    EPA selected the following remedial actions in the 1986 ROD:
    First Component
        restoration of the water quality in Municipal Well No. 7 to
        drinking water quality standards, through a treatment
        process known as "air-stripping".




                                                            "C 002     0660

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Second Component
    provision of an alternative water supply for residents
    potentially affected by ground water contamination
    associated with the Site.
Third Component
    excavation and treatment (by the addition of heat) of
    approximately 28,000 cubic yards of contaminated soils and
    waste materials; and
    placement of the treated waste in a secure landfill to be
    constructed on-site in accordance with the requirements of
    the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act."
The Township of Fairfield subsequently chose not to provide
treatment for Municipal Well No. 7, and decided to use the
Passaic Valley Water Commission as an alternative potable water
supply for the entire community. EPA issued an ESD in May 1991,
to explain the deletion of the Municipal Well No. 7 component of
the remedy.
In the summer of 1989, EPA hooked up 55 residential properties
and nine commercial establishments to the municipal water system.
This fulfilled the second remedial component of the 1986 ROD.
EPA selected the following remedial action for the fourth and
final remedial component in the 1989 ROD:
•   remediation of contaminated ground water associated with the
    Site by extracting the contaminated water, treating it, and
    reinjecting the treated water into the ground.
Remedial Design for Contaminated Soils and Waste Materials
EPA initiated the remedial design in 1987. Initial design
activities focused on further characterization of the soils and
waste materials at the Site and restoration of water quality in
Municipal Well No. 7. In the summer of 1990, the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers conducted field investigations designed to measure
air emissions from on-site activities during test pit
excavations, and to collect geotechnical data involving the
subsurface soils.
At the time of the RI/FS, EPA believed that sludge waste at the
Site was limited to the existing surface lagoon, and that the
waste remaining in this lagoon would be best treated by the same
processes intended to be used for soil treatment. However, the
results of the remedial design investigations indicated that the
volume of sludge at the Site was greater than originally
estimated. In addition, new information about the levels and
combinations of contaminants in the sludges, and also in some



                                                       CTC   002 066:

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

site soils, indicated that additional treatment before disposal
would be required.
The remedial design investigations provided additional
information about the buried sludge lagoons. Some sludges have
concentrations of lead oyer 100,000 parts per million (ppm);
others contain halogenated organic compounds (HOCs), such as
trichloroethylene or perchloroethylene, at total concentrations
greater than 1000 ppm, as well as high concentrations of lead.
Under RCRA regulations, 40 C.F.R. § 268.32, waste with this
combination of contaminants is classified as a "California List"
waste, and cannot be land disposed without treatment. 40 C.F.R.
Part 268 prescribes incineration as the treatment for all
California List wastes.
In addition, the results of testing during the remedial design
indicated that some of the other soil and waste materials also
had high lead levels; these were classified as RCRA
characteristic hazardous wastes because of their toxicity. As
RCRA hazardous Wastes, they must meet specific treatment
standards before they can be placed in the RCRA landfill to be
constructed at the Site.
RCRA Land Disposal Restrictions
Section 1004(5) of RCRA, 42 U.S.C. § 6904(5), defines hazardous
waste, among other things, as solid waste that may "...pose a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health and the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed, or otherwise managed." Section 3001 of RCRA, 42 U.S.C.
§ 6921, directs EPA to define which solid wastes are hazardous by
either listing the particular hazardous waste, or by identifying
the characteristics of hazardous waste. These RCRA provisions
were statutory requirements at the time the ROD was signed in
1986. The ROD provided that the remedy would comply with all
RCRA requirements.
In the 1984 Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments (HSWA), Congress
expanded the scope of the RCRA program to minimize the reliance
on land disposal of hazardous wastes, and to restrict hazardous
wastes that continue to be land disposed. In Section 3004 of
HSWA, 42 U.S.C. §6924, Congress directed EPA to "promulgate
regulations specifying those levels or methods of treatment, if
any, which substantially diminish the toxicity of the waste or
substantially reduce the likelihood of migration of hazardous
constituents from the waste so that short-term and long-term
threats to human health and the environment are minimized."
HSWA was enacted prior to the 1986 ROD, and therefore its
provisions, which include restrictions that were phased into law
to become effective at pre-determined times after 1986, are
applicable requirements (ARARs) for the Site. RCRA prohibits the
land disposal of certain specified hazardous wastes unless these
wastes meet the treatment standards specified in 40 C.F.R. Part


                                                           002     0662

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

268. These prohibitions are called Land Disposal Restrictions,
or LDRs. On May 8, 1993, the final LDR regulations will become
law, and disposal of all contaminated soil and debris will be
subject to LDR treatment standards. Since remedial activities at
the Site will not commence prior to this date, the chemical
concentrations of materials defined as hazardous waste under RCRA
must be reduced to acceptable levels prior to containment, in
order to comply with LDRs.
Although HSWA was enacted in 1984, EPA was unable to address the
specific implications of its implementing regulations in the
1986 ROD, because the regulations were written and promulgated
after the ROD was issued. In order to comply with some of these
regulations, EPA must modify the remedy described in the
1986 ROD. No fundamental changes to the remedy are required.
The regulations which have dictated changes in the remedy are
described below.
In 40 C.F.R. § 261.10, EPA describes its method of identifying
the characteristics of hazardous waste. EPA has determined that
toxicity, ignitability, corrosivity, and reactivity are
properties of a waste which would result in harm to human health
or the environment if a waste were to be mismanaged. EPA has
established test methods and regulatory levels for each
characteristic property. If test results involving a particular
waste show levels above acceptable regulatory levels for any
characteristic property, that waste is a hazardous waste. The
regulatory levels that have been established provide a high
degree of certainty that wastes exceeding those levels would pose
hazards to human health and the environment if improperly
managed.

To determine whether a waste is toxic, EPA established the
Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP) test, and
prescribed it in the regulations after the 1986 ROD was issued.
This test was developed to estimate the concentrations at which
specific compounds will leach out of a soil matrix. If the
levels of hazardous substances in the leachate from the TCLP test
are greater than the regulatory level, that waste is defined as a
RCRA characteristic hazardous waste for toxicity. Under the
LDRs, these wastes must be treated before they can be placed in a
landfill.

EPA has established two types of LDR treatment standards for both
characteristic and listed hazardous wastes under the LDRs in
40 C.F.R. Part 268:
•   Concentration levels of waste or waste extracts which must
    be attained in these wastes or waste treatment residuals
    before they may be land disposed; and
    Specified technologies which must be applied to specified
    wastes or waste treatment residuals before they may be land
    disposed.


                                                      CTC   002   0663

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Description of Significant Differences
EPA has selected the following modifications to the remedy
selected in the 1986 ROD for treatment and disposal of the
contaminated soils and other waste materials. These
modifications, and the effects of inflation, will increase the
cost of the remedy above what was estimated in the ROD.
The modified remedy will include:
    excavation (as described in the ROD) of 35,000 cubic yards
    of contaminated soils and other waste materials (an increase
    of 7,000 cubic yards from the volume estimated in the ROD);
    off-site disposal and treatment of approximately 1650 cubic
    yards of "California List" waste materials (a new component
    that replaces the on-site thermal treatment of high
    concentrations of VOC contaminated soils, and provides for
    compliance with the RCRA requirements for disposal of these
    waste materials);
    stabilization of the lead contaminated soils remaining on
    the Site, prior to their placement in the RCRA landfill (an
    additional component that is needed to comply with RCRA land
    disposal restrictions); and
•   treatment that will reduce the VOCs in contaminated soils to
    acceptable levels (this will be accomplished by off-site
    treatment and disposal of the high VOC content "California
    List" wastes, and by the reduction and treatment of the
    remaining VOCs in the soils during the stabilization
    process, rather than in a separate low temperature thermal
    treatment system as described in the ROD);
•    placement of the treated soils in a secure on-site landfill,
     as described in the ROD. This landfill will be constructed
     in accordance with RCRA and Toxic Substances Control Act
     (TSCA) requirements.
The off-site treatment and disposal of "California List" waste
materials with high levels of VOCs, and stabilization of the lead
contaminated soils that will also reduce the VOCs remaining in
the soils, are modifications of the remedy selected in the
1986 ROD. These VOC treatment methods replace the low
temperature thermal treatment method described in the ROD.
These modifications will provide treatment which permanently and
significantly reduces the toxicity and mobility of the
contcUDinants at the Site, and complies with all ARARs. As a
result, this remedy will be permanent, and will ensure the
protection of human health and the environment into the future as
well as the near term.




                                                      "C 002     0664

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Stabilization
As described above, LDRs mandate that RCRA hazardous waste be
stabilized Or otherwise treated before it can be landfilled.
TCLP tests were performed on 24 samples taken from all areas of
the Site to determine whether the soils and waste materials were
subject to LDRs. The results of the TCLP analyses indicate that
lead is the only inorganic contaminant in the soils or sludges
whose leachate level is greater than its prescribed regulatory
level. The RCRA regulatory level for lead leaching from a sample
is 5 ppm, and any sample with a lead TCLP leachate value greater
than 5 ppm is considered a RCRA characteristic hazardous waste.
The EPA action level for lead is 1000 ppm for surface cleanups in
industrial areas such as the Caldwell Site. Lead concentrations
in the soils and waste materials at the Site greatly exceed this
level; lead was detected at concentrations over 10,000 ppm in the
subsurface soils, and over 100,000 ppm in the sludges.
Approximately 33,000 cubic yards of soil and waste materials have
lead concentrations over 1,000 ppm. These concentrations of lead
will result in TCLP leachate values greater than the 5 ppm
regulatory level; for example, soil containing 1420 ppm lead has
a TCLP leachate value of 21.3 ppm. Since soils and sludges with
lead leachate values greater than 5 ppm are RCRA hazardous
wastes, they are subject to LDRs. Consequently, the lead must be
stabilized before the soils and kludges can be placed in the RCRA
landfill.
Stabilization of the lead contaminated soils and waste materials
involves binding or "fixing" the soil with materials such as
cement, lime, fly ash, or special additives. The soil is then
mixed with a combination of binders and water to form a matrix
that will prevent any single constituent, such as lead, from
leaching out of the mixture. This process will reduce the lead
TCLP leachate to within acceptable limits so the contaminated
material can be landfilled. Stabilization will increase the
volume of materials to be placed in the landfill by up to one-
third because of the addition of binder materials. As a result,
a larger landfill must be constructed to accommodate the
additional volume of stabilized materials, and the cost of the
landfill component will increase accordingly. Approximately
33,000 cubic yards of soil exceed EPA action levels for lead and
must be stabilized.

Treatment of Volatile Organic Compounds
"California List" wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes that also have
total concentrations of HOCs over 1000 ppm. Lead leachate levels
from the TCLP tests on the soils and waste materials at the Site
exceed the regulatory level; therefore, these materials are RCRA
characteristic hazardous wastes because of toxicity. Some of
these wastes also contain HOCs, such as trichloroethylene and
perchloroethylene, at total HOC levels over 1000 ppm.
Approximately 1650 cubic yards of waste at the Site have the



                                                           002     0665

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

combination of high levels of both lead and HOCs that constitutes
"California List" waste material.
RCRA regulations specify the treatment requirements for
"California List" wastes. The only treatment technology that
meets these requirements is incineration. Because "California
List" wastes from this site contain high concentrations of both
VOCs and lead, and also some PCBs, EPA has determined that this
waste would be best treated and disposed of off-site at a
RCRA/TSCA approved facility that will permanently destroy these
hazardous substances. This is a modification of the 1986 ROD,
which specified low temperature thermal treatment as the
technology to reduce the concentration of VOCs in the soils prior
to containment in the on-site landfill.
With the "California List" waste materials removed from the Site,
the remaining VOCs in the soils can be reduced and treated by a
stabilization process unit that includes appropriate air
pollution control equipment to meet New Jersey State
requirements. As a result, a separate low temperature thermal
treatment system is no longer necessary. EPA has determined that
off-site treatment and disposal of the "California List" wastes,
and reduction of residual VOCs by treatment within the
stabilization unit is protective of human health and the
environment, and is cost effective. Approximately 1650 cubic
yards of "California List" waste materials will be sent to an
off-site RCRA/TSCA approved treatment and disposal facility.
Costs
The following explanation summarizes the major cost impacts of
the modifications to the selected remedy for the contaminated
soils and waste materials. EPA estimated the total cost for the
remedial action in the 1986 ROD to be approximately $4,000,000 to
$5,000,000. The total cost of the remedial action is now
estimated to be approximately $19,000,000 to $25,000,000.
The cost increase results principally from the design
modifications required to handle the wastes found, during the
remedial design field tests, from requirements imposed under the
LDRs, as discussed earlier, and from inflation. The major areas
of cost change are described below.
     1) Soil Stabilization/Solidification;
     Soil stabilization is an additional component of the remedy.
     The amount of increase in cost of this component will depend
     upon the selected stabilization method. The companies who
     specialize in this service have customized equipment and
     proprietary process techniques, and chemical additives that
     will allow them to meet the performance specification called
     for in the design bid documents.



                               8
                                                      CTC   002    0666

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    2) California List Waste Disposal;

    Off-site treatment and disposal of California List waste
    materials is an additional component of the remedy. As a
    result of treatability work during the remedial design, EPA
    determined that California List wastes must be excavated,
    tested and shipped for off-site treatment and disposal at a
    RCRA approved facility. This component will add to the cost
    of the project.

    3) Excavation. Handling and Landfill Construction:
    As indicated above, the additional field work and analysis
    performed during the remedial design has increased the
    estimated volume of contaminated soil at the Site by about
    25 percent, from 28,000 cubic yards to about 35,000 cubic
    yards. Since this volume of soil and sludge is the starting
    material for the treatment and disposal processes, the
    increased volume raises the cost proportionately of
    virtually every step of the process. These earth handling
    steps include excavation, handling, screening, segregation,
    sampling, stabilization, TCLP testing, landfilling, and
    backfilling with clean soil.

    The size and cost of the landfill construction would
    normally be expected to increase as the volume of waste
    increases, and with the "swell factor" which results from
    blending in binders or fixing materials during the
    stabilization process. The estimates in the ROD did allow
    for some increase; furthermore, a small change in the height
    of the landfill will accommodate added volume at minimal
    cost.

    4. Deletion of Low Temperature Thermal Treatment

    A separate low temperature volatilization system (LTVS) was
    selected in the 1986 ROD as an innovative technology to meet
    the unique requirements of this Site. Since the LTVS is no
    longer needed for the treatment of the VOC contaminated
    soils, the deletion of this component will represent a cost
    savings. EPA has determined that it is cost-effective to
    replace or substitute the LTVS VOC treatment method with
    off-site treatment and disposal of the "California List"
    wastes, and by reduction and treatment of the VOCs remaining
    in the soils during processing in the stabilization unit.

Although the estimated cost of the remedial action at the Site
has increased, the overall intent and purpose of the remedy, as
presented in the 1986 ROD, has not changed.

Support Agency Comments
The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy
concurs with this ESD.



                                                       CTC   002   0667

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Affirmation of statutory Determinations
EPA has modified the selected remedy for the contaminated soils
and waste materials because of additional information concerning
site contaminants obtained during the remedial design field
studies, and because certain applicable RCRA regulations were
promulgated after the ROD was signed. EPA and NJDEPE believe
that the remedy remains protective of human health and the
environment; complies with federal and state requirements that
were identified in the ROD and in this ESD as applicable or
relevant and appropriate to this remedial action; and is cost
effective. In addition, the revised remedy utilizes permanent
solutions and alternative treatment technologies to the maximum
extent practicable for the Site.



 Lyi.^^
William J . M}iszynsk>r P.E.
Acting RegdTonal A d f n i n i s t r a t o r




                                               10


                                                            002    0668
