LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: DECLARATION STATEMENT, RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT, CALDWELL TRUCKING COMPANY SITE
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/108443
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 18c0bab967b3c7b2879019b511d4ec0788fff2e7afa1c2c6d130a42fd4de5263
Source PDF pages: 72
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                               SDMS Document



                                                                                                                   108443
                                                    ?S^qLARATION STATEMENT

                                               I^CORD o f J DECISION JOIEHD^OT               '' >*

                                             CALDWELL TICKING COMPANY SITE
B;^u,tfe^4t@ mama aa'#' Local^ion „^

            Caldw©l:a.,t Trjicking - i ^ ^ i a n i            " ->*^-'
            F a i r f i e l d ' T o w n s h i p ; ; sssse^ot^om          New Jersiv'
                                                                 V-

            8tateinea%--og Basia...^nd Pitrpt^ae

            This Recordrpf D!sSlsions;fB^]( AmeMmen^lfpcuaients the U.S.
            Snvironmentlrl ProtWction,x^^i^'cy'a^CEPA'sf selectioij of a modified




                                                                                                                      f o r p^aiyss^t^f,
                                                                                                                              '^^i&mm
                                                                                                                     d fOE
                                                                                                                               •m
            c©ni'.alns t:!i@ d o c i a n e n t s ,|                                                  g.-> ;se rT^e^;i^rj o f - §yy
            •'iJfAS • r e i n e d i a 1 a c t i o n , x '•                                                                          '¥'Si?i •

 •:•• T3/J S t a t e ;&f .,iNfe|^Tjersey ,coT3?|5^rs withFj&fef'lji^i^ctedp^amedy^^rily                                  if
 "••' i n s t i t u t i o n ^ l o c f e i i t r o l s , Ifh.leh- ^iRclud^fetl||^'ire •:ns^'^fj^^.s^aif^^^               .
            l i m i t e d t o deedTS-iiistricti'sfsg              •ar§, s.s^abiki m ^ - fssH'i^S         t-site.
                                                                                                     if,:.:
    •   •
            ^^a^iaagjA'^t of the Slfc©
            &




      Actua3;*©r threatenedj|-^|il|&i^r4ffefziirdous,-suliS^ca-ni^ -froBf^-the
    •Caldw.gll Trucking Coaf>'&i^^i:%'|^#f.-l^^-^ not ad0#'€isse^yfc'y'.;i?»P:l®aie#^ng
    ''^M^-W&aponse festion selected "In'"t!his ROD Ainendia®jit, iaay'-ipii^sant
      a^^iipinent and sxibstantial threat to public health, welfare or                                                           •'en-,.
      thQ erivisjbnment.

            Description of the Selected Remedy

            The remedial action described in this document addresses
            contaminated soils at the Caldwell Trucking Company site. It
            represents a modification of the remedy for contaminated soils
            selected in the initial ROD (September 1986) and subsequent
            Explanation of Significant Differences (February 1993) for the
            site. The previous remedy included the treatment of contaminated
            soils and placement of the treated soils in a landifill to be
            constructed at the site. The modified remedy, developed as a
            result of a study undertaken by a group of potentially
            responsible parties, eliminates the need for construction of the
            on-site landfill while providing a similar degree of protection
            to human health and the environment. The major components of the
            selected remedy are as follows:



                                                                                                        CTC    00:       .1291

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Excavation and off-site disposal of 1650 cubic yards of
     .California List waste materials;
•    Excavation and off-site treatment and disposal of all soils
     with concentrations of volatile organic compounds over
     100 milligrams per kilogram;
     In-situ stabilization of 29,500 cubic yards and 5,200 cubic
     yards of contaminated soil in the central lagoon area and
     north lagoon area, respectively, foirming a low permeability
     solidified mass;
     Placement of two feet of clean soil over the solidified mass
     to allow for revegetation of the areas; and
     Appropriate environmental monitoring to ensure the
     effectiveness of the remedy.
Declaration of statutory Determinations
The selected remedy meets the requirements for remedial actions
set forth in CERCLA §121, 42 U.S.C. §9621: (1) it is protective
of human health and the environment; (2) it attains a level or
standard of control of the hazardous substances, pollutants and
contaminants, which at least attains the legally applicable or
relevant and appropriate requirements under federal and state
laws; (3) it is cost-effective; (4) it utilizes permanent
solutions and alternative treatment (or resource recovery)
technologies to the maximum extent practicable; and (5) it
satisfies the statutory preference for treatment as a principal
element.
Because this remedy will result in contaminants remaining on the
site above health-based levels (although in a stabilized form), a
review will be conducted within five years after the commencement
of the remedial action to ensure that the remedy continues to
provide adequate protection to human health and the environment.




William J. Mitf^ynski^^.E.            Date
Deputy RegTonal Adroinistrator
U.S. EPA, Region II




                                                     CTC   002 12<^

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                        .DECISION .SUMMARY
                   RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT
                  CALDWELL TRUCKING COMPANY SITE

SITE BACKGROUND
Caldwell Trucking Company (Caldwell) was a sewage hauling and
disposal firm located at 222 Passaic Avenue in Fairfield
Township, New Jersey. The site consists of Lot 17 of Block 2201
and Lots 7, 18 and 20 of Block 2302 on the Fairfield Township tax
map, in an area zoned for industrial use. The site also includes
those areas affected by the plume of contaminated ground water.
The West Essex Regional High School is located approximately
200 feet to the east. Approximately 45 small businesses are
situated within one mile of the site, and the nearest major
residential area is about 1000 feet to the northeast.
Caldwell disposed of residential and commercial septic waste, as
well as industrial waste, in unlined lagoons on the site from the-
early 1950's until about 1973. When the lagoons were full, they
were backfilled and a new series of lagoons were dug, sometimes
over pre-existing lagoons. From 1973 to the early 1980s, wastes
were consolidated in four underground storage tanks prior to
disposal off the site.

1986 Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study
In June 1986, EPA completed a Remedial Investigation and
Feasibility Study (RI/FS) for the site. The RI/FS was conducted
to identify the types, quantities, and locations of contaminants,
and to develop ways of addressing the contamination problems.
The RI delineated the horizontal and vertical extent of the
contamination in the former lagoons, and confirmed the presence
of a downgradient plume of contaminated ground water. Metals,
primarily lead, cadmium and mercury, volatile organic compounds
(VOCs), polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and
polychlorinetted biphenyls (PCBs) were detected in on-site
subsurface soils. Lead, PCBs, and PAHs were also detected in on-
site surface soils. Lead is the primary metal of concern in both
the surface and subsurface soils. Ground water is contaminated
with VOCs, including trichloroethylene and 1,1,1-trichloroethane.
A risk assessment was performed as part of the 1986 RI/FS. This
information is available for review in the Administrative Record
for the 1986 Record of Decision (ROD).
Based on the results of the RI/FS, site remediation was divided
into four remedial phases or components. Remedies for the first
three components were selected in the 1986 ROD. The fourth

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 component, which deals with the contaminated ground water, is
-being, dealt .with-under .a second.ROD ^igned .in ,1989. :This ground
 water component is not affected by the proposed ROD Amendment.
1986 ROD Remedy
The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) selected
the following remedial actions in the 1986 ROD:
First Component
      Restoration of the water quality in Municipal Well No. 7 to
      drinking water quality standards, through a treatment
      process known as "air-stripping".
Second Component
      Provision of an alternative water supply for residents
      potentially affected by ground water contamination
      associated with the site.
Third Component
     Excavation and treatment (by the addition of heat) of
     approximately 28,000 cubic yards of contaminated soils and
     waste materials; and
      Placement of the treated waste in a secure landfill to be
      constructed on the site in accordance with the requirements
      of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA).

The Township of Fairfield subsequently chose not to provide
treatment for Municipal Well No. 7, but rather decided to utilize
water provided by the Passaic Valley Water Commission as an
alternative potable water supply for the entire community. EPA
issued an ESD in May 1991, to explain the deletion of the
Municipal Well No. 7 component of the remedy.
In the summer of 1989, EPA connected 55 residential properties
and nine commercial establishments to the municipal water system.
This fulfil±ed the second remedial component of the 1986 ROD.

Remedial Design for Contaminated Soils and Waste Materials
In 1987, EPA initiated a remedial design for the third component
of the 1986 ROD involving the contaminated soils and waste
materials at the site. Initial design activities focused on
further characterization of the soils and waste materials, and
restoration of the water quality in Municipal Well No. 7. In the
summer of 1990, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers conducted field




                                                         CTC   002   1294

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

investigations designed to measure air emissions from on-site
activities during test pit excavations, and to collect
geotechnical data involving the subsurface soils.
At the time of the RI/FS, EPA believed that sludge waste at the
site was limited to the existing surface lagoon, and that the
waste remaining in this lagoon would be best treated by the same
processes intended to be used for soil treatment. However, the
results of the remedial design investigations indicated that the
volume of sludge at the site was greater than originally
estimated. In addition, new information about the levels and
combinations of contaminants in the sludges, and also in some
site soils, indicated that additional treatment would be required
prior to disposal.
The remedial design investigations also provided additional
information about the buried sludge lagoons. Some sludges have
concentrations of lead over 100,000 milligrams per kilogram
(mg/kg); others contain halogenated organic compounds (HOCs),
such as trichloroethylene or perchloroethylene, at total
concentrations greater than 1000 mg/kg, as well as high
concentrations of lead. Under the RCRA regulations found at
40 C.F.R. § 268.32, any waste with this combination of
contaminants is classified as a "California List" waste, and
cannot be land disposed without treatment. 40 C.F.R. Part 268
prescribes incineration as the treatment method for all
"California List" wastes.
In addition, the results of testing during the remedial design
indicated that some of the other soil and waste materials also
exhibited high lead levels; these were classified as RCRA
characteristic hazardous wastes because of their toxicity. If
these RCRA hazardous wastes are excavated, they must meet
specific RCRA treatment standards, known as Land Disposal
Restrictions, before being placed in a land disposal unit.

1993 Explanation of Significant Differences
In February 1993, as a result of the additional information
gathered in the remedial design, EPA modified the remedy selected
in the 1986—ROD for treatment and disposal of the contaminated
soils and other waste materials, as follows:
•   Excavation (as described in the 1986 ROD) of 35,000 cubic
    yards of contaminated soils and other waste materials (an
    increase of 7,000 cubic yards compared to the volume
    estimated in the 1986 ROD);




                                                    CTC   002    1295

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      Off-site disposal and treatment of approximately 1650 cubic
    .. yards ..of-California List waste materials. (a new component
      that replaced the on-site theirmal treatment of high
      concentrations of VOC contaminated soils);
      Stabilization of the lead contaminated soils remaining on
      the site, prior to their placement in the RCRA landfill (an
      additional component needed to comply with RCRA land
      disposal restrictions);
      Treatment to reduce the VOCs in contaminated soils to
      acceptable levels (to be accomplished by off-site treatment
      and disposal of the high VOC content California List wastes,
      and by the reduction and treatment of the remaining VOCs in
      the soils during the stabilization process, rather than in a
      separate low temperature thermal treatment system as
      described in the 1986 ROD); and
•     Placement of the treated soils in a secure on-site landfill,
      as described in the 1986 ROD (to be constructed in
      accordance with RCRA and Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA)
      requirements).

The off-site treatment and disposal of California List waste
materials with high levels of VOCs, and stabilization of the lead
contaminated soils that would also reduce the VOCs remaining in
the soils, were modifications of the remedy selected in the
1986 ROD. These VOC treatment methods replaced the low
temperature thermal treatment method described in the ROD.
In September 1994, a group of eight potentially responsible
parties (PRPs), under EPA oversight, completed the excavation and
off-site treatment and disposal of the California List waste
materials, and removed the underground storage tanks.
ENFORCEMENT HISTORY
In April 1993, EPA issued a unilateral Administrative Order
(UAO), Index No. II-CERCLA-93-0102, to 11 potentially responsible
parties to implement the existing remedy. In June 1993, EPA
issued a second UAO, Index No. II-CERCLA-93-0104, to 15 PRPs to
conduct a pre-design ground water investigation. Nine PRPs
agreed to comply with both UAOs, and formed the Caldwell Trucking
Company Site Trust (the Trust). On March 30, 1994, EPA, the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) and the
U.S. Department of Interior lodged a consent agreement with the
U.S. District Court, under which the Trust will perform the
remedial work to contain the contaminated ground water plume, in
addition to the site work which they are undertaking under both
UAOs.




                                                        CTC   001

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

• 1994. FOCUSED.FEASIBILITY STUDY
In October 1993, the Trust conducted bench-scale studies to
evaluate the effectiveness of stabilization on site-specific
contaminated soil. In January 1994, the Trust presented EPA and
NJDEP with the results of the bench-scale studies. These studies
indicated that, after the California List waste materials and
other soils with high concentrations of VOCs were treated and
disposed of off site, stabilization of the remaining wastes in
place might be as effective in protecting human health and the
environment as the existing stabilization and landfilling remedy.
This would be accomplished by forming a solid and durable
concrete mass (in-situ stabilization/solidification), with a low
permeability of 1 X 10"* (one in a hundred thousand) centimeters
per second (cm/sec).
As a result, in March 1994, EPA approved the Trust's request that
it be allowed to prepare a focused feasibility study (FFS), which
is a feasibility study with a limited scope, to evaluate in-situ
stabilization/solidification as an alternative remedy for the
remaining soil contamination at the site. The purpose of the FFS
was to demonstrate that an in-situ stabilization/ solidification -
technology would be effective at the Caldwell Trucking site, and
to evaluate whether this technology would be protective of human
health and the environment.
Two remedial alternatives were compared in the FFS. The first
alternative consists of the remedy presented in the 1986 ROD, as
modified by the 1993 ESD; this alternative includes stabilization
of the non-California List waste material and placement in an on-
site landfill. The second alternative consists of in-situ
stabilization/solidification of the non-California List waste
material and installation of a soil cover.
The information presented regarding Alternative 1, stabilization
and landfilling, is based on an EPA design for this remedy that
was prepared by the U.S. Ainny Corps of Engineers, and modified by
the Trust pursuant to the UAO. The information presented
regarding Alternative 2, in-situ stabilization/solidification, is
based upon information gathered from current industry literature,
the use of 'this technology at another Superfund site, and bench-
scale testing conducted in October 1993 utilizing soils from the
Caldwell Trucking site.

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
The FFS and Proposed Plan for this ROD Amendment were released to
the public for comment on October 25, 1994. These documents were
made available to the public in the administrative record file at
information repositories located at the Town Clerk's Office,




                                                      CTC   002 129'7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Fairfield Township, New Jersey and EPA's Region II Office in New
.York .City... .A, Notice .for.- these. documents _ was. published, in. the
 Caldwell Progress on November 3, 1994. A public comment period
 was held from October 25, 1994 to November 25, 1994. In
 addition, a public meeting to discuss the proposed change to the
 remedy was held at the Town Hall in Fairfield on November 9,
 1994. No comments were made by the public concerning the
 proposed change at this meeting. In addition, no comments were
 received by EPA during the public comment period. A sximmary of
 the public meeting is addressed in the Responsiveness Summary.


REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES

Remedial action objectives are specific goals to protect human
health and the environment; they specify the contaminant(s) of
concern, the exposure routes, receptors, and acceptable
contaminant levels for each exposure route. For the Caldwell
Trucking site, they are:

•     Prevent exposure through dermal contact with and/or
      ingestion of California List waste materials.

      Prevent exposure through dennal contact with and/or
      ingestion of contaminated soil with VOCs greater than
      100 mg/kg.

•     Prevent exposure through dermal contact with and/or
      ingestion of contaminated soil containing heavy metals, such
      as lead, cadmium and mercury.

•     Inhibit leaching of site contaminants from the soil into the
      ground water by stabilizing all contaminated soil with
      concentrations of lead greater than 1000 mg/kg, and cadmium
      greater than 3 mg/kg.

•     Mitigate any unacceptable risks to human or ecological
      receptors from the inhalation of contaminants released from
      soil on the site to the air.


DESCRIPTION~OF ALTERNATIVES

The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act (CERCLA) of 1980, as amended, requires that
selected site remedies be protective of human health and the
environment, be cost effective, comply with other laws, and
utilize permanent solutions and alternative treatment technolo-
gies and resource recovery alternatives to the maximum extent
practicable. In addition, CERCLA includes a preference for the
use of treatment as a principal element for the reduction of
toxicity, mobility or volume of the hazardous substances.




                                                             CTC   002   1298

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 This amended ROD evaluates two remedial alternatives for
.addressing'soil..contamination,.associated with the Caldwell
 Trucking site.
These alternatives are:
Alternative 1: StzUslllzatlon/Landfill
Capital Cost: $13,194,000
Annual Operation and Maintenance (O & M) Cost:    $189,000
Present Worth Cost: $15,539,000
Construction Time: 1.5 years
Alternative 1 is the existing remedy; it includes:
•    Excavation, off-site treatment and disposal of approximately
     1650 cubic yards of California List waste materials;
•    Excavation and stabilization of about 29,500 cubic yards of
     non-California List waste material in the central lagoon
     area and 5,200 cubic yards of contaminated soil in the north
     lagoon area, which will immobilize the heavy metals and
     reduce the remaining VOCs in the contaminated soils to an
     acceptable level; and
                     •t

•    Placement of the treated wastes in an on-site RCRA/TSCA
     landfill, with a double liner and leachate collection
     system.
Because this alternative would result in contaminants remaining
on the site, CERCLA requires that the site be reviewed every five
years. If justified by the review, additional remedial actions
may be implemented to remove or treat the wastes.

Alternative 2: Stabilization/Solidification
Capital Cost: $8,384,000
Annual O 6 M Cost: $93,000
Present Worth Cost: $9,538,000
Construction Time: 0.75 year
Alternative 2 includes:
•    Excavation, off-site treatment and disposal of approximately
     1650 cubic yards of California List waste materials;
•    Excavation, and off-site treatment and disposal of
     contaminated soils with concentrations of VOCs greater than
     100 mg/kg;




                                                      CTC    002   1299

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      In-situ stabilization/solidification of about 29,500 cubic
. , >'. yards, and,5,200,cubic, yards in. the central, lagoon area and
      north lagoon area, respectively, forming a solid" and durabre
      low permeability concrete mass, referred to as "the
      solidified mass"; and
     Placement of two feet of clean soil over the solidified mass
     and revegetation of the areas.
Because this alternative would result in contaminants remaining
on the site, CERCLA requires that the site be reviewed every five
years. If justified by the review, additional remedial actions
may be implemented to remove or treat the wastes.

SUMMARY OF THE COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES
In selecting a remedy, EPA considered the factors set out in
Section 121 of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. §9621, by conducting a detailed
analysis of the remedial alternatives pursuant to Section
300.430(e)(9) of the National Oil and Hazardous Substances
Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP). EPA assessed the individual
alternatives against each of nine evaluation criteria and
compared the relative performance of each alternative against
those criteria.
The following "threshold" criteria must be satisfied by any
alternative in order to be eligible for selection:
1.   Overall protection of human health and the environment
     addresses whether or not a remedy provides adequate
     protection and describes how risks posed through each
     exposure pathway are eliminated, reduced or controlled
     through treatment, engineering controls or institutional
     controls.
2.   Compliance with applicable or relevant and appropriate
     requirements addresses whether or not a remedy will meet all
     of the applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements
     of federal and state environmental statutes and require-
     ments, or provide grounds for invoking a waiver.
The following "primary balancing" criteria are used to make
comparisons and to identify the major trade-offs between
alternatives.
3.   Long-term effectiveness and permanence refers to the ability
     of a remedy to maintain reliable protection of human health
     and the environment over time, once cleanup goals have been
     met. It also addresses the magnitude and effectiveness of
     the measures that may be required to manage the risk posed
     by treatment residuals and/or untreated wastes.
                                 8



                                                      CTC   002   130O

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

4.    Reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment
     .^refers- to .a..remedial, technology's. expected, ability to reduce
      the toxicity, mobility or volume of hazardous substances,
      pollutants or contaminants at the site.
5.   Short-term effectiveness addresses the period of time needed
     to achieve protection, and any adverse impacts on human
     health and the environment that may be posed during the
     construction and implementation period until cleanup goals
     are achieved.
6.   Implementabilitv is the technical and administrative
     feasibility of a remedy, including the availability of
     materials and services needed to implement a particular
     option.
7.   Cost includes estimated capital and operation and
     maintenance costs, and the present worth costs.
The following "modifying" criteria are considered fully after the
formal public comment period on the Proposed Plan is complete:
8.   State acceptance indicates whether, based on its review of
     the FFS report and Proposed Plan, the state supports,
     opposes, and/or has identified any reservations with the
     preferred alternative.
9.   Community acceptance refers to the public's general response
     to the alternatives described in the Proposed Plan and the
     FFS.
A comparative analysis of these alternatives based upon the
evaluation criteria noted above follows.
Threshold Criteria
Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment
Alternative 1 provides protection of human health and the
environment through removal and off-site disposal of the
California List waste materials, a major source of the ground
water contamination. In addition, the remaining contaminated
materials in the central lagoon area and the contaminated soils
in the north lagoon area would be excavated and stabilized prior
to placement in a RCRA/TSCA landfill to be constructed on the
site. The landfill would encapsulate and isolate the stabilized
material to prevent infiltration of rain, surface water runoff,
and ground water. The landfill cap would prevent exposure
through direct contact with the stabilized material.
Alternative 2 provides the same level of protection of human
health and the environment as Alternative 1. The California List




                                                         CTC   002   1301

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

waste materials, a major source of the ground water contamina-
nt ion, -.would-be .sent -Off site for treatment and disposal.
 Similarly, all soils With concentrations bf VOCs over 100' mg/kg
would be sent off site for treatment and disposal. The remaining
 contaminated soils in the central lagoon area and in the north
 lagoon area would be stabilized in place, forming a low
permeability solidified mass. This stabilization method creates
a solid and durable mass which would practically eliminate the
 flow of water through the treated soil. Two feet of clean soil
would be added to cover the solidified mass. This will allow
revegetation of the area, reduce the potential for direct contact
with the solidified mass, and prevent erosion.
Compliance with ARARs
Applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs) are
those federal and State environmental and public health
regulations that apply to remedial activities at the site. There
are three types of ARARs: chemical-specific, which are health- or
risk-based concentration limits; location-specific, which are
based on the geographical location of the site and its
surroundings; and action-specific, which are controls on
particular types of remedial activities.
Chemical-Specific ARARs
There are no federal or state chemical-specific cleanup standards
promulgated for the cleanup of the contaminated surface and
subsurface soils at the Caldwell Trucking site. However, EPA and
NJDEP agreed upon objectives for the cleanup of the contaminated
soil based on a future industrial use of the site. These
objectives are shown in Table 1. Both Alternative 1 and
Alternative 2 will achieve these cleanup objectives.
Action-Specific ARARs
Both alternatives are expected to attain the following action-
specific ARARs: the Clean Air Act National Emissions Standards
for Hazardous Air Pollutants (40 C.F.R. Part 61), New Jersey Air
Permit Requirements (NJAC 7:27-8), New Jersey Control and
Prohibition of Air Pollution by Toxic Substances (NJAC 7:27-17),
and New Jersey Regulations for Volatile Organic Substances
(NJAC 7:27-16).
Alternative 1 requires a waiver of the NJDEP Hazardous Waste
Regulations found at NJAC 7:26-10.8e-7, because the landfill
would not be located a sufficient distance from a neighboring
property to comply with the siting criteria. As part of the
remedial design for the existing remedy, EPA and NJDEP agreed to
waive this ARAR. Alternative 2 would not trigger these siting
criteria; therefore, no waivers are necessary.

                               10



                                                     ^^C   002   1302

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Alternative 1 would comply with RCRA land disposal restrictions
. ..(LDRs) for the -placement, of the .stabilized, soil = into an, onrsite
 landfill. Stabilization would comply with the treatment
 requirements that specify that a RCRA hazardous waste must be
 treated prior to placement at a disposal facility. Alternative 2
 would not invoke LDRs because these activity-based limitations do
 not apply when the waste material is treated in place.
 Nonetheless, stabilization of the contaminated soils under
 Alternative 2 would achieve standards equivalent to the LDRs for
 the treated soils.
Both alternatives would comply with the action-specific
requirements of RCRA, the U.S. Department of Transportation
regulations, and the New Jersey Solid and Hazardous Waste
Regulations regarding the handling and shipment of California
List wastes and other contaminated soils which would be sent off
site for treatment and disposal. In addition, both alternatives
would meet the RCRA LDR treatment standards for the proper off-
site treatment and disposal of the California List wastes and the
soils contaminated with high levels of VOCs.
Location-Specific .\RARs
Both alternatives are expected to meet the requirements of the
Executive Order on Wetlands Protection (EO 11980), Section 404 of
the Clean Water Act, and Section 7:7A of the New Jersey
Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act.
Primary Balancing Criteria
Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence
Both alternatives would equally reduce the magnitude of residual
risk through the off-site treatment and disposal of California
List wastes and soils contaminated with high amounts of VOCs, and
stabilization of the remaining contaminated soils. The
containment of stabilized soils in an on-site hazardous waste
landfill (Alternative 1) or via in-situ stabilization/
solidification (Alternative 2) would provide comparable
reductions in the baseline risk estimates developed as part of
the 1986 RI/FS.
As required by CERCLA, both alternatives would require a five-
year review to evaluate site conditions. If justified by the
review, additional remedial actions may be implemented to remove
or treat the wastes.
The isolation of the treated waste materials in either a capped
hazardous waste landfill (Alternative 1) or a solidified mass
with a two foot clean soil cover (Alternative 2) would limit
potential exposure of human or ecological receptors to treated
waste materials to a similar degree. Because of concerns that
                                   11


                                                          CTC   002 130:;

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

organic constituents could adversely affect the permanence of the
.solidified, mass, associated., with .Alternative., 2,.. sampling, would, be
performed during the remedial design to verify that the selected
reagent mix used for stabilization would create a solidified mass
with long-term durability.
Both alternatives would reduce leachate generation to an
acceptable level. Both alternatives would reduce migration of
contaminants to ground water underlying the Caldwell Trucking
site. Alternative 1 would rely on stabilization to immobilize
the contaminants, then placement of the treated wastes into an
on-site landfill with a double liner, leachate collection system,
and a hazardous waste cap. This landfill cap would have a low
permeability of 1 x lO"* cm/sec. Which would isolate these
materials from water that might infiltrate through the cap
material. Alternative 2 would encapsulate the treated materials
in a low permeability (1 x 10"* cm/sec) solidified mass located
above the water table. Leachate would not be generated from the
solidified mass, and infiltration of rain and surface water
runoff through the mass would be practically eliminated because
of its low permeability.
Reduction in Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume
The alternatives would each achieve essentially equivalent
reductions in toxicity, mobility or volume of the soils to be
treated. Both alternatives would reduce the toxicity, mobility
and volume of the California List wastes through the off-site
incineration of these materials. Alternative 2 would further
reduce the toxicity and volume of the contaminated soils at the
site by the off-site treatment and disposal of those soils with
VOCs greater than 100 mg/kg. Alternative 1 would not directly
reduce the intrinsic toxicity or volume of the contaminated
soils. Stabilization, under both alternatives, would increase
the volume of treated waste material at the site; however, the
mobility of these constituents would be initially reduced by
chemical stabilization. Secondary reduction in mobility would be
obtained either by containment in a hazardous waste landfill
(Alternative 1) or encapsulation in a subsurface concrete-like
solidified mass (Alternative 2). Both alternatives would be
expected to effectively immobilize the hazardous constituents
remaining il?~the soil.
Short-Term Effectiveness
For either alternative, an air monitoring program and engineering
controls will be used to limit any airborne dust and emissions
from the site during construction. Both alternatives would
require the implementation of a health and safety plan to
minimize any risks to on-site workers, employees in nearby
industrial and commercial facilities, and other members of the
public. Alternative 2 would generate somewhat less VOCs, odor
                                   12


                                                          CTC   002   1304

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

and dust emissions than Alternative 1, by eliminating soil
excavation, aboveground handling and treatment, and overland
transport of treated residual materials' to an on-site landfill.
Construction time would also be reduced under Alternative 2,
because the action may be completed in nine months, as compared
to 18 months for Alternative 1.

Under Alternative 1, construction of an on-site hazardous waste
landfill and backfilling of the central lagoon area excavation
would require approximately 5,000 trucks carrying 100,000 cubic
yards of construction materials. Alternative 2 would require 250
truckloads of construction materials. This reduction in truck
traffic would result in significant reductions in noise and odor
impacts to the surrounding community.
On-site disturbance of wetlands and habitat alteration or loss
would be less under Alternative 2. Alternative 1 would affect
1.8 acres of wetlands, while Alternative 2 would affect 0.5 acre
of wetlands. Both alternatives require access agreements for the
use of adjacent properties during design and remedial action
activities.
ImplementeUaility
The necessary technical equipment and skilled workers are
available to implement either alternative. Both alternatives
involve well-established, common construction methods. Numerous
hazardous waste sites have been remediated by stabilization and
containment methods similar to those developed for Alternative 1
and Alternative 2. Provisions would have to be made in the
Alternative 2 remedial design for the handling of large debris
and boulders during the solidification process.

Alternative 1 would require a wetlands mitigation plan, and
compliance with federal and state air emissions regulations.     In
addition. Alternative 1 would require either compliance with
NJPDES regulations for discharge of stormwater runoff or
permission to discharge to the local sewer authority.
Alternative 2 would also require compliance with federal and
state air emissions regulations, and a mitigation plan for
wetlands lost during construction.

Cost

The cost evaluation of each alternative includes consideration of
capital costs and annual O&M costs. The estimated capital cost
of Alternative 1 is $13.2 million, with an estimated O&M cost of
$189,000 per year. The estimated capital cost of Alternative 2,
the less expensive alternative, is $8.4 million, with an
estimated O&M cost of $93,000 per year. A detailed breakdown of
the O&M costs can be found in the FFS.


                                13


                                                     crc   0O2   1 •-••ni.-
                                                                 J. .^'i (_) h

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Modifying Criteria
State Acceptance
The State of New Jersey concurs with the selected remedy only if
institutional controls, which include but are not necessarily
limited to deed restrictions, are established for the site.
Community Acceptance
EPA solicited comments from the community regarding the two
remedial alternatives, and on whether to amend the 1986 ROD
remedy. There were no comments from the community at the public
meeting concerning the proposed remedy change. In addition, no
written comments were received during the public comment period.
The attached responsiveness summary describes the community
relations activities for this ROD Amendment.

SELECTED REMEDY
After evaluating the two alternatives, EF7* has selected
Alternative 2 as the remedy for the site because it best
satisfies the requirements of Section 121 of CERCLA, and the
NCR's nine evaluation criteria for remedial alternatives. The
remedy was based on continued use of the property for commercial
or industrial purposes.
The major components of the remedy are as follows:
     excavation and off-site disposal of 1650 cubic yards of
     California List waste materials;
•    excavation and off-site treatment and disposal of all soils
     with concentrations of VOCs over 100 mg/kg;
     in-situ stabilization of 29,500 cubic yards and 5,200 cubic
     yards of contaminated soil in the central lagoon area and
     north lagoon area respectively, to form a low permeability
     concrete solidified mass; and
•    placement of two feet of clean soil over the solidified mass
     followed by revegetation of the areas to limit contact with
     the treated materials and erosion of the soil cover.


STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS
As previously noted. Section 121 of CERCLA mandates that a
remedial action must be protective of human health and the
environment, cost effective, and utilize permanent solutions and
                               14


                                                      CTC   002    1306

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery
technologies to the maximum extent, practicable. Section
121 (b)(i)' also establishes a preference for" remedial-actions
which employ treatment to permanently and significantly reduce
the volume, toxicity, or mobility of the hazardous substances,
pollutants, or contaminants at a site. Section 121 of CERCLA
further specifies that a remedial action must attain a degree of
cleanup that satisfies ARARs under federal and state laws, unless
a waiver can be justified.

For the reasons discussed below, EPA has determined that the
selected remedy for the Caldwell Trucking Company site meets the
requirements of Section 121 of CERCLA.
The selected remedy will adequately control potential exposure of
human or ecological receptors to treated waste materials. In
addition, because of concerns that organic constituents could
adversely affect the permanence of the stabilized mass, sampling
will be performed during the remedial design to verify that the
selected reagent mix used for stabilization will provide a
solidified mass with long-term durability.
Protection of wnw^w Health and the Environment
The selected remedy will practically eliminate migration of
contaminants to the ground water underlying the Caldwell Trucking
site by excavation and off-site disposal of the contaminated
soils with concentrations of VOCs over 100 mg/kg, in addition to
the excavation and off-site disposal of the California List
wastes. Lead and the remaining low levels of VOCs in the soil
will be stabilized and encapsulated in a solidified mass with a
maximum permeability of 1 x 10"* cm/sec, thus providing long-term
protection to human health and the environment.

Compliance with ARARs

The selected remedy will be designed to meet the soil cleanup
criteria, as well as all action-specific and location-specific
ARARs discussed under the "Summary of Comparative Analysis of
Alternatives", above.

Cost Effectiveness

The cost effectiveness of an alternative is determined by
weighing the cost against the alternative's ability to achieve
ARARs and remedial action objectives. The selected remedy is the
most cost-effective remedy. The capital costs of the selected
remedy are almost $5 million less than Alternative 1, and the
yearly O&M costs are one half of those for Alternative 1.




                               15



                                                   CTC   002   1307

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment
^Technologies .to the Maximum Extent Practicable
The selected remedy utilizes permanent solutions and treatment
technologies to the maximum extent practicable and provides the
best balance of trade-offs with respect to the nine evaluation
criteria previously discussed.
The selected remedy will reduce the toxicity and volume of the
contaminated soil at tha site by the off-site treatment and
disposal of California List wastes, and the off-site treatment
and disposal of soils with VOCs greater than 100 mg/kg. This
will significantly reduce the toxicity, mobility and volume of
the contaminants at the site, and offers a permanent solution to
the risks posed by these wastes.
In addition, the selected remedy will immobilize the hazardous
constituents remaining in the soil through chemical
stabilization. A secondary reduction in mobility will be
obtained by encapsulation of the treated wastes in a subsurface
concrete solidified mass. As a result, the mobility of the
remaining contaminants at the site will be significantly reduced.
Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element
The selected remedy will also meet the statutory preference for
remedies that employ treatment as a principal element. The
California List waste materials will be incinerated in accordance
with 40 CFR Part 268, and the remaining site soils will be
stabilized in situ, thereby reducing the risk to human health.
DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES
The Proposed Plan for the Caldwell Trucking Company site was
released for public comment on October 25, 1994. The Proposed
Plan identified Alternative 2 as the preferred remedy for the
site. No written or verbal comments were received concerning the
proposed remedy change. As a result, EPA has determined that no
significant changes to the remedy, as it was originally defined
in the Proposed Plan, are necessary.




                               16


                                                  CTC   002   1308
                                              V

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY
                                ; FOR THE
                     CALDWELL TRUCKING COMPANY SITE
                         FAIRFIELD, NEW JERSEY
I.    INTRODUCTION
This Responsiveness Summary provides a summary of the public
meeting concerning a modification in the remedy for the
contaminated soils at the Caldwell Trucking Company Superfund
site. The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
has amended the remedy for the contaminated soils at the site,
after taking into consideration that there were no comments from
the public in regard to the remedy change.
EPA held a public comment period from October 25, 1994 through
November 25, 1994 to provide interested parties with the
opportunity to comment on the focused feasibility study (FFS)
report and the Proposed Plan. In addition, EPA held a public
meeting to discuss the two remedial alternatives described in the
FFS report and to present EPA's preferred remedial alternative
for cleaning up the contaminated soil at the site. The meeting
was held at the Fairfield Town Hall, located at 230 Fairfield
Road, Fairfield, New Jersey, on November 9, 1994, at 7:00 pm.
At the public meeting, there were no comments on the proposed
remedy change. The only question regarded the California List
wastes, and when they had been excavated. No written comments
were received during the public comment period.
II.   ORAL COMMENT RECEIVED DURING THE PUBLIC MEETING
Comment: A member of the Two Bridges Sewer Authority wanted to
know the time period for the excavation of the California List
wastes, and if it took place during this past summer.
Response: The cleanup started in mid-August and concluded Labor
Day week.
III. LIST OF APPENDICES
The following appendices document the public participation in the
remedy selection process for the site.
      Appendix A contains the Proposed Plan that was distributed
      to the public for review and comment;
      Appendix B contains the public notice which appeared in the
      Caldwell Progress;
      Appendix C contains the public meeting transcript;
      Appendix D contains the index to the administrative record
      developed for the site.

                                                      crc   00.2 1.309

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX A




             CTC   oo:   1310

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Superfund Proposed Plan
                                            Caldwell Trucking Company Site
                                                           Fairfield Township
 ^                                                           Essex County
                                                              New Jersey

EPA
Region 2                                                                                                    October 1994


PURPOSE OF PROPOSED PLAN                                        with volatile organic compound (VOC) concentrations
                                                                greater than 100 milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg) will be
This Proposed Plan describes remedial alternatives being        excavated and disposed of off-site, and the remaining
considered to amend the 1986 Record of Decision (1986           contaminated waste will be stabilized or solidified in place.
ROD) for the Caldwell Trucking Superfund site, Fairfield        As a result, a hazardous waste landfill is no longer needed,
Township, New Jersey. In addition, this Proposed Plan           because the off-site disposal of highly contaminated wastes
identifies the preferred remedial alternative, along with the   together with on-site stabilization/solidification of the
rationale for this preference.                                  remaining contaminated wastes will be protective of
                                                                human health and the environment.
This Proposed Plan was developed by the U.S. Environ-
mental Protection Agency (EPA), as lead agency, with            This Proposed Plan is being provided as a supplement to
support from the New Jersey Department of Environmen-           the FFS report to inform the public of the EPA and
tal Protection (NJDEIP). EPA is issuing this Proposed           NJDEP preferred remedy, and to solicit public comments
Plan as part of its public participation responsibilities       pertaining to the modification of the existing remedy.
under Section 117(a) of the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA) of           Changes to the preferred remedy may be made, or no
1980, as amended, and Section 300.430(f) of the National        change to the existing remedy may be considered, if public
Contingency Plan (NCP).                                         comments or additional data indicate that such a change,
                                                                or no change, will result in a more appropriate remedial
During the design of the remedy, EPA received new               action. The final decision regarding the selected remedy
information about the site. As a result, EPA Issued an          will be made after EPA has taken all public comments into
Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) in February        consideration. We are soliciting public comment on the
1993, modifying the remedy selected in the 1986 ROD for         alternatives considered in the detailed analysis of the FFS
the soils contamination operable unit This modified             because EPA and NJDEP may select a remedy other than
remedy includes excavation and off-site disposal of some        the preferred remedy.
highly contaminated waste, stabilization of the remaining
waste materials, and placement of the treated wastes into
a landfill to be construd^fid nn the site.
                                                                    Dates to remember:
On February 3,1994, a group of eight potentially responsi-          MARK YOUR CALENDAR
ble parties (PRPs), who are performing the cleanup
activities at the Caldwell Trucking site, formally requested        October 25, 1994 - November 25,1994
permission to prepare a focused feasibility study (FFS) to          Public comment period on the FFS report. Proposed
evaluate an alternative remedy to deal with the soil                Plan, and remedies considered
contamination at the site. The FFS compares the existing
remedy with this alternate remedy. The two alternatives,            November 9, 1994, at 7:00pm
which are summarized in this Proposed Plan, are described           Public meeting at the Fairfield Town            Hall.
in the FFS report; that report should be consulted for a            230 Fairfield Avenue, Fairfield, New Jersey
more detailed description of the alternatives.

The remedy described in this Proposed Plan is now the
preferred remedy for the site. The preferred remedy
includes excavation and off-site disposal of highly contami-
nated wastes, as described in the existing remedy. Soils
                                                                                                    00'.i    1311
                                                                                           CTC

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Superfund Proposed Plan                                                              Caldwell Trucking Company Site


COMMUNITY ROLE IN SELECTION PROCESS                           SITE BACKGROUND

v£PA>axi4 NJDEP-rely on public input to fnsure that the       .Caldwell. Trucking Company (Caldwell) was.a sewage
 concerns of the community are considered in selecting an      hauling'firim located at 222 Passaic Avenue in Fairfield'
 effective remedy for each Superfund site. To this end, the    Township, New Jersey. The site consists of Lot 17 of
 FFS report. Proposed Plan, and supporting documentation       Block 2201 and Lots 7, 18 and 20 of Block 2302 on the
 have been made available to the public for a public com-      Fairfield Township tax map, and also those areas affected
 ment period which begins on October 25, 1994 and con-         by the plume of contaminated ground water. The West
 dudes on November 25, 1994.                                   Essex Regional High School is located approximately 200
                                                               feet to the east. Approximately 45 small businesses are
                                                               situated within one mile of the site, and the nearest m^or
   Copies of the FFS report. Proposed Plan, and sup-           residential ariea is approximately 1000 feet to the north-
   porting documentation are available at the following        east
   repositories:
                                                              Caldwell disposed of residential and commercial septic
   Town Clerk's Office                                        waste, as well as industrial waste, in unlined lagoons on
   Township of Fairfield                                      the site from the early 1950's until about 1973. When the
   230 Fairfield Road                                         lagoons were full, Caldwell backfilled them and dug a new
   Fairfield, New Jersey 07004                                series of lagoons, sometimes over pre-existing lagoons.
   (201)882-2700

   and                                                        1986 Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study

   Superfund Records Center                                   In June 1986, EPA completed a Remedial Investigation
   EPA Region II                                              and Feasibility Study (RI/FS) for the site. The RI/FS was
   26 Federal Plaza, Room 2900                                conducted to identify the types, quantities, and locations of
   New York, New York 10278                                   contaminants, and to develop ways of addressing the
   (212)264-8770                                              contamination problems. The RI delineated the horizontal
                                                              and vertical extent of the contamination in the former
                                                              lagoons, and confirmed the presence of a downgradient
                                                              plume of contaminated ground water. Metals, primarily
                                                              lead, cadmium and mercury, VOCs, polynuclear aromatic
A public meeting will be held during the public comment       hydrocarbons (PAHs), and polychlorinated biphenyls
period at the Fairfield Town Hall located at 230 Fairfield    (PCBs) were detected in on-site subsur&ce soils. Lead,
Road, Fairfield Township, New Jersey, on November 9,          PCBs, and PAHs were also detected in on-site surface
1994, at 7:00 pm to present the conclusions of the FFS, to    soils. Lead is the primary metal of concern in both the
elaborate further on the reasons for recommending the         surface and subsurface soils. Ground water is contam-
preferred remedial alternative, and to receive public com-    inated with VOCs, including trichloroethylene and
ments.                                                        1,1,1-trichloroethane.

Comments received at the public meeting, as well as           A risk assessment was performed as part of the 1986
written comments, will be documented in the Responsive-       RI/FS. This information is available for review in the
ness Summary Section of the ROD Amendment, which              Administrative Record for the 1986 ROD, at the
formalizes the selection of the remedy.                       repositories listed above.

All written comments should be addressed to:                  Based on the results of the RI/FS, site remediation was
                                                              divided into four remedial components. Remedies for the
                                                              first three components were selected in the 1986 ROD.
          Richard J. Robinson, Project Manager                The fourth component, which deals with the contaminated
         Central New Jersey Superfund Section I               ground water, is being dealt with under a second ROD
          U.S. Environmental Protection Agency                that was signed in 1989. That component is not affected
               26 Federal Plaza, Room 711                     by this proposed ROD amendment
                  New York, NY 10278




EPA Region II • October 1994                                                      CTC     (.iOi    1312            Page 2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Superfund Proposed Plan                                                                 Caldwell Trucking Company Site


1986 ROD Remedy                                                  emissions from on-site activities during test pit excava-
                                                                 tions; and to collect geotechnical datainvolving the subsur-
EPA selected the following remedial actions in the 1986          face soils.
ROD:
                                                                 At the time of the RI/FS, EPA believed that sludge waste
First Component                                                  at the site was limited to the existing surface lagoon, and
                                                                 that the waste remaining in this lagoon would be best
•       Restoration of the water quality in Municipal Well       treated by the same processes intended to be used for soil
        No. 7 to drinking water quality standards, through       treatment However, the results of the remedial design
        a treatment process known as "air-stripping".            investigations indicated that the volume of sludge at the
                                                                 site was greater than originally estimated. In addition,
Second Component                                                 new information about the levels and combinations of
                                                                 contaminants in the sludges, and also in some site soils,
•       Provision of an alternative water supply for resi-       indicated that additional treatment before disposal would
        dents potentially affected by ground water contam-       be required.
        ination associated with the site.
                                                                 The remedial design investigations also provided additional
Third Component                                                  information about the buried sludge lagoons. Some
                                                                 sludges have concentrations of lead over 100,000 mg/kg;
•       Excavation and treatment (by the addition of heat)       others contain halogenated organic compounds (HOCs),
        of approximately 28,000 cubic yards of contaminat-       such as trichloroethylene or perchloroethylene, at total
        ed soils and waste materials; and                        concentrations greater than 1000 mg/kg, as well as high
                                                                 concentrations of lead.         Under RCRA regulations,
•       Placement of the treated waste in a secure landfill      40 C.F.R. § 268.32, any waste with this combination of
        to be constructed on-site in accordance with the         contaminants is classified as a California List waste, and
        requirements of the Resource Conservation and            cannot be land disposed without treatment 40 C.F.R.
        Recovery Act (RCRA).                                     Part 268 prescribes incineration as the treatment method
                                                                 for all California List wastes.

The Township of Fairfield subsequently chose not to              In addition, the results of testing during the remedial
provide treatment for Municipal Well No. 7, but rather           design indicated that some of the other soU and waste
decided to use the Passaic Valley Water Commission as an         materials also had high lead levels; these were classified as
alternative potable water supply for the entire community.       RCRA characteristic hazardous wastes because of their
EPA issued an ESD in May 1991, to explain the deletion           toxicity. As RCRA hazardous wastes, they must meet
of the Municipal Well No. 7 component of the remedy.             specific treatment standards before they can be placed in
                                                                 a land disposal unit
In the summer of 1989, EPA hooked up 55 residential
properties and nine commercial establishments to the
municipal water system. This fulfilled the second remedial       1993 Explanation of Significant Differences
component of the 1986 ROD.
                                                                 In February 1993, as a result of the additional information
                                                                 gathered in the remedial design, EPA modified the remedy
Remedial Design for Contaminated Soils and Waste                 selected in the 1986 ROD for treatment and disposal of the
Materials                                                        contaminated soils and other waste materials, as follows:

In 1987, EPA initiated a remedial design for the contami-        •       Excavation (as described in the 1986 ROD) of
nated soils and waste materials component of the                         35,000 cubic yards of contaminated soils and other
1986 ROD. Initial design activities focused on further                   waste materials (an increase of 7,000 cubic yards
characterization of the soils and waste materials at the site,           compared to the volume estimated in the 1986
and restoration of water quality in Municipal Well No. 7.                ROD);
In the summer of 1990, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
conducted field investigations designed to measure air




EPA Region II - October 1994                                                                                          Page 3
                                                                                  CTC     00;      131

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Superfund Proposed Plan                                                                  Caldwell Trucking Company Site


          Off-site disposal and treatment of approximately       EPA, the NJDEP and the U.S. Department of Interior
        "1650 cubic yards of California List waste materials^-' .lodged a consent agreement with.the U.S.. District Court,
          (a new component that replaced the on-site ther-       under which the Trust will perform the remedial work to
          mal treatment of high concentrations of VOC            contain the contaminated ground water plume, in addition
          contaminated soils);                                   to the site work which they are undertaking under both
                                                                 UAOs.
         Stabilization of the lead contaminated soils re-
         maining on the site, prior to their placement in
         the RCRA landfill (an additional component              1993 FOCUSED FEASmnjTY STUDY
         needed to comply with RCRA land disposal restric-
         tions);                                                 In October 1993, the Trust conducted bench-scale studies
                                                                 to evaluate the effectiveness of stabilization on site-specific
         Treatment that will reduce the VOCs in contami-         soil and contaminants. In January 1994, the Trust
         nated soils to acceptable levels (this will be accom-   presented EPA and NJDEP with the results of the bench-
         plished by off-site treatment and disposal of the       scale studies. These studies indicated that after the
         high VOC content California List wastes, and by         California List waste materials and other soils with high
         the reduction and treatment of the remaining            concentrations of VOCs were treated and disposed of off-
         VOCs in the soUs during the stabilization process,      site, stabilization of the remaining wastes in place might be
         rather than in a separate low temperature thermal       as effective in protecting human health and the envi-
         treatment system as described in the 1986 ROD);         ronment as the existing remedy. This would be accom-
         and                                                     plished by forming a solid and durable concrete mass (in-
                                                                 situ stabilization/solidification), with a minimum perme-
         Placement of the treated soils in a secure on-site      ability of 1 X 10"* centimeters/second.
         landfill, as described in the 1986 ROD. This
         landfill will be constructed in accordance with         As a resiilt on February 3, 1994, the Trust formally
         RCRA and Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA)            requested permission to prepare an FFS to evaluate this
         reqmrements.                                            in-situ stabilization/solidification as an alternative remedy
                                                                 for the source of contamination. The purpose of the FFS
                                                                 was to demonstrate that an in-situ stabiliza-
The off-site treatment and disposal of California List waste     tion/solidification technology would be applicable to the
materials v^dth high levels of VOCs, and stabilization of the    Caldwell Trucking site, and to evaluate whether this
lead contaminated soils that would also reduce the VOCs          technology would be protective of human health and the
remaining in the soils, were modifications of the remedy         environment
selected in the 1986 ROD. These VOC treatment methods
replaced the low temperature thermal treatment method            Two remedial alternatives were compared in the FFS. The
described in the ROD.                                            first alternative consists of the remedy presented in the
                                                                  1986 ROD, as modified by the 1993 ESD; this alternative
In September 1994, the PRPs, under EPA oversight                 includes stabilization of the non-California List waste
completed the excavation and off-site treatment and              material and placement in an on-site landfill. The second
disposal of the California List waste materials, and re-         alternative consists of in-situ stabilization/solidification of
moved the underground storage tanks.                             the non-Califomia List waste material and installation of
                                                                 a soU cover.
ENFORCEMENT HISTORY
                                                                 The information presented regarding Alternative 1,
In April 1993, EPA issued a unilateral Adminiistrative           stabilization and landfilling, is based on an EPA design for
Order (UAO), Index No. n-CERCLA-93-0102, to 11                   this remedy that was prepared by the U.S. Army Corps of
potentially responsible parties to implement the existing        Engineers, and modified by the Trust pursuant to their
remedy. In June 1993, EPA issued a second UAO, In-               UAO. The information presented regarding the stabiliza-
dex No. II-CERCLA-93-0104, to 15 PRPs to conduct a pre-          tion/solidification portion of each of these alternatives is
design ground water investigation. Nine PRPs agreed to           based Upon information gathered from current industry
comply with both UAOs, and formed the Caldwell Truck-            literature, and from bench-scale testing conducted in
ing Company Site Trust (the Trust). On March 30, 1994,           October 1993 utilizing soils from the Caldwell Trucking




EPA Region II - October 1994                                                                                           Page 4
                                                                                   CTC      oo:

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Superfund Proposed Plan                                                               Caldwell Trucking Company Site


site. The Trust presented additional information relative       These alternatives are:
totfaein-situ'Stabilization/solidificatioii alternative.based
on the use of this technology at another Superfund site.        Alternative 1: Stabilization/Landfill

                                                                Capital Cost $13,194,000
SCOPE AND ROLE OF ACTION                                        Operation and Maintenance (O & M) Cost: $189,000
                                                                Present Worth Cost $15,539,000
This Proposed Plan describes a remedial alternative being       Construction Time: 1.5 years
considered to amend the existing remedy at the Caldwell
Trucking site. This alternative remedy and the existing         Alternative 1 is the existing remedy; it includes:
remedy are described in more detail in the FFS.
                                                                •       Excavation, off-site treatment and disposal of
                                                                        approximately 1650 cubic yards of California List
REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES                                              waste materials;

Remedial action objectives are specific goals to protect        •       Excavation of approximately 35,000 cubic yards of
human health and the environment. For the Caldwell                      contaminated soils and other waste materials; and
Trucking site, they are:
                                                                •       Stabilization of about 29,500 cubic yards of non-
•       Mitigate any unacceptable risks to human and                    California List waste material in the central lagoon
        ecological receptors from dermal contact with                   area and 5,200 cubic yards of contaminated soil in
        and/or incidental ingestion of soil contaminants.               the north lagoon area, which will immobilize the
                                                                        heavy metals and reduce the remaiiung VOCs in
•       Mitigate any unacceptable risks to human or                     contaminated soils to an acceptable level prior to
        ecological receptors from inhalation of contami-                placement of the treated wastes in an on-site
        nants released from soil on the site to the air.                RCRA/TSCA landfiU.

•       Inhibit the leaching of contaminants from soil on       Because this alternative would res\ilt in contaminants
        the site and their possible migration to ground         remaining on the site, CERCLA requires that the site be
        water.                                                  reviewed every five years. If justified by the review,
                                                                additional remedial actions maybe implemented to remove
                                                                or treat the wastes.
SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

CERCLA requires that each selected site remedy be               Alternative 2: Stabilization/Solidification
protective of human health and the environment be cost
effective, comply with other laws, and utilize permanent        Capital Cost: $8,384,000
solutions ancl alternative treatment technologies and           O & M Cost $93,000
resource recovery alternatives to the maximum extent            Present Worth Cost $9,538,000
practicable. In addition, CERCLA includes a preference for      Construction Time: 0.75 years
the use of treatment as a frincipal element for the reduc-
tion of toxicity, mobility or volume of the hazardous           Alternative 2 includes:
substances.
                                                                •       Excavation, off-site treatment and disposal of
The FFS report evaluates two remedial alternatives for ad-              approximately 1650 cubic yards of California List
dressing the contamination associated with the Caldwell                 waste materials;
Trucking site.
                                                                •       Excavation, and off-site treatment and disposal of
                                                                        contaminated soils with concentrations of VOCs
                                                                        greater than 100 mg/kg;




EPA Region II • October 1994                                                                                         Page 5
                                                                                      CTC     oo;      1315

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Superfund Proposed Plan                                                                 Caldwell Trucking Company Site


          In-situ stabilization/solidification of about 29,500           plementation period until cleanup goals are
        1 cubic.:yud8^ end 5,200. cubic yardsaa the.central              achieved.
          lagoon area and north lagoon area respectively,
          forming a solid and durable low permeability                   Implementabilitv is the technical and administra-
          concrete mass, referred to as 'the solidified mass";           tive feasibility of a remedy, including the avail-
          and                                                            ability of materials and services needed to imple-
                                                                         ment a particular option.
•        Placement of two feet of clean soU over the soli-
         dified mass areas to prevent direct contact with                Cost includes estimated capital and operation and
         the solidified mass.                                            maintenance costs, and net present worth costs.

Because this alternative would result in contaminants                    State acceptance indicates whether, based on its
remaining on the site, CERCLA requires that the site be                  review of the FFS report and Proposed Plarx, the
reviewed every five years. If justified by the review,                   state concurs, opposes, or has no comment on the
additional remedial actions may be implemented to remove                 preferred alternative at the present time.
or treat the wastes.
                                                                         Community acceptance refers to the reaction of
                                                                         the community and wiU be assessed in the amend-
EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES                                               ed ROD following a review of the public comments
                                                                         received on the FFS report and the Proposed Plan.
During the detailed evaluation of remedial alternatives,
each alternative is assessed against nine evaluation criteria,
which are described below.                                       A comparative analysis of these alternatives based upon
                                                                 the evaluation criteria noted above follows.
    0    Overall protection of human health and the envi-
         ronment addresses whether or not a remedy                o      Overall Protection of Human Health and the
         provides adequate protection and describes how                  Environment
         risks posed through each pathway are eliminated,
         reduced, or controlled through treatment engi-          Alternative 1 provides protection of human health and the
         neering controls, or institutional controls.            environment through removal and off-site disposal of the
                                                                 California List waste materials, a major source of the
    0    Compliance with applicable or relevant and appro-       ground water contamination. In addition, the remaining
         priate requirements (ARARs) addresses whether           contaminated materials in the central lagoon area and the
         or not a remedy will meet all of the applicable or      contaminated soils in the north lagoon area would be
         relevant and appropriate requirements of federal        excavated and stabilized prior to placement in a
         and state environmental statutes and reqmre-            RCRA/TSCA landfill to be constructed on the site. The
         ments, or provide grounds for invoking a waiver.        landfill would encapsulate or isolate the stabilized material
                                                                 to prevent infiltration of rain, surface water runoff, and
    0    Long-term effectiveness and permanence refers to        ground water. The landfill cap would prevent exposure
         the ability of a remedy to maintain reliable protec-    through direct contact with the treated material.
         tion of human health and the environment over
         time, once cleanup goals have been met                  As in Alternative 1, Alternative 2 provides protection of
                                                                 human health and the environment through removal and
    0    Reduction oftoxidtv. mobility, or volume through        off-site disposal of the California List waste materials, a
         treatment is the anticipated performance of the         major source of the ground water contamination. Howev-
         treatment technologies that a remedy may employ.        er, Alternative 2 provides additional protection through the
                                                                 excavation and off-site disposal of all soils with concentra-
    0    Short-term effectiveness addresses the period of        tions of VOCs over 100 mg/kg, and stabilization in place of
         time needed to achieve protection, and any adverse      the remaining contamination in the central lagoon area
         impacts on human health and the environment             and in the north lagoon area forming a low permeability
         that may be posed during the construction and im-       solidified mass. This stabilization creates a soUd and dura-
                                                                 ble mass which would practically eliminate the flow of



                                                                                                                      D a '76 6
EPA Region II - October 1994
                                                                                            CTC     OO'l     1316

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Superfund Proposed Plan                                                                Caldwell Trucking Company Site


, water through the contaminated soil. Two feet of clean          tion/solidification component of Alternative 2 is the same
 soil woiildr be added* to cover the'SoUdifiedmess. Tiuawill    :. treatment process required to. meet RCRA LDRs under
 allow revegetation of the area, reduce the potential for         Alternative 1.
 direct contact with the solidified mass, and prevent
 erosion.                                                       Both alternatives would comply with the action-specific
                                                                reqviirements of RCRA, U.S. Department of Transportation
   0    Compliance with ARARs                                   regulations, and the New Jersey Solid and Hazardous
                                                                Waste Regulations regarding the handling and shipment
Applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements             of California List wastes and other contaminated soils
(ARARs) are those federal and State environmental and           which would be sent off-site for treatment and disposal. In
public health regulations that apply to remedial activities     addition, both alternatives would meet the RCRA LDR
at the site. There are three types of ARARs: chemical-          treatment standards for the proper off-site treatment and
specific, which are health- or risk-based concentration         disposal of the California List wastes and the soils contami-
limits; location-specific, which are based on the geographic-   nated with high levels of VOCs.
al location of the site and its surroundings; and action-
specific, which are controls on particular types of remedial    Both alternatives are expected to meet the requirements of
activities.                                                     the Executive Order on Wetiands Protection (EO 11980),
                                                                Section 404 of the Clean Water Act and Section 7:7A of
There are no federal or State chemical-specific cleanup         the New Jersey Freshwater Wetiands Protection Act
standards promulgated for the cleanup of the contaminated
surface and subsurface soils at the Caldwell Trucking site.       0      Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence
However, during the 1986 ROD remedial design, EPA and
NJDEP agreed upon objectives for the cleanup of the              Both alternatives would reduce the magnitude of residual
contaminated soil. Both Alternative 1 and Alternative 2          risk through the off-site treatment and disposal of the
will achieve these cleanup objectives.                           California List wastes and soils contaminated with high
                                                                 amounts of VOCs, and stabilization of the remaining
Both alternatives are expected to attain the following           contaminated soils. The containment of stabilized soils in
action-specific ARARs: the Clean Air Act National Emis-          an on-site hazardous waste landfill (Alternative 1) or via
sions Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants (40 CFR             in-situ stabilization/solidification (Alternative 2) would
Part 61), New Jersey Air Permit Requirements (NJAC               provide comparable reductions in the baseline risk esti-
7:27-8), New Jersey Control and Prohibition of Air Pollu-        mates developed as part of the 1986 RI/FS.
tion by Toxic Substances (NJAC 7:27-17), and New Jersey
Regulations for Volatile Organic Substances                     As required by CERCLA, both Alternatives would require
(NJAC 7:27-16).                                                 a five-year review to evaluate site conditions. If justified
                                                                by the review, additional remedial actions may be imple-
Alternative 1 requires a waiver of the NJDEP Hazardous          mented to remove or treat the wastes.
Waste Facility Siting Criteria (NJAC 7:26-10.8e-7) action-
specific ARAR, since the landfill woirld not be located at a    The isolation of the treated waste materials in a capped
sufficient distancefrx)ma neighboring property to comply        hazardous waste landfill (Alternative 1) or a solidified mass
with the siting criteria. As part of the remedial design for    with a two foot clean soil cover (Alternative 2) wo\ild
the existing remedy, EPA and NJDEP agreed to waive this         adequately control potential exposure of human or ecologi-
ARAR. Alternative 2 would not trigger these siting              cal receptors to treated waste materials. Because of con-
criteria; therefore, no waivers are necessary.                  cerns that organic constituents could impact the perma-
                                                                nence of Alternative 2, samplirig would be performed
Alternative 1 would meet RCRA land disposal restrictions        during the remedial design to verify that the selected
(LDRs) for the placement of the stabilized soil into an on-     reagent mix used for stabilization Vfovld create a solidified
site landfill. Stabilization would meet the treatment           mass with long-term durability.
requirements that specify that a RCRA hazardous waste
must be treated prior to placement at a disposal facility.       Both alternatives would reduce leachate generation and
Alternative 2 would not invoke LDRs because these                migration to ground water underlying the CaldweU
activity-based limitations do not apply when the waste           Trucking site. Alternative 1 would rely on stabilization to
material is treated in place. Nonetheless, the stabiliza-        immobilize the contaminants, followed by landfilling of the




EPA Region II - October 1994                                                                                         Page?
                                                                                             CTi     oi..);   1317
                                                                                        V.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Superfund Proposed Plan                                                                Caldwell Trucking Company Site


treated soil to isolate these materials from water that         On-site disturbance of wetiands and habitat alteration or
might infiltrate through the.cap.jnateriaL.. Alternative 2.     loss would be. less, under Alternative 2. Alternative 1
would encapsulate treated materials in a low permeability       would affect 1.8 acres bf wetiaiids, while Alternative 2
solidified mass located above the water table. Leachate         would affect 0.5 acre of wetiands. Both alternatives
would not be generated from the solidified mass, and            require access agreements for the use of adjacent proper-
infiltration of rain and surface water runoff through the       ties during design and remedial action activities.
mass would be practically eliminated because of its low
permeability-                                                    0      Implementabilitv

 0      Reduction in Toxicity. Mobility, or Volume              The necessary technical equipment and skilled workers are
                                                                available to implement either alternative. Both alterna-
The alternatives would each achieve essentially eqvuvalent      tives involve well-established, common construction
reductions in toxicity, mobility or volume of the soils to be   methods. Numerous hazardous waste sites have been
treated. Both alternatives would reduce the toxicity,           remediated by stabilization and containment methods
mobility and volume of the California List waste through        similar to those developed for Alternative 1 and Alter-
the off-site incineration of this waste. Neither alternative    native 2. Provisions would have to be made in the Alter-
would directiy affect the intrinsic toxicity or volume of the   native 2 remedial design for the handling of large debris
soil constituents. The mobility of these constituents would     and boulders during the solidification process.
be initially reduced under both alternatives by chemical
stabilization. Secondary reduction in mobility would be         Alternative 1 would require a wetiands mitigation plan,
obtained either by containment in a hazardous waste             and compliance with federal and state air emissions regula-
landfill (Alternative 1) or encapsulation in a subsurface       tions. In addition. Alternative 1 would reqmre either
concrete solidified mass (Alternative 2). Both alternatives     compliance with NJPDES regulations for discharge of
would be expected to immobilize the hazardous constitu-         stormwater runoff or permission to discharge to the local
ents remaining in the soil.                                     sewer authority. Alternative 2 would also require compli-
                                                                ance with federal and state air emissions regulations, and
 0      Short-Term Effectiveness                                a mitigation plan for wetiands lost during construction.

For either alternative, an air monitoring program and            0      Cost
engineering controls will be used to control any airborne
dust and emissions from the site. Both alternatives would       The cost evaluation of each alternative includes consider-
require the implementation of a health and safety plan to       ation of capital costs and annual O&M costs. The estimat-
minimize any risks to on-site workers, employees in nearby      ed capital cost of Alternative 1 is $13.2 million, and the
industrial and commercial facilities, and other members of      estimated O&M cost is $189,000 per year. The estimated
the public. Alternative 2 would generate somewhat less          capital cost of Alternative 2 is $8.4 miUion and the estimat-
VOC^s, odor and dust emissions than Alternative 1, by           ed O&M cost is $93,000 per year.
eliminating soil excavation, aboveground handling and
treatment and overland transport of treated residual             o      State Acceptance
materials to an on-site landfill. Construction time would
also be reduced under Alternative 2, because the action         The State of New Jersey concurs with the proposal to
may be completed in nine months, as compared to                 amend the 1986 ROD, and supports the preferred remedial
18 months for Alternative 1.                                    alternative.

Under Alternative 1, construction of an on-site hazardous        0      Community Acceptance
waste landfill and backfilling of the central lagoon area
excavation would require approximately 5,000 trucks             Community acceptance of the preferred alternative will be
carrying 100,000 cubic yards of construction materials.         assessed in the ROD following review of the public com-
Alternative 2 would require 250 truckloads of construction      ments received on the FFS report and the Proposed Plan.
materials. This reduction in truck traffic would result in
significant reductions in noise and odor impacts to the
surrounding community.




EPA Region II - October 1994                                                                                         Page 8
                                                                                     CTC      OU.     1318

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Superfund Proposed Plan                                                                  Caldwell Trucking Company Site


PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE                                             The preferred remedy is the most cost-effective remedy.
                                                                  The capital costs of the preferred reniedy are almost
Based upon an evaluation of the various alternatives^ EPA'        $5'million less thari'Alteniative 1; aiidthe yearly O&M
and NJDEP recommend Alternative 2, in-situ stabiliza-             costs are one half of those for Alternative 1.
tion/solidification, as the preferred alternative for the site
remedy.                                                           Future land use at the site is also an important consider-
                                                                  ation. Under Alternative 1, a four acre hazardous waste
Alternative 2 includes excavation and off-site disposal of        landfill would be constructed in the north lagoon area.
1650 cubic yards of California List waste materials,              This landfill would occupy the ientire north lagoon area,
excavation and off-site treatment and disposal of all soils       and make it unavailable for other land use. The preferred
with concentrations of VOCs over 100 mg/kg, and in-situ           remedy may allow some development in the north lagoon
stabilization of 29,500 cubic yards and 5,200 cubic yards in      area, since the solidified mass woiild occupy only a small
the central lagoon area and north lagoon area respectively,       portion of this area. Land use restrictions would be
forming a low permeability concrete solidified mass. Two          required to protect the integrity of the solidified mass in
feet of clean soil will be placed over the solidified mass to     both the central lagoon area and north lagoon area.
allow for revegetation of the area.
                                                                  The preferred alternative would provide the best balance
The preferred alternative would adequately control                of trade-offs among alternatives with respect to the
potential exposure of human or ecological receptors to            evaluating criteria. EPA and NJDEP believe that the
treated waste materials. In addition, because of concerns         preferred alternative will be protective of human health
that organic constituents could adversely affect the perma-       and the environment will comply with ARARs, will be cost
nence of the stabilized mass, sampling would be performed         effective, and will utilize permanent solutions and alterna-
during the remedial design to verify that the selected            tive treatment technologies or resource recovery technolo-
reagent mix used for stabilization would provide a soli-          gies to the maximum extent practicable. The remedy also
dified mass with long-term durability.                            will meet the statutory preference for the use of treatment
                                                                  as a principal element
The preferred alternative would practically eliminate
migration of contaminants to the ground water underlying
the Caldwell Trucking site by excavation and off-site
disposal of the contaminated soils with concentrations of
VOCs over 100 mg/kg, in addition to the excavation and
off-site disposal of the California List wastes. Lead and the
remaining low levels of VOCs in the soil will be stabilized
and encapsulated in a solidified mass that will have a mini-
mum permeability of 1 x lO'' centimeters per second, thus
providing long-term protection to human health and the
environment

The preferred alternative would have fewer short-term
impacts than Alternative 1 because it eliminates soil
excavation, aboveground handling and treatment and
overland transport of treated waste materials to an on-site
landfill. The preferred alternative could be completed in
nine months as compared to 18 months for Alterrrative 1.
There would be less truck traffic under the preferred
alternative. About 5,000 truckloads (or 10,000 truck trips)
would be required for Alternative 1, as compared to 250
truckloads (or 500 truck trips) for tire preferred alterna-
tive. This reduction in truck traffic would resirlt in signifi-
cant reductions in noise and odor impacts on the sur-
rounding community.




EPA Region H - October 1994                                                                                           Page 9
                                                                                        CTC      (..'OJ

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX B




             CTC   002   1320

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                    tvJ Ki.1^
                                                                                               nO^"^ '                                      ^      0-'
                                                                               S'd
                                                                 \^
                                                     Ci\^^v^"- . < ^
      UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL
              PROTECTION AQCNCY
     ANNOUNCES PROPOSAl. TO AMEND
      HEMEOIAI. ALTERNATIVE POR THE
       CALOWEU TRUCKING COMPANY
                SUPERFUND SITE                                                6 Brooltside Avenue, Caldwell, N.J. 0 7 0 0 6
     FAIRRELD TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY
    Th« united Stales Environmentai Protection
 Agency (EPA) has issued a Proposed Plan
 wtMch explains an alternative to the remedyA
 selected in tne 1986 Record of Decision
 (ROO) for the remaining sou contaminatkin at
 the Caldwell Trucking Company Superfund               Slate of New Jersey.
 Site (ttie SKe).                                        County of Essex,
    The 1986 ROO provided that the 35.000
 cubic yards of remaining contaminated soil at
 itia Site be stabilized and placed in a h a i -
ardous waste landfill to be constructed on sit*                                                     Mary Carroll                            of full age,
(Alternative l).
    EPA is recommending that trie remedy t>e
cfianged to excavation, off-site treatment and
                                                       being duly sworn according to law, on
                                                                                                               her           oath, saith that (sihe is
disposal of contaminated soils with concen-
trations of volatile organic compounds
greater than 100 parts per million: Irveitu sta-
biiizatlon/soiidification of about 35.000 cubic        a clerk in the office of     THE PROGRESS" and that a notice, of which Ihe"
yards of contaminated soil to form a solid,
durabi*. low permeabMly concrete mass, and
placement of two feet of clean soil over the           annexed is a true copy, was published on the                                                day of
•oMMed mass (AllemaOve 2).
   Before selecting a final remedy. EPA will
consider all written and oral comments on                                     November                             A.D., 19.."''            m said-THE
      preferred alterratlve. A l comments must
be postmarked on or before November 25,
1994. The final decision document wuiinckide
a summary ol public comments and EPA                    PROGRESS," a public newspaper printed and published at Caldwell, in this
responses.
   EPA will hold an informational put>lic meet-
ing on Wednesday, November 9, 1994, at                  State, in the English language, and continued therein for                                   weeks
7:00 p.m., at the Fairfield Town Hall al 330
Fairfield Road to discuss the proposed allar-
naOve to the 1966 ROO.                                  successively thereafter, at least once in every week, the last publication being
   The preferred alternative la outlined and
discussed in the Propoead Plan. The Focuaed
Feasibility Study (FFS) rapoa Proposed Plan,            on the         M                 day of                               flpvember.... ^g -^^
and other sMe-reialed docurrientt can be con-
sulted at the information repositories Hated
before during regular business hours:
   Tovmship of Fairfield                                making                   9 r               insertions in all.
   Town Clerk's Office
   230 FairfieU Road
   Fairfield. hU 07004
   (201) 882-2700
   EPA Region 3
   26 Federal Plaza, Rm. 3900
   New York, NY 10278                            _
   (212)264-6770                                        Sworn and subscribed this
   9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
   Written comment* on the preferred a M m »                            3rd                      day of
Hve, should be sent to:
   Richard Robinson, Project Manaoar. U.S.
Environmentai Protection Agency, 26 Federal          November 1994                         before
Plaza. Room 711. New York. New York 1037&
THE PROGRESS
Nov. 3,1994
$46.93


                                                                                                              ,'Notarjr9y^)l^HB< N»w Jersey
                                                                                                          r..-\'-AC-, -J . - • '.-"•-•: .           V
                                                                                                   >•'.




                                                                                                                               '-•"' c      oo;^    1321

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX C




             CTC   002   13:;

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 1                            CALDWELL TRUCKING COMPANY SITE
                              FAIRFIELD MUNICIPAL BUILDING
 2

 3   IN THE MATTER OF:
                                              TRANSCRIPT OF
4    CALDWELL TRUCKING COMPANY                 PROCEEDINGS
5

 6

 7                                  November 9, 1994
                                    7:15 p.m.
 8                                  Fairfield, New Jersey

 9

10

11   B E F O R E :
12           John P. McBurney, Senior Project Director
             Andrew S. Johnson, P.E., Vice President
13           Richard J. Robsinson, Remedial Project Manager

14

15

16

17
                                     LISA ARGENTIERI
18                                   SHORTHAND REPORTER

19

20

21

22                         BRODY & GEISER
                     CERTIFIED SHORTHAND REPORTERS
23                        77 Hamilton Avenue
                       Fords, New Jersey 08863
24                          (908) 738-8555

25   JOB #411094                              CTC OO:   -j -:>• .r-i ":i-




          BRODY & GEISER (908) 738-8555 or (212) 732-0644

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 1   A P P E A R A N C E S :

     PITNEY, ' HARDIN,-' KIPP >fi SZUCH, 'ESQS.
     BY: PETER J. HERZBERG, ESQ.
 3   ATTORNEY FOR CALDWELL TRUCKING

 4   STEVEN KATZ, ESQ.
     ATTORNEY FOR THE EPA
 5

 6

 7

 8

 9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25                                                CTC   oo:   1324

          BRODY & GEISER (908) 738-8555 or (212) 732-0644

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                3
  1                 MR. ROBINSON: Good evening.             My name

-" T     •'''i's'-'Rick"'Rbbxnson .• 'I''m" the* proj act-manager
  3        with EPA, with the Caldwell Trucking Site.
  4        Tonight there are two things we'd like to
  5        talk to you about.        The first thing I'd
  6        like to talk to you about is removal of the
  7        most hazardous wastes at the site which was
  8        completed in September and the second is
  9        the post change and a remedy for the
10         remaining wastes at the Caldwell Trucking
11         Site. We think this new remedy has merits.
12                  First, I'd like to remind everybody
13         to sign in, those of you who are here
14         tonight, if you're not on our mailing
15         list.    I would like to go over tonight the
16         1994 construction activities which were
17         presented by de maximis. Jack McBurney and
18         John Alonzo.      They're the group hired by
19         the Environmental Protection Agency, the
20         EPA's who are doing work at the site and
21         their contractor they've hired, the
22         engineering contractor is Blasland, Bouck &
23         Lee, Andy Johnson and Mike McNally. One
24         other thing, from the State of New Jersey,
25         Riche Outlaw and Trish Conti from EPA and


       BRODY & GEISER     (908) 738-8555     (212) 732-0644

                                                  CTC   0i")2   13':"^
                                              V

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             4
 1       also Charlie Tenerella, section chief.
'2         -%s- ••'After''th€-ital-'k>*about^ t h «
 3       construction activities we will then go
 4       back and talk about the repositories'
 5       overview of the remedy change followed by
 6       focused feasibility study results which are
 7       represented by Blasland, Bouck & Lee and
 8       then I will evaluate and go over the
 9       evaluation criteria for change remedy and
10       then we'll open it up to questions and
11       answers.     Now I'd like to turn it over to
12       Jack, who will go over the results of the
13       1994 fieldwork.
14                 MR. MCBURNEY: Thank you, Rick.                 We
15       use lots of acronyms in Superfund.                 The
16       first thing I'll acquaint you with tonight
17       is the one called OUl which is an operable
18       unit.     One, this project is divided into
19       pieces.     These pieces of the project we're
20       talking to you about tonight deals with the
21       handling of on-site contaminated soils.
22       Phase one activities we completed this
23       summer. We excavated and removed for
24       off-site disposal the most highly
25       contaminated wastes and soils that existed


     BRODY & GEISER    (908) 738-8555       (212) 732-0644

                                             , CTC    002    1326

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 1       on the Fairfield or the Caldwell Trucking

 2      ' prope'rty ." " Those • mate-ri-ars • were':^ either

 3       incinerator or landfilled in federally

 4       approved facilities for disposal of

 5       hazardous wastes.

 6                Phase two is what we're going to

 7       talk to you about tonight.         It is our

 8       approach to dealing with the remaining
 9       treatment for the soils that will remain
10       on-site after the California List waste
11       soils were removed this summer.
12                I just want to highlight for you
13       what was involved in the work that we've
14       done.    To date we put in a fence to
15       completely enclose the site and protect it
16       from the public.       We removed four
17       underground storage tanks.         We monitored
18       around controlled air emissions at the
19       site.    We established a hotline for

20       concerned citizens for use of access to

21       call in the event that they were concerned

22       about emissions or odors or activities on

23       the site during removal of the California

24       List wastes.     We really received no

25       concerned calls on the hotline.           We



     BRODY & GEISER    (908) 738-8555     (212) 732-0644

                                             CTC   002   1.327

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        6
 1        completed the work on schedule.         We
-•2     -.completed, the^ work-, without-: incident. -,In.
 3        toto we removed about 2500 tons of the
 4        so-called California List waste soil
 5        without incident.
 6                There are some pictures over here
 7        that show some of the work involved in
 8        removing the tanks and then excavating and
 9        removing the soils and that work is
10        finished.     The worst part of the hazards
11        are behind us and we want to talk tonight
12        about the balance of the project to deal
13       with on-site soil.
14               Just to help you frame your
15        reference, we have a map of the site up
16        over there.     This is kind of a blowup of
17        the site.     This is supposed to be green,
18        but it looks dark to you now.       That area of
19        the site is the part of the site known as
20        the central lagoon area.       It was the place
21        where the California List wastes were
22        removed.     There are four tanks which show
23        in outline.     There are the four underground
24        storage tanks which have been removed,
25        destroyed and their tanks have been cut


      BRODY & GEISER    (908) 738-8555   (212) 732-0644

                                          I CTC   002   132S

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       7
 1       apart.    That work is finished now.        That
~2   "• 'kind 'of summarizes the work^ that-has-.heen
 3       done today.
 4                MR. ROBINSON: I'd like now to go
 5       over and explain some irregularity
 6       overviews.    The existing remedy for
 7       contaminated soils at this site includes
 8       excavation and treatment of the remaining
 9       soils, contaminated soils and its placement
10       into on-site hazardous waste landfills to
11      be constructed and this aircraft photo of
12       the site in the north lagoon area.
13                In its 1986 record of decision EPA
14       selected a remedy at the time.        It called
15       for treatment of the most contaminated
16       soils by low temperature unit.        In 1993 EPA
17      modified the remedy because of the
18       additional information developed during
19       remedial design which indicated high levels
20       of volatile organic compounds.        Wastes were
21       concentrated in certain areas of the site
22       and once these wastes were removed, thermal
23       treatment was no longer needed.        That's
24       what was removed in some of the California
25       List wastes earlier this year.        The PRP


     BRODY & GEISER    (908) 738-8555   (212) 732-0644

                                         CTC   002   1329

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                    8
 1           Group formerly approached EPA and the State
•2   .      ;.of NewN J e r s e y .abou.t...aji..al.t.ernate. reme.dy     _
 3           which would eliminate the need for the
 4           landfill and would still be protective.                      As
 5           a result, the EPA authorized the PRP Group
 6           to prepare a focused feasibility study.
 7           That is a detailed engineering report to
 8           evaluate the remedies.             In this case it's
 9           called focused because it compares two
10           alternatives.
11                     The purpose of this study is to
12           evaluate the alternative remedy, overall
13          protection to human health in the
14           environment.        The ESD compares the focused
15           feasibility study and compares the existing
16           remedy with this alternate remedy, as
17          previously indicated by Jack, the first
18          phase of the soil cleanup at the site, the
19           excavation and the off-site.               The
20           California List waste, which was the most
21           hazardous wastes at the site, was completed
22           earlier this year.           This proposed remedy
23           deals with the remaining soil contamination
24           at the site.        Proposed remedy change would
25           include excavation and off-site disposal of


         BRODY & GEISER      (908) 738-8555        (212) 732-0644

                                                      CTC   002    1330

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         9
 1         some hot spots, remaining hot spots of
.2 .      -?.vo'latile i-organic.;compounds .contaminated .,
 3         soils.
 4                  These are not the remaining soils.
 5         These high concentrations of volatile
 6         organics are not as hazardous as the
 7         California List wastes that were removed
 8         and sent off-site for treatment and
 9         disposal.
10                  The second component of the remedy
11         is stabilization of the remaining
12         contaminated soils in place forming a
13         solidified concrete mass and then placement
14         of two feet of clean soil over the
15         solidified mass.     The final decision
16         guarding the selected remedy will be made
17         after the EPA has taken all the public
18         comments into consideration and tonight we
19         are letting the public comment on this
20         proposed remedy change.
21                  To this end the FFS report, the
22         Proposed Plan and supporting documentation
23         have been made available to the public for
24         a public comment period which began on
25         October 25th and concludes on November 25th


       BRODY & GEISER   (908) 738-8555    (212) 732-0644

                                           CTC   002   1331

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              10
 1              and copies of the FFS report, Proposed Plan

.'2   .-.-.v.   and .=s^uppo!rting-documenta.t ion, have-been, .made
 3              available at our repositories.        The two
 4              repositories for this site are at the town
 5              clerk's office here in Fairfield and the
 6              Superfund Records Center at 26 Federal
 7              Plaza, New York.     Their address and phone
 8              numbers are listed in the Proposed Plan
 9              which is at the front desk there. Comments
10              received at this public meeting, as well as
11              written comments, will be documented in the
12              response and summary section of- the record
13              decision amended which formalizes the
14              selection of the remedy.       All written
15              comments should be addressed to me and my
16              address is in the Proposed Plan which is at
17              the front desk.
18                      We'll now turn the presentation over
19              to Andy Johnson of Blasland, Bouck & Lee,
20              who will speak about the focused
21              feasibility study and present the two
22              alternatives being considered.
23                      MR. JOHNSON: Thank you. Rick.         Just
24              to start with what the focused feasibility
25              study looked at was treating the remaining


          BRODY & GEISER     (908) 738-8555    (212) 732-0644

                                                CTC   002   1332

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            11
 1        soils on-site in what is called the central

•2-     ."lago-on--. area,1 ^as-^wel-l.«as. "the. remaining,...sails
 3        on-site in the north lagoon area
 4        approximately 35,000 cubic yards of
 5        material.     As Rick said, during the design
 6        of the landfill remedy the PRP Group came
 7        to the EPA and requested the EPA to
 8        consider an alternate remedy for the site.
 9                 The basis for the alternate remedy
10        that was proposed was really three
11        factors.     Number one, that the site
12        contaminants which are the volatile organic
13        compounds, as in lead, could be
14        encapsulated via stabilization.            The second
15        factor was that the presence of cobbles and
16        stones at the site would not impact the
17        proposed remedy and the third factor is
18        that the in-situ stabilization process
19        would be cost-effective,
20                As Rick reviewed before, there were
21        two alternatives, one was the EPA's
22        original remedy and Alternative 2 was the
23        remedy that the group was proposing the EPA
24        to consider.      Alternative 1 is the
25        stabilization/landfill alternative which


      BRODY & GEISER    (908) 738-8555      (212) 732-0644

                                               CTC   002 133r?

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                  12
  1             entailed the stabilization of the north
••J2   -.      ; l a g o o n .-area;- a n d , c e n. t r a 1 > 1 a g o o a a r.e a s . o f
  3             soil.       The placement of the stabilized
  4             soils into a landfill was constructed
  5             on-site.         The installation of a cap over
  6             the stabilized materials and the placement
  7             of a final cover over the landfill.                             The
  8             second alternative, the one that the group
  9             requested the EPA to consider, entailed
10              first of all, the removal of hot spots, as
11              Rick said before, the removal of volatile
12              organic compounds within the north lagoon
13              area and central lagoon area that exceeded
14              100 milligrams per kilogram in
15              concentration and secondly, the in-situ
16              stabilization of the remaining soils in the
17              central lagoon area and north lagoon area
18              and finally, the construction of a soil
19              cover over the stabilized mass.
20                         Just to give you an idea what would

21              be involved with these two alternatives,
22              first of all, is the original remedy, the
23              EPA's original design which entailed a
24              number of specific steps.                      First of all,
25              the contaminated soils on the site would


            BRODY & GEISER         (908) 738-8555             (212) 732-0644

                                                                CTC     002     1334

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             13
 1        have to be excavated out of the ground.
'2   vv: ;.They^^'w

 3        contaminated soils, would be transported to
 4        a central processing facility on-site where
 5        soil solidification would be added.            Once
 6        these soils were solidified, they would
 7        again be placed in trucks and would be
 8        moved to the on-site landfill.           Alternately
 9        the on-site landfill, if you have the
10        treated soil within the landfill and,
11        ultimately you would, they would construct
12        a cap over the landfill, and a final soil
13        cover.
14                    The purposes of this figure is to
15        give you an idea of the extent of the
16        landfill on the property.         The landfill
17        would have been about four acres in size
18        and would have taken up the entire north
19        lagoon area. That one segment of the
20        property that Rick pointed out before, near
21        the north lagoon area is a height of about
22        25, 30 feet above existing ground surface.
23                    The alternate remedy that the group
24        proposed the EPA consider really consisted

25        of what we call the in-situ stabilization


     BRODY & GEISER       (908) 738-8555    (212) 732-0644

                                           CTC   002 13.35

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        14
 1       of the contaminated soils.     What is
 2       involved in that process?'• Ydii'vev got "a -
 3       piece of construction equipment could be a
 4       backhoe or a rake or something like that.
 5       That piece of equipment adds cement like
 6       materials into the soils in place.         As you
 7       can see, the soils here would be treated in
 8       place, the treated soils are simply left
 9       there.    Once they're treated they're left
10       in place and when the entire soil is within
11       the north lagoon area and central lagoon
12       area are treated via this process if soil
13       is placed over the solidified mass and that
14       is the extent of the remediation.
15                This is a profile of what the
16       solidified mass will look like in the
17       central lagoon area.    What you've got in
18       the yellow represents the California List
19       wastes where they formerly were as of the
20       materials that we removed this summer.              The
21       green represents the solidified material,
22       the remaining contaminated soils that were
23       going to be stabilized in place and the
24       purple represents the topsoil cover that
25       will be put over the solidified mass.


     BRODY & GEISER   (908) 738-8555   (212) 732-0644

                                       CTC   002   t3.3(ij

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            15
 1                MR. ROBINSON: In evaluating the
•2'      •rem:edies T B P A lo-oks • at:.the .le^achate.:- crd-teria
 3        and the first seven I will be going over in
 4        detail state acceptance. State of New
 5        Jersey has already accepted, it accepts the
 6        proposed remedy change and right now we're
 7        out here soliciting the community's
 8        comments on this remedy.
 9                The first evaluation criteria is
10        overall protection to human health in the
11        environment and Alternative 1 provides
12        overall protection of human health in the
13        environment.      Alternative 1, the remaining
14        contaminated materials after the California
15        List wastes have been removed, will be
16        excavated and treated prior to placements
17        in on-site hazardous landfill.            It would
18        encapsulate infiltration of rain surface
19        water and ground water.         Alternative 2

20        would provide overall protection by soils

21        with concentrations of volatile organics

22        greater than 100 milligrams per kilogram

23        being sent off-site for treatment and

24        disposed.     The remaining contamination

25        would be stabilized in place forming a low



      BRODY & GEISER    (908) 738-8555      (212) 732-0644

                                              CTC   002   1337

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                      16
 1       permeability stabilized mass.       This

"2      -'solidified •massiwoul* practically, eliminate
 3       flow of ground flow of water through the
 4       treated soil.    Two feet of clean soil will
 5       be placed over the solidified mass to
 6       reduce potential exposure for direct
 7       contact with the solidified mass and to
 8       prevent erosion.    The second evaluation
 9       criteria is compliance with the applicable
10       or relevant and appropriate requirements
11       and both Alternative 1 and Alternative 2
12      meet the soil cleanup projectives that were
13       selected for the site through the
14       implementation of the air monitoring
15       program that would meet the federal and
16       state air emission requirements.
17                Alternative 1 will not meet the
18       requirements of this state's hazardous
19       waste landfill citing criteria because its
20       being built too close to the property
21       lines.    By the way, they have been obtained
22       through that purpose.    Alternative 2 does
23       not meet.    That requirement is not
24       applicable since a landfill is not being
25       built.    Land disposal restrictions,


     BRODY & GEISER   (908) 738-8555   (212) 732-0644

                                       CTC   002    1338

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        17
  1        Alternative 1 would meet the land disposal

"' 2    • • restrictions -and •land f disposal ^restrictions
  3        are the regulations that deal with the
  4        disposal of hazardous wastes.        Alternative
  5        2, they are not applicable since the soil
  6        would be treated in place in the ground.
  7        However, the stabilization of the soil
  8        under both alternatives will meet the same
  9        requirements and both alternatives will
10         meet through wetland requirements.
11                The next evaluation criteria is
12         long-term effectiveness and permanence and
13         overall the first is reduction of risk.
14         Alternative 1 will reduce risk through the
15         stabilization, through contaminated soils
16         and containment of the on-site landfill.
17         Alternative 1 reduces risk through
IS         stabilization of the soils in place,
19         forming a low permeability solidified
20         concrete mass.
21                 Reduction in leachate generation is
22         important to prevent and also migration
23         ground water underlying the Caldwell
24         Trucking Site. Alternative 1 would reduce
25         the leachate generation through the


       BRODY & GEISER   (908) 738-8555   (212) 732-0644

                                         •CTC   002   1339

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        18
 1       Stabilization to immobilize the
 2       contaminants' followed by landfilling "of the
 3       treated soil to isolate the materials from
 4       water.     Alternative 2 would reduce the
 5       leachate generation.     There would be no
 6       leachate generation under Alternative 2
 7       since it's not a landfill and the soils
 8       would be encapsulated.     Contaminated soils
 9       would be encapsulated in a low permeability
10       concrete mass which would practically
11       eliminate infiltration of water and, as
12       required by Superfund, both alternatives
13       would require a five year review to
14       evaluate site conditions and if justified
15       by the review, additional remedial actions
16       may be implemented to remove or treat the
17       wastes.
18                 Next evaluation criteria is
19       reduction in toxicity, mobility or volume.
20      Alternative 2 somewhat reduce the toxicity
21       in volume of the contaminated soils at the
22       site by the off-site treatment disposal of
23       the contaminated soils with volatile
24       organic compound concentrations greater
25       than 100 milligrams per kilogram.           Neither


     BRODY & GEISER    (908) 738-8555   (212) 732-0644

                                        ;CTC   002   1340

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                  19

  1       alternative    would d i r e c t l y   reduce   the
•-2       irit'riTisic? foxicifey-'ar'.volume :of'.the        •
  3       contaminant soils.         Both alternatives would
  4       immobilize the soil with chemical
  5       stabilization and secondary reduction in
  6       mobility would be obtained by either
  7       containment in a hazardous waste landfill
  8       which is Alternative 1 or by encapsulation
  9       in a subsurface concrete solidified mass,
10        which is Alternative 2.
11                The next evaluation criteria is
12        short-term effectiveness.              Alternative 1
13        through the supplementation of an air
14       monitoring program would construct dust,
15        air, odors and emissions as of
16        Alternative 2.       The impacts on wetland
17       Alternative 1 would impact approximately
18        1.8 acres of wetlands that are at the site
19        versus a half acre for Alternative 2.
20       Alternative 1 would require approximately
21        5,000 truckloads to build the landfill and
22        250 truckloads would be necessary for
23        Alternative 2.       The construction time it
24        would take approximately 18 months to
25        complete Alternative 1 versus nine months


      BRODY & GEISER    (908) 738-8555           (212) 732-0644

                                                  CTC   002   1341

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           20
 1        for Alternative 2. The next evaluation
 2'       criteria is •• implement ability- fox ".bo.th
 3        alternative technical equipment and skilled
 4        workers are available.      Numerous hazardous
 5        waste sites have been remediated by
 6        stabilization and containment methods
 7        similar for both alternatives.        Under
 8        Alternative 2 procedures are the handling
 9        of large debris and boulders that are
10        present at the site must be designed.
11                The final evaluation criteria that
12       we will be discussing is cost and the
13        capital cost for Alternative 1 is
14        approximately $13.2 million and with an
15        annual operation of maintenance cost of
16        $189,000 per year.     Alternative 2 capital
17        cost is $8.4 million and annual operation
18        of maintenance cost is approximately
19        $93,000 per year.     Preferred alternative is
20       Alternative 2, in-situ stabilization of the
21        contaminated soils.     This alternative
22        provides long-term protection to human
23        health in the environment and practically
24        eliminates migration of contaminants to the
25        ground water, soils with volatile


      BRODY & GEISER   (908) 738-8555    (212) 732-0644

                                        CTC   002   1342

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            21
 1          concentration, underlying the Caldwell
' 2'   . :.• »- Tru'ckihg- sit'e 'for "treatment 'and o'f'f-.site •--'
 3          disposal of contaminated soils and the lead
 4          and the remaining lower levels of the
 5          volatile organics will be stabilized and
 6          encapsulated in a concrete solidified
 7         mass.     This alternative has fewer
 8          short-term impacts, 250 truckloads versus
 9          5,000 truckloads for Alternative 1.            The
10         preferred alternative was nine months to be
11         completed versus eight months to be
12         completed for Alternative 1, $5 million
13         less than Alternative 1 and operation and
14         maintenance costs are half of those for
15         Alternative 1.
16                  This alternative provides the best
17         balance of trade-offs among the
18         alternatives with respect to the evaluation
19         criteria and EPA and the State believes
20         that the preferred remedy alternative will
21         protect human health in the environment,
22         comply with the applicable or relevant and
23         appropriate requirements, be cost-effective
24         and utilize permanent solutions and
25         alternative treatment technologies or


       BRODY & GEISER     (908) 738-8555     (212) 732-0644

                                             CTC   002   1343

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                      22
 1       resource recovery technologies to the
 2       maximum extent practicable.      'The-remedy
 3       meets.the statutory preference for the use
 4       of the treatment as a principal element.
 5                On that note, I'd like to open it up
 6       for questions.     If you would, please state
 7       your name and who you are representing so
 8       the stenographer can take it down.
 9                Any questions?
10                MS. DONALDSON: I'm Robin Donaldson
11       with Two Bridges Sewerage Authority.         I
12       just want to know the time period for the
13       excavation.    What time period?      Was that
14       going back to the original?
15                MR. ROBINSON: Going back to the
16       original work this summer?
17                MS. DONALDSON: Yes, in the summer.
18       Did it take place --
19                MR. ALONZO: It Started mid August
20       and it finished Labor Day week.        I'm John
21       Alonzo with De Maximis.
22                MR. ROBINSON: If you would like, you
23       can come up afterwards and ask individual

24       questions.    Please sign in before you
25       leave.    We have copies of the Proposed Plan


     BRODY & GEISER    (908) 738-8555   (212) 732-0644

                                         CTC   002   1344

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                      23

 1       and if you want to send any     written

 2       comments, the address and where' to•send

 3       them is in the Proposed   Plan.

 4              Thank you very much for        attending

 5       (Whereupon the meeting was     concluded.)

 6

 7

 8

 9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25



     BRODY & GEISER   (908) 738-8555   (212)    732-0644
                                         CTC    002   1345

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               24
1                       C E R T I F I C A T E



 3                I, LISA ARGENTIERI, a Notary Public and

 4   Shorthand Reporter of the State of New Jersey do hereby

 5   certify that the foregoing is a true and accurate

 6   transcript of the testimony as taken stenographically

 7   by and before me at the time, place and on the date

 8   hereinbefore set forth.

 9                I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that I am neither a

10   relative or nor employee nor attorney nor counsel for

11   any of the parties to this action and that I am neither

12   a relative nor employee of such attorney or counsel,

13   and that I am not financially interested in the action.

14

15
                               ^ ^ f ^ < ^ i^^)2?^^
16

17

18                   Notary Public of the State of New Jersey

19                   My Commission Expires February 16, 1998

20

21

22

23

24

25                                          CTC   002   134^


         BRODY k GEISER (908) 738-8555 or (212) 732-0644

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX D




             CTC   00^   1347

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

10/21/94                                Index Oocunent Nutter Order                                            Page: 1
                                • • CAtDUELL TRUCriNC COMPANY, OPERABLE UNIT NOV iDociments

KSS3S3=SSSSSSSS3SSS3«3SSZ8SSZS8SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS=rSS===SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS=SSSSSSSrSSrrZS==SSSSXSBSSE==E



Docunent Hunter: CTC-001-0001 To 0046                                                Date: 02/25/85

Title: Potential Hazardous Waste Site Preliainary Assessment - Regional Contamination

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Fouler, Ton: Nalcoln Pimie, Inc.
Recipient: none: US EPA


Oocuaent Muiter: CTC-001-0047 To 0056                                                Date: 06/16/82

Title: Potential Hazardous Waste Site • Site Inspection Report - Caldwell Trucking Co. Site

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Harvey, Paul: NJ Department of Enviromental Protection (HJDEP)
Recipient: none: US EPA


Docuaent Nuiter: CTC-001-0057 To 0070                                                Date: 02/16/82

Title: (Nenorandin discussing) Well Sanpling in Fairfield Township (with attached pages of historical
       well data)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Harvey, Paul: NJ Departnent of Enviromental Protection (NJDEP)
Recipient: Naack, Charles: NJ Departnent of Environaental Protection (NJDEP)



Docunent Nuiter: CTC-001-0071 To 0089                                                 Date: 06/01/84

Title: Coniunity Relations Plan • Caldwell Trucking, Fairfield Township, Essex County, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Neyer, Gilbert J.: NUS Corporation
Recipient: none: US EPA



Docunent Huiter: CTC-001-0090 To 0156                                                 Date: 11/01/84

Title: Work Plan • Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study - Caldwell Trucking Coqpany Site, Township
       of Fairfield, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Mather, Stanley E. J.: NUS Corporation
Recipient: none: US EPA




                                                                                               CTC       002    1348

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

10/21/94                                 Index Docunent Nunber Order                                            Page: 2
                                         CALDWELL TRUCKIHG COMPANY, OPERABLE UNIT NO. 1 Docunents




Docunent Nuiter: CTC-001-0157 To 0372                                                   Date: 06/01/85

Title: Site Operations Plan and General Health and Safety Requirements • Caldwell Trucking Coopany
       Site

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Johnson, Leonard C :   NUS Corporation
Recipient: none: US EPA



Document Nuiter: CTC-001-0373 To 0566                                                   Date: 06/01/86

Title; Remedial Investigation • Volune I: Text, Caldwell Trucking Site

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Johnson, Leonard C :   NUS Corporation
Recipient: none: US EPA


Docunent Nuiter: CTC-001-0567 To 0602                                                   Date: 06/01/86

Title: Remedial Investigation • Volune II: Puiping Test, Caldwell Trucking Company Site

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Johnson, Leonard C :   NUS Corporation
Recipient: none: US EPA



Docunent Nuiter: CTC-001-0603 To 0971                                                   Date: 01/01/86

Title: Remedial Investigation - Volune III: Appendices A and B, Caldwell Trucking Company Site

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Johnson, Leonard C :   NUS Corporation
Recipient: none: US EPA



Oocunent Nurtser: CTC-001-0972 To 1047                                                  Date: 01/01/86

Title: Remedial Investigation • V o l u w IV: Appendices C through G, Caldwell Trucking Company Site

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Johnson, Leonard C :   NUS Corporation
Recipient: none: US EPA




                                                                                                    etc
                                                                                                          00?      , ..

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

10/21/94                                I n d e x Docunent N u i t e r   Order                                        Page: 3


                                        CALDWELL TRUCKING COMPANY,' OPERABLE UNIT NO. 1 D o c u n e n t s


*3esBSS8BBsaSSSr3SSSS«SSS«SCSSSSSSS83B3=SXSSSS=SSSSSSZSasSSSS==SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSXBBaSSS«SB8rESSS=SSSXXa«XS««SK«K«SBasSSS


Oocunent Nuiter: CTC-001-1048 To 1049                                                          Date: 09/30/86
Title: (Letter transmitting copies of the errata or corrections to the draft Remedial Investigation
       and Feasibility Study reports)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Johnson, Leonard C : NUS Corporation
Recipient: Finnerty, Edward J.: US EPA
 Attached: CTC-001-1050

Docunent Nuiter: CTC-001-1050 To 1084                            Parent: CTC-001-1048          Date: 09/01/86

Title: Errata - Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study Final Reports, Caldwell Trucking Company
       Site

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Johnson, Leonard C : NUS Corporation
Recipient: none: US EPA



Docunent Nunber: CTC-001-108S To 1246                                                          Date: 06/01/86

Title: Feasibility Study, Caldwell Trucking Coopany Site

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Johnson, Leonard C : HUS Corporation
Recipient: none: US EPA



Docunent Huiter: CTC-001-1247 To 1379                                                          Date: 06/01/86

Title: Feasibility Study - Volune II: Appendices A and B; Caldwell Trucking Coopany Site

     Type; REPORT
   Author: Johnson, Leonard C : HUS Corporation
Recipient: none: US EPA



Oocunent Nuiter: CTC-001-1380 To 1381                                                          Date: 05/30/91

Title: Piiblic Notice 91-64, Explanation of Significant Differences, Caldwell Trucking Superfund Site
       (Certification of publication attached)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: none: US EPA
Recipient; none: The Progress




                                                                                                            CTC   002 1350

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

10/21/94                         . . . . Index. Docunent Nuiter. Order                                             ... Page: .4

                                         CALDWELL TRUCKING COMPANY, OPERABLE UNIT NO. 1 Docunents

>S838S8SSZ8B3SS88a8SSZ«SS3SS8Z8S8SSS8SZSSSSSSS8SaSSSS83SSSS8833S3838SZS3BZSSSS8SSS88SSS888S8S888SS88SSSSSSSSCZZ8SB3S3a


Oocunent Nuiter:' CTC-001-1382 To 1383                                                  Date: 05/03/91
Title: (Memo regarding:.) Request for Approval of an Explanation of Significant Differences for the
       Caldwell Trucking Superfund Site

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Callahan, Kathleen C : US EPA
Recipient: Sidamon-Eristoff, C : US EPA



Oocunent Nuiter: CTC-001-1384 To 1390                                                   Date: 05/03/91

Title: Explanation of Significant Differences, Caldwell Trucking Site, and Supporting Information

     Type: LEGAL DOCUMENT
   Author: none: US EPA
Recipient; none: none


Oocunent Huiter: CTC-001-1391 To 1393                                                   Date: 11/30/90

Title: (Letter and attached copy of resolution #90-146)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Tafuri, Spencer: Township of Fairfield
Recipient: Robinson, Rick: US EPA
 Attached: CTC-001-1394

Oocunent Nuiter; CTC-001-1394 To 1396                      Parent; CTC-001-1391          Date: 10/09/90

Title; Resolution «90-146, EPA Water Purification Tower

     Type: LEGAL DOCUMENT
   Author: Lemley, Janet: Township of Fairfield
Recipient: none: none



Docunent Nuiter: CTC-001-1397 To 1399                                                   Date: 01/21/85

Title; Agenla: Pi^lic Meetir«, Caldwell Trucking Site, Mmicipal Building, Fairfield. New Jersey
       (with attachments)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: none: US EPA
Recipient; none; none
 Attached: CTC-001-1400 CTC-001-1401        CTC-001-1405




                                                                                               '••''<•"•   0 0 2    l.-:;i.-.;
                                                                                                                           51

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

.10/21/94                                    ^index Oocunent?iluiter Ortier                                                         .Page: 5
                                              CALDWELL TRUCKING COMPANY, OPERABLE UNIT NO. 1 Docunents

            •zzzzsaaBaBzzzazzssBBSBsaBBaBsszszszaaBaaszaaaBaasaazzzzzsBBBBzzBBBZzaBBasBazzszzaasBBZsszzBBBBBBBSBsasBBzzsszsa


Oocunent N u i t e r : CTC-001-1400 To 1400                         Parent: CTC-001-1397                 Date: 01/21/85

Title: (Meeting sign-in sheet, Caldwell Trucking Company site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: none: none
Recipient: none: none


Docunent N u i t e r : CTC-001-1401 To 1404                         Parent: CTC-001-1397                 Date: 01/21/85

T i t l e : Meeting Sumary: Caldwell Trucking, January 2 1 , 1985

     Type: PLAN
  Author: none:       US EPA
Recipient: none:      none



Docunent Nudier: CTC-001-1405 To 1406                               Parent: CTC-001-1397                 Date:     /    /

T i t l e ; (Pamphlet:) S i ^ e r f u t d : What I t I s , How I t Works (handout at a January 2 1 , 1985, p u b l i c meeting)

     Type: CORRESPONOEHCE
   Author: none: US EPA
Recipient: none: none



Docunent Huiter: CTC-001-U07 To 1408                                                                     Date: 01/01/85

Title: (Fact sheet) Enviromental Facts • Caldwell Trucking Site, Township of Fairfield, Essex Couity,
       New Jersey

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: none; US EPA
Recipient; none; none


Docunent Muiter: CTC-001-U09 To 1414                                                                     Date: 06/01/86

Title: (Fact sheet) Enviromental Facts • Caldwell Trucking Company Site • Status Advisory: Evaluation
       of Remedial Alternatives

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: none: US EPA
Recipient: none: none




                                                                                                                 CTC        002   13'=i'?

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

• iD/21/9i                                     Index Oocunent Nuiter.Order                                                        Page: 6

                                               CALDWELL TRUCKING COMPANY, OPERABLE UNIT NO. 1 Docunents

 SZZSSZZZZBaaaaE3333XS«ZZa3Z8Z8ZB8ZaBBZBZBBBZ«ZZ8Z8ZZZZZSSB8aaaaZZZa8SZSXBS8SB8ZaaBZBaaaZZZZZZSB8aaBSBBZ8ZBBB8BBZaBaBS38a



 Oocunent N u i t e r : CTC-001-1415 To 1417                                                                Date: 10/01/86

 T i t l e : News Release - EPA Selects Cleanup Option f o r Siperfund S i t e i n F a i r f i e l d , HJ
      Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: none: US EPA
 Recipient: none: none



 Oocunent N u i t e r : CTC-001-1418 To 1418                                                                Date: 09/15/86

 Title: (Memo forwarding) Record of Decision for Caldwell Trucking Site for Approval

      Type: CORRESPONDENCE
    Author: Marshall, James R.; US EPA
 Recipient: Daggett, Christopher J.: US EPA
  Attached: CTC-001-1419

Docunent Nuiter: CTC-001-1419 To 1478                               Parent: CTC-001-1418                    Date: 09/25/86

 Title: Record of Decision, Remedial Alternative Selection (Caldwell Trucking Company site)

      Type: LEGAL DOCUMEHT
    Author: Daggett, Christopher J.: US EPA
 Recipient: none: none



 Docunent Nuiter: CTC-001-1479 To 1511                                                                      Date:   / /

 Title: LEAD in the Environment (and other news articles related to the health effects of lead)

      Type: REPORT
    Author: Boggess, William R.: University of Illinois
 Recipient: none: National Science Fomdation



 Docunent Nuiter; CTC-00V1512 To 1515                                                                       Date: 02/01/88

 Title; (Letter containing NJDEP's comDents on the revised Work Plan and the Quality Assurance Management
        Plan for the Caldwell Trucking Company site)

      Type; CORRESPONDENCE
    Author: Longo, Lawrence J.: HJ Department of Enviromental Protection (NJDEP)
 Recipient: Finnerty, Edward J.: US EPA




                                                                                                                    crc      002 135-^

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

10/21/94                                I n d e x Oocunent N u i t e r Order                                     Page: 7
                                        CALDWELL TRUCKING COMPANY; OPERABLE UNIT iilO. 1 Docunents


Z8ZSSSSZZZCSX33S33SZ8aZZEaZZZZZ8ZZ3ZSZZZZZ8888EBZS88SZZ33SSSSSEB33338B888S38BSS8S83=SS3ZSSSE333SZZZS8S33SZ8BSZZS3E8S5E



Docunent Nuiter: CTC-001-1516 To 1516                                                    Date: 11/07/88

Title: (Memo forwarding the enclosed Preliminary Health Assessment for the Caldwell Trucking Coopany
       site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Johnson, Denise; Agency for Toxic Substances t Disease Registry (ATSOR)
           Nelson, William; Agency for Toxic Substances A Disease Registry (ATSOR)
Recipient; Finnerty, Edward J.: US EPA
 Attached: CTC-001-1517

Oocunent Nuiter: CTC-001-1517 To 1531                           Parent: CTC-001-1516     Date: 10/01/88

Title: Health Assessment for Caldwell Trucking Company, Fairfield, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: none; Agency for Toxic Substances C Disease Registry (ATSOR)
Recipient: none: none



Docunent Nunber: CTC-001-1532 To 1532                                                    Date: 11/28/88

Title: (Letter discussing soil excavation during the remedial action at the Caldwell Trucking Company
       site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Reynolds, Frederick D.; US A m y
Recipient; Singh, I c ^ l : INS Engineers/Architects



Oocunent Nunber: CTC-001-1533 To 1681                                                    Date: 08/01/89

Title: Evaluation of Low Teoperature Volatilization Systems, Volune 2 (for the Caldwell Trucking
       Company site)

     Type: PLAN
   Author: none: Roy F. Weston, Inc.
Recipient: none: IMS Engineers/Architects




                                                                                                     CTC   002   1354

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

10/21/94                                  Index Docunent Nuiter Order                                            Page: 8
                                          CALOWEU" TRUCKING COMPANY; OPERABLE UNIT NO.'1 Documents




Docunent N u i t e r : CTC-001-1682 To 1688                                              Date: 12/22/89

Title: (Memo discussing excavation limits)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Hooker, Donald: none
Recipient: none: file


Docunent Nuiter: CTC-001-1689 To 1690                                                    Date: 01/18/90

Title: (Nemo sumarizing a conversation held on January 18, 1990, regarding the excavation and treatment
       of contaminated soil at the Caldwell Trucking Company site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Barry, Alison: US EPA
Recipient: Finnerty, Edward J.: US EPA



Oocunent Nunber: CTC-001-1691 To 1693                                                    Date: 04/16/90

Title: (Letter with attached consents on the 65X design svimittal for the Caldwell Trucking Company
       site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author; Magee, John F. II: NJ Department of Enviromental Protection (NJDEP)
Recipient: Hooker, Donald; US Aney Corpc of Engineers



Docunent Huiter; CTC-001-1694 To 1709                                                     Date: 04/25/90

Title: (Transmittal slip with attached April 1990, Scope of Work for additional field activities
       at the Caldwell Trucking Coopany site)
   •

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Hooker, Donald: us A m y Corps of Engineers
Recipient: Fimerty, Edward J.: US EPA




                                                                                                     CTC   0O2   1 "Tcc

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

10/21/94                                   Index Docunent Huiter Order                                              Page: 9
                                          tAlOWEtt TRuaciNGCOMPANT/'OPEHABLE UNIT NO. 1" Docunents

                                                          BZSZZZS8Z888SZ8883S888888aZ888ZS88SZ88SSZZ8888ZSZZ8X88ZZaa8aaaS8ZZ8



Docunent N u i t e r : CTC-001-1710 To 1711                                               Date: 06/13/90

Title: (Memo discussing the significance of the TCLP rule for the remedial design of the Caldwell
       Trucking Company site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Barry, Alison: US EPA
Recipient: Finnerty, Edward J.; US EPA


Oocunent Nuiter: CTC-001-1712 To 1715                                                     Date: 09/04/90

Title: (Memo with attached Addendun to the Caldwell Trucking Company site Health Assessment)

     Type; CORRESPONDENCE
   Author; Kent, Martha Dee: Agency for Toxic Substances ( Disease Registry (ATSOR)
Recipient: Nelson, William: Agency for Toxic Substances i Disease Registry (ATSOR)


Docunent Huiter: CTC-001-1716 To 1722                                                     Date: 11/09/90

Title: (Letter containing the analyses of Waste Characterization Saoples taken from the Caldwell
       Trucking Company site)

     Type: DATA
   Author: Ross, Robert W. II: Acurex Corporation
Recipient: Waterland, Larry: none



Docunent Huiter; CTC-001-1723 To 1728                                                     Date: 05/15/91

Title: (Letter responding to coonents on the Acurex draft report regarding the Caldwell Trucking
       Company site. The Acurex Report is contained within this Adninistrative Record as CTC 001
       1793)

     Type: CORRESPONOEHCE —
   Author: Thumau, Rotert C : US EPA
Recipient: Finnerty, Edward J.; US EPA




                                                                                                  CTC      .002    i-^=--

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

10/21/94      .«                   . . . . I n d e x Oocunent. H u i t e r , O r d e r                           Page: 10
                                        CALDWELL TRUCKING COMPANY, OPERABLE UNIT NO. 1 Docunents


•ZZZZZZZZ88ZZZ3ZZS3Z38SSZSS88SZttBaE88ZSZZZZZ83ZZZZS3a38S3SSSZZZ838ZZZZB3SSS888SZZ8SSZZZZ8Z88S8ZS88SSZ83ZZSZS888Z88Z8aBZ8



Docunent Nuiter:'CTC-001-1729 To 1739                                                    Date: 06/24/91

Title: (Memo containing cooments on the technical review of the cut lines for the Caldwell Trucking
       Company site)

     Type; CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Conti, Trish: HJ Department of Enviromental Protection (HJDEP)
Recipient: Kelnan, Zoe: HJ Deportment of Enviromental Protection (HJDEP)



Docunent Huiter: CTC-001-1740 To 1743                                                    Date: 08/20/91

Title: (Letter providing general guidelines pertaining to the regulations governing air peraitting
       for the Caldwell Trucking Company site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Kelman-Shinn, Zoe: NJ Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP)
Recipient: Finnerty, Edward J.; US EPA


Docunent Huiter; CTC-001-1744 To 1744                                                    Date: 09/26/91

Title: (Letter confirming an earlier telephone conversation regarding the control of polychlorinated
       biphenyl emissions at the Caldwell Trucking Company site)

     Type; CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Kelnan-Shinn, Zoe: NJ Department of Environmental Protection (HJOEP)
Recipient: Finnerty, Edward J.: US EPA



Oocunent Huiter: CTC-001-1745 To 1746                                                    Date: 11/02/91

Title: (Facsimile header sheet and attached sumary of PCB data for the Caldwell Trucking Coopany
       site)

     Type: CORRESPONOEHCE
   Author: Enger, John; US A m y Corps of Engineers
Recipient: Robinson, Rick: US EPA




                                                                                                   CTC    0<
                                                                                                           DO2   1357

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

10/2 V 9 4                      .   .   Jndex D o c u n e n t J I u i t e r O r d e r                           .Page:   11


                                        CALDWELL TRUCKING COMPANY, OPERABLE UNIT NO. 1 D o c u n e n t s


8S8S8S8S8Z8ZZB38S3EZSZSBZSZSSSZESSSZS38ZSS38S83SZZSSZSZS3SS3S3338333SZZ8Z3SS8Z83SSZZSS8SZZZZZSa338833SSS333SZZZZZZa£Z8EB


Oocunent Huiter: CTC-001-1747 To 1748                                                         Date: 02/06/92
Title: Attachment I, Potential Air ARARs for the 95X Review Submittal for the Design Analysis for
       Caldwell Trucking Company Superfuxl Site in Fairfield, Hew Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: none: US EPA
Recipient: none: none


Docunent Huiter; CTC-001-1749 To 1752                                                         Date: 02/11/92

Title: (Letter containing the HOAA's review of docunents relating to the Caldwell Trucking Company
       eite)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Csulak, Frank G.; National Oceanic t Atmospheric Adninistration (HOAA)
Recipient: Robinson, Rick; US EPA


Docunent Hunter: CTC-001-1753 To 1753                                                         Date: 02/13/92

Title: (Letter from the Air and Waste Management Division, Hazardous Waste Facilities Branch regarding
       the 9SX Design Analysis for the proposed Site Remediation Excavation at the Caldwell Trucking
       Coopany site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Bellina, Andrew: US EPA
Recipient: Borsellino, Ronald: US EPA



Oocunent Nuiter: CTC-001-17S4 To 1756                                                         Date: 02/21/92

Title; (Letter containing coonents on the 9SX Remedial Design for the Caldwell Trucking Company site)

     Type: CORRESPONOEHCE
   Author: Greenlaw. David: US EPA
Recipient: Finnerty. Edward J.: US EPA




                                                                                                      CTC oo:
                                                                                                                   :;s

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

40/21/94                                .. lndex.Doeu»ent Nuiter.Order                                                 page: 12
                                           CALDWELL TRUCKING COMPANY, OPERABLE UNIT NO. 1 Docunents




Docunent H u i t e r : CTC-001-1757 To 1766                                               Date: 03/02/92

Title: (Letter with comments on materials submitted for the 9SX Design for Remedial Action at the
       Caldwell Trucking Company site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Vijayasundaram, S.: NJ Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP)
Recipient; Finnerty. Edward J.: US EPA


Oocunent Nuiter; CTC-001-1767 To 1767                                                     Date: 10/30/92

Title: (Letter with plans for a biddability, constructability and operability review of docunents
       for the Caldwell Trucking Company site remediation excavation)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Beyer, Harry F. Jr.; US Army Corps of Engineers
Recipient: none: US EPA
 Attached: CTC-001-1768 CTC-001-1793 CTC-002-0001      CTC-002-0608

Oocunent Nunber: CTC-001-1768 To 1792                       Parent; CTC-001-1767          Date: 06/23/92

Title: 95X Design Review Coonents, Site Excavation Remediation, Caldwell Trucking Superfu^ Site,
       Fairfield, HJ

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: none: US Army Corps of Engineers
Recipient; none: US EPA



Docuwnt Hunber: CTC-001-1793 To 2338                        Parent: CTC-001-1767           Date:      / /

Title: Invitation for Bids, Caldwell Trucking Coopany, Site Remediation Excavation, Design Analysis
       (Design Analysis Report)

     Type: PLAH          "~
   Author: none: US Army Corps of Engineers
Recipient: none; US EPA




                                                                                                      CT'C   Ot")?.'    i "?•'-,o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

.10/21/94                                     Index Docunent Huiter Order                                              ..Page: 13
                                          CALDWELL TRUCKING COMPANY. OPERABLE UNIT NO. 1 Docunerits

8ZS88Za8S88S8ZZZ8ZZS88aZ8S*88Z888S8a888*B««S«88S8a8S8SX888888S88S88a8S8ZZ88S88a8aas88S88SBZZ8SZZ8a88ZS88S888888a88ZZ8aZ



Docunent H u i t e r : CTC-002-0001 To 0607                     Parent: CTC-001-1767            Date: 10/01/92

T i t l e : C a l A M l l Trucking Company, S i t e Remediation Excavation, Step 1 of Two-Step Sealed Bidding

     Type; PLAH
  Author; none:     US Amy Corps of Engineers
Recipient; none:    US EPA



Oocunent Hunter: CTC-002-0608 To 0654                          Parent: CTC-001-1767             Date: 08/01/92

Title: Caldwell Trucking Co. Site Remediation, Fairfield, Hew Jersey (site maps)

     Type: GRAPHIC
   Author: none: US Army Corps of Engineers
Recipient: none: US EPA



Docunent Huiter: CTC-002-0655 To 0656                                                           Date;    / /

Title; (List of docunents used as guidance in selecting end documenting modifications to the remedy
       at the Caldwell Trucking Coopany site)

     Type: OTHER
   Author: none; none
Recipient; none: none



Docunent Huiter; CTC-002-0657 To 0658                                                           Date: 02/05/93

Title; (Memo providing minutes of a January 28, 1993. meeting concerning VOC treatment technologies
       for the Caldwell Trucking Company site)

     Type: CORRESPONOEHCE
   Author: Robinson. Rick: US EPA
Recipient: file: US EPA



Ooonent Huiter; CTC-002-0659 To 0668                                                            Date; 02/17/93

Title: Explanation of Significant Differences, Caldwell Trucking Coopany Site. Fairfield Township,
       Hew Jersey.

     Type: LEGAL DOCUMEHT
   Author: Muszynski. William J.:       US EPA
Recipient: none: none




                                                                                                        CTC      002   13(b0

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

10/21/94                                 Index Docunent Huiter Order                                              Page: 14
                                         CALDWELL TRUCKING COMPANY, OPERABLE UNIT NO. 1   fiocuwnts

   Ba888*88S8S8888888888SS888Z                                    B888S8SS8Za8888S8aaaazZZ8KSSZZ88ZZS8888Sa8ZZZ88S8a88S8aa


Oocunent Huiter: CTC-002-0669 To 0726                                                     Date: 02/03/94

Title: (Letter discussing the attached CaldWell Trucking Site OUl • Alternate Remedial Approach)

     Type: CORRESPONOEHCE
   Author: McBumey. John P.: de maximis. inc.
Recipient: Robinson, Richard J.: US EPA



Docunent Huiter: CTC-002-0727 To 0728                                                     Date: 03/11/94

Title: (Letter regarding the Caldwell Site Trust's proposed alternate remedy for the on-site soils)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: McBumey, John P.: de maximis, inc.
Recipient: Robinson. Richard J.: US EPA


Oocunent Huiter: CTC-002-0729 To 0730                                                     Date: 03/18/94

Title: (Letter regarding the Caldwell Trucking Coopany Site Trust's. February 3. 1994. Request for
       Modification of Remedy)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Muszynski. William J.: US EPA
Recipient: McBumey. John P.: de maximis. inc.



Docunent Huiter: CTC-002-0731 To 0731                                                     Date: 10/14/94

Title: (Letter forwarding the Focused Feasibility Study, Operable Unit One)

     Type: CORRESPONOEHCE
   Author: Caldwell Trucking Trust: Blasland t Bouck Engineers
Recipient: Robinson. Richard J.; US EPA
 Attached: CTC-002-0732 CTCt)02-08S4

Docunent Huriser: CTC-002-0732 To 0853                    Parent: CTC-002-0731            Date: 10/01/94

Title: Focused Feasibility Study. Operable Unit 1, Volune 1 of 2

     Type: REPORT
   Author: CaldweU Trucking Trust: BlaslandftBouck Engineers
Recipient: Robinson. Richard J.: US EPA




                                                                                                CTC        002   1361

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

10/21/94                             Index Oocunent Nuiter Order                                     Page: 15
                                     CALDWELL TRUCKIHG COMPANY.-OPERABLE UNIT NO. t Docunents




Docunent Huiter: CTC-002-0854 To 1213                 Parent: CTC-002-0731          Date: 10/01/94

Title: Focused Feasibility Study, Operable Unit 1, Volune 2 of 2

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Caldwell Trucking Trust: Blasland t Bouck Engineers
Recipient: Robinson. Richard J.: US EPA
