LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: Report: Record of Decision Amendment - Operable Unit 2 Syncon Resins Superfund Site, Kearny, Hudson County, New Jersey, prepared by U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 2, September 30, 2010.
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/109384
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: f5e4b03d56b36f3efa6831ec19047f0a824ce6454cb61603f5875fa422f8874c
Source PDF pages: 61
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       *109384*
                                         109384


         RECORD OF DECISION
    AMENDMENT - OPERABLE UNIT 2
    SYNCON RESINS SUPERFUND SITE
 KEARNY, HUDSON COUNTY, NEW JERSEY




              s,v/:




            Prepared by:
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
              Region 2
         New York, New York




           September 2010




                                        500827

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                      DECLARATION STATEMENT

                  Record of Decision Amendment


SITE NAME AND LOCATION

Syncon Resins Superfund Site (EPA ID# NJD064263817)
Kearny, Hudson County, New Jersey    :•
Amendment to Operable Unit 2 (0U2) Remedy

STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

This decision document amends the September 27, 2000 0U2 soil
remedy for the Syncon Resins Superfund Site (Site). It presents
modifications to the 0U2 remedy to address contaminated soils.

This modified•remedy was selected in accordance with the
requirements of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, ,'
Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, as amended (CERCLA),42
U.S.C. §9601 et seq., and to the extent practicable, the
National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan
(NCP), 40 CFR Part 300. i    •            '

The State of New Jersey concurs with the 0U2 amended Selected
Remedy. A copy of the related concurrence letter can be found
in Appendix IV. The information supporting this remedy is
contained in the Administrative Record for this Site,, the index
of which can be found in Appendix III.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY

Groundwater contamination at the Site is being addressed as OUl
by'a September 29, 1986 Record of Decision (ROD). This amends
the Selected Remedy-for the soil component of the Syncon Resins
Site (designated 0U2). The initial soil remedy was selected in
a September 27, 2000 ROD which included the following:

  • Excavation and drainage, of approximately 30,000 cubic yards
    of.contaminated soil from an area of about 2.5 acres;
  • Removal and disposal of buried debris and other
    obstructions from the excavated areas;     ^
  • Installation of a drainage layer at the bottom of the
    excavations, treatment/disposal of drained free product ,
    from the excavated materials;                              .




                                                           500828

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      • Addition of soil amendments to the excavated soil before
        backfilling, possible restoration of natural hydraulic
        conditions; and
      • Discontinuation of the contaminated water treatment system
        operation, and establishment of institutional controls to .
        ensure continued commercial/industrial use of the property.

      The major components of this current modification of the 0U2
      Remedy consiist of:

      •   Excavation of soils exceeding Remediation Goals (RGs), to a
          depth of about 12.5 feet;     ,
      •   Post-remediation sampling to verify achievement of RGs;
      •   Treatment and/or disposal of excavated soils at off-site
          facilities in accordance with applicable regulatory        /
          requirements;
      •   Backfilling of recovered existing gravel from completed
          excavation areas to the bottom portion" of the excavation;
      •   Backfilling of excavated areas with imported clean fill;
          and
      •   Implementation of institutional/engineering controls.

    DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS
V
    Part 1: Statutory Requirements

    The Amended Remedy is protective of human health and the
    environment, complies with federal and state requirements that
    are applicable or relevant: and appropriate to the remedial
    actions to the extent practicable, and is cost-effective.

    Part 2: Statutory Preference for Treatment
              -   V   -                  "     .       -       •   ••



    The Amended Remedy meets the statutory preference for the use of
    remedies that involve treatment of a principal threat.

    Part'3: Five-Year Review Requirements

    .Because thiS' remedy will result in hazardous substances,
    pollutants, or contaminants remaining on-site above levels that
    allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, a statutory
    review will be conducted within five years after initiation of.
    remedial action to ensure that the remedy is, or will be,
    protective of human health and the environment.




                                                                   500829

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ROD DATA CERTIFICATION CHECKLIST

The following information is included in the Decision Summary
section of this ROD Amendment. Additional information can be .
found in the Administrative Record file for this Site.

  •   Chemicals of Potential concern (COPCs) and their respective
      concentrations and a discussion of source materials
      constituting principal threats may be found in the "Site
      Characteristics" section.
  •   Baseline risk represented by the COCs may be found in the
      "Summary of Site Risks" section.
  •   Remediaton Goals for areas that are sources to soil
      contamination can be found in the "Remedial Action
      Objectives" section.
  •   Current and reasonably anticipated future land use
      assumptions and current and potential future uses of
      groundwater used in the baseline risk assessment and ROD
      can be found in the "Current and Potential Uses" section.
  •   Estimated capital, and total present worth costs, and the
      number of years over which the remedy cost estimates are
      projected can be found in the "Description of Remedial
      Alternatives" section.
  •   Key factors that led to selecting the remedy may be found
      in the "Comparative Analysis" and "Statutory
      Determinations" sections.




                                                TL     2^/c
Walter E. Mugdan, Director                      Date
Emergency and Remedial Response Division
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Region 2




                                                              500830

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

              DECISION SUMMARY

       Operable Unit 2 Selected Remedy

        Syncon Resins Superfund Site

      Kearny, Hudson County, New Jersey




United States Environmental Protection Agency

                  Region 2

               September 2010




                                                500831

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                       Page


SITE NAME, LOCATION, AND DESCRIPTION                                     1

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES . :                              .1

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION                                    6

SCOPE AND ROLE OF THIS OPERABLE UNIT                                      6

SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS                                  ,        7

PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE                                       •           8

CURRENT AND POTENTIAL USES                      '                         9

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS                                                    10

REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES            '.            •. . .                17

DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES                                   . 18

SELECTED REMEDY         '                                                27

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS          '.....                                 28

DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES                                     30




APPENDICES

APPENDIX   I      FIGURES
APPENDIX   II     TABLES
APPENDIX   III    ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX
APPENDIX   IV     STATE CONCURRENCE LETTER .




                                                                     500832

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE NAME, LOCATION, AND DESCRIPTION

The Syncon Resins Site encompasses approximately 15 acres and is
located in a heavily industrialized area of Northern New Jersey.
The Site is located at 77 Jacobus Avenue in Kearny, Hudson
County. The Site is bounded on its western edge by the Passaic
River. Adjacent to the northern and southern boundaries are two
licensed waste haulers. The Site is bounded on the eastern side
by Jacobus Avenue and is across the street from a lacquer
manufacturing facility. The closest residential areas to the .
Site are located approximately one mile due west 'in Newark and
one and one-half miles southeast in Jersey City.

The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection' (NJDEP) is
the lead agency for Operable Unit 1 (OUl) which is containing
and treating contaminated groundwater. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) became the lead agency for 0U2 in 2007,
which is the subject of this Record of Decision (ROD).

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES

The origin of the Syncon Resins Site is obscure. The earliest
evidence documenting the existence of the Site consists of 1951
aerial photographs of the area. The narrow peninsula on which
the Syncon Resins Site is located is heavily industrialized.
Syncon Resins produced alkyd resin carriers for pigments and
varnishes. Various chemical plants, hazardous waste
transporters, manufacturing companies, petroleum facilities, and
storage terminals are situated within the immediate area.

Most of the company's business consisted of reprocessing of off-
specification resins purchased from other manufacturers. Six
main buildings and seven ancillary structures were used in
process-related activities on the Site. There were at least two
reactor buildings containing stainless steel vessels, various
other buildings and structures, numerous large bulk storage
tanks, two unlined lagoons that had been used for discharging
process wastewater, and an unknown number of underground tanks
and associated piping systems.

In May 1977, the owners of Syncon Resins filed for bankruptcy
under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Act. In November 1981, NJDEP
investigated the Site and ordered its owners to control and
contain the hazardous material at the Site. The company ceased
all operations in 1.982. In 1982, a limited Site investigation




                                                           500833

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

was conducted by NJDEP and EPA, which identified widespread soil
and groundwater contamination. • On September 1, 1983, Syncon
Resins was placed on the National Priorities List of Superfund
Sites.

In 1983, the United States filed a proof of claim 'in the Syncon
Resins bankruptcy action. The Chapter 11 bankruptcy was
converted to Chapter 7 liquidation. The only asset in the
bankruptcy estate was the property comprising a portion of the
Site, Lots 13 and 13R. On July 25, 1996, the Bankruptcy Court
granted the trustee's motion to abandon the property and dismiss
the bankruptcy case.

In 1984, a total of 12,824 55-gallon drums of off-specification
resins, raw materials, wastes and solvents stored at various
locations on the Site were removed by NJDEP. From May 1985 to
April 1986,- NJDEP conducted a remedial investigation (RI) at the
Site. The sampling performed during the RI indicated extensive
on-site contamination in vessels and tanks, soil, groundwater,
and building dirt/dust. Four general classes of chemical
contaminants were found on-site: organic compounds (volatiles
and base/neutral extractables), pesticides, polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs) and metals. The organic compounds present were
common raw materials and/or resin components, and the metals
detected in samples were probably from metallic oxides or
organo-metallic compounds utilized as pigments or catalysts in
the production processes.

Following the investigation, a feasibility study (FS) was
completed in 1986. Based on the findings of the RI/FS, a ROD
was issued by EPA in September 1986. The major components of
the OUl remedy were:

  • Removal and disposal of the contents of storage tanks and
    vessels, lagoon liquids and sediments, and grossly
    contaminated surface soils;
  • Decontamination of buildings and tanks;
  • Installation of a permeable cover material over the Site to
    eliminate exposure to contaminated subsurface soils and to
    allow for natural flushing of underlying soil and
    groundwater contaminants; and
  • Construction of a collection and treatment system for
    remediating contaminated groundwater from the shallow
    aquifer, with discharge to the Passaic River.




                                                           500834

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

In addition, the selected interim remedy included a final
provision to conduct supplemental studies to evaluate methods to
enhance the effectiveness of the flushing and/or treatment of
contaminated soils.

A remedial design (RD) was performed by NJDEP for the cleanup of
the Site. OUl remedial construction activities commenced in May
1990. Construction activities included the removal of
contaminated materials contained in storage tanks, lagoon ",
liquids and sediments, and surface soils; the decontamination of
buildings dnd tanks; installation of a gravel cover over the
Site to allow natural flushing of underlying soil; construction
of a cement-bentonite slurry wall; and the construction of a
contaminated water treatment system (CWTS). Hazardous materials
removed off-site included approximately 2,100 cubic yards (CY)
of contaminated soil and approximately 970 CY of lagoon
sedimeint. These areas had high concentrations of contaminants,
and contaminated soil and sediment were removed off-site to
reduce exposure. The gravel layer was provided to cover the'
entire Site. Following the completion of these activities,
approximately 100 above-ground storage tanks located in open
areas on the Site were recycled and/or disposed of off-site.
Remedial construction activities were completed in 1993. The
OUl remedy of natural flushing with groundwater collection and
treatment is currently in operation at the Site.

RI activities performed under 0U2 included soil and groundwater
sampling, a Cone Penetrometer Testing (CPT) investigation, and a
Pilot Scale Field Test to study the movement of contamination in
the groundwater. In February and March 1997, a CPT was used to
probe the shallow subsurface at approximately 70 locations. The
results of this testing revealed that widespread free and/or
residual product were still present throughout the Site.. The
depth of free and residual product at many of the probe
locations was found to be about 6 to 8 feet below existing
grade. Based on the CPT investigation, approximately 30,000 CY
of soil were contaminated with.free and/or residual product.

In summer 1997, a pilot-scale field test was initiated near the
existing collection trench on the Site. The purpose of the
testing.was to confirm through excavation that areas of high
fuel fluorescence detector readings actually represent
free/residual product and to determine if flushing coul'd be
enhanced by installing a connector trench from the product-,
contaminated area to the existing collection trench. Four




                                                           500835

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

rounds of samples were collected. The analytical data did not
indicate any rapid movement of contamination from the
surrounding areas through groundwater in the excavated trench.
Influent contamination levels at the CWTS also showed no
significant change.

In January 1998, NJDEP completed an FS of the Site using the
data collected during the investigations noted above.. The
results of the study are summarized in the July 1998 focused
feasibility study (FFS) Report'for the Site. 0U2 efforts were
directed at improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the
existing OUl remedy by removing the remaining free/residual
product source of contamination, and enhancing the natural
flushing component of the existing remediation system. These
enhancements were expected to shorten the remediation phase. An
0U2 ROD was issued on September 27, 2000. The major components
of the 0U2 remedy were: excavation and drainage of approximately
30,000-CY of contaminated soil from an area of about 2.5 acres;
removal and disposal of buried debris and other obstructions
'from the excavated areas; installation of a drainage layer at
the bottom of the excavations, treatment and or disposal of
drained free product from the excavated materials; addition of
soil amendments to the excavated soil before backfilling;
possible restoration of natural hydraulic conditions;
discontinuation of the CWTS operation, and establishment of
institutional controls to ensure continued commercial/industrial
use of the property.

On July 10, 2001, the first Five-Year Review was completed. The
report recommended continuing operation of the existing
groundwater collection and treatment system, until monitoring of
the groundwater indicates that contaminant levels are below the
applicable criteria.

In December 2002, NJDEP received funding from EPA to start 0U2
activities and in January 2004, NJDEP started contractual
proceedings to perform a Preliminary Design.Investigation (PDI).
A PDI was conducted from July to October 2006 by NJDEP. The PDI
consisted of geophysical investigations and soil and groundwater
sampling, and was intended to further delineate the source(s)
and extent of contamination in soil and groundwater to
facilitate an effective and efficient evaluation of the remedy
selected in the 2000 0U2 ROD.   The "results of the investigation
and the comparison with the 2000 ROD were presented in a Draft
PDI Report dated February 14, 2007. The report indicated that




                                                           500836

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

it would not be feasible to implement the remedy selected in
2000 because total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPHs), which also
contains PCBs, would not drain from the soil.

In May 2006, a building assessment was performed by NJDEP. The
structural integrity of- 12 buildings was found to be
compromised, which would make it unsafe to perform an.y vibratory
or excavation activities within or adjacent to them, and
building demolition was recommended. Iri addition, asbestos-
containing material (ACM) and lead-based paint were suspected to
be present in the buildings, but the assessment was limited due
to the compromised structural integrity of the buildings. A
more detailed survey, with appropriate protective measures, was
recommended to further investigate the distribution of ACM prior
to building demolition activities.

A second Five-Year Review Report for the Site was issued on
September 7, 2006. This review recommended the following: the
0U2 remedy needs ,to be designed and constructed; NJDEP needed to
continue the operation, maintenance and monitoring of. the OUl'
remedy; NJDEP needs to conduct more frequent sampling of
groundwa'ter monitoring wells located near the slurry wall to
confirm that the wall is functioning as intended and there are
no contaminants migrating off-site; access controls needed to be
maintained and the Site use must remain restricted so that the
public is not exposed to site-related contaminants; and the
ongoing operation and maintenance and monitoring are subject to
routine modification and adjustment.

In 2007, EPA assumed the lead responsibiTity for Site activities
for 0U2. On July 14, 2008, a field investigation was conducted
which consisted of collecting soil borings and conducting
sampling activities. In 2009, a technical memorandum, was
prepared to assess regional groundwater flow and water quality
in unconsolidated deposits in the vicinity of the Site. In
2010, EPA started FFS activities and the final report is dated
August 10, 2010.

Enforcement Activities                            '

The United States filed a cost recovery action in 1986 against
Mr. Benjamin Farber, the former owner of the entire Site and
present owner of a portion of the Site.. In addition, the United
States later named Disch Construction Company (Disch) and Essex
Chemical Corporation (Essex) as defendants in that action. Mr.




                                                           500837

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Farber filed a contribution action against 17 additional
parties. After many years of litigation, the case was resolved,
and as-a result of settlements with six of the parties,
including Mr. Farber, Disch and Essex, the United States-
received $2.69 million in reimbursement of past costs incurred
at the Site.

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

The Proposed Plan and supporting documentation for 0U2 was
released to the public for comment on August-9, 2010. These
documents were made available to the public at the EPA
Administrative Record File Room, 290 • Broadway, 18^*^ Floor, New
York, New York; and the Kearny Main Public Library, Kearny, New
Jersey.

On August 9, 2010, EPA issued a notice in the Jersey Journal
local newspaper which contained information relevant to the
public comment period for the Site, including the duration of
the comment period, the date of the public meeting and
availability of the administrative record. Information
regarding the public meeting was posted on EPA's webpage. The
public comment period began on August 9, 2008 and ended on.
September 8, 2008.

EPA held a public meeting on August 19, 2010 to explain EPA's
preferred soil remedy. The purpose of this meeting was to
inform- local officials and interested citizens about the
Superfund process, to discuss the Proposed Plan and receive
coiranents on the Proposed Plan, and to respond to questions from
area residents and other interested parties. However, except
for a visit by a Township official, no one from the public
attended the meeting.

SCOPE AND ROLE OF THIS OPERABLE UNIT

A remedy was selected for the Site for OUl on September 29,
1986. ' OUl addressed contaminants in storage tanks, lagoons,
sediments, surface soils, and groundwater.

The September 2000 0U2 ROD specified a remedy to excavate and
drain contaminants from soil, remove buried debris, install a
drainage layer, treat/dispose of drained free product, add soil
amendments, and possibly restore natural hydraulic conditions
and discontinue CWTS operation.




                                                            500838

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

since the issuance of the 0U2 ROD, new information was obtained
that showed that the 2000 0U2 ROD remedy would not be effective
because it was determined that contamination would not
adequately dra,in from the soil. As a result, an amendment to
the existing 0U2 ROD remedy was considered necessary. This
remedy addresses contaminated soil and is intended to be the
final soil remedy for the Site.

SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS

The historical soil information consists of data collected
during a sampling event conducted by NJDEP in 1994, a CPT
sampling event in 1997, a PDI conducted in 2006, and a data gap
field investigation conducted by EPA in 2008.

The Site has been divided into five distinct areas:
northeastern area, northwestern area, southeastern area,
southwestern area, and an area west of the slurry wall. (See
Figure 1 in Appendix I ) .

 A variety of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), semi-volatile
 organic compounds (SVOCs), total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPHs),
 PCBs, pesticides, and metals were identified in soil that
 exceeded the delineation criteria. Specifically, contaminants
 that were detected exceeding the delineation criteria (NJDEP
 non-residential direct contact soils remediation standard and
 NJDEP impact to groundwater soil remediation standard) include:
VOCs - benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylenes (BTEX); 1,2-
 dibromo-3-chloropropane; and 1,2-dichloropropane; SVOCs -
 benzo(a)anthracene, benzo(a)pyrene, benzo(a)fluoranthene,
 dibenz(a,h)anthracene, indeno(1,2,3-cd) pyrene, and naphthalene;
,PCBs; Pesticides - aldrin, diedrin,'4,4'-DDD, 4,4'-DDT, and
 heptachlor; TPH and Metals - arsenic, cadmium, lead, and
manganese.

VOCs (in particular, BTEX) appear to be localized within the
southwestern Area, and coincide with the estimated extent of
free product based on the 1997 CPT investigation.- For instance,
soil sampling results indicate that benzene was not detected
frequently or at high concentrations at the Site; the highest
detected concentration of benzene was at 1.1 milligrams per
kilogram (mg/kg) in a soil boring in the Southwestern- Area.

With the exception of a few soil sample locations in the
southeastern area, PCBs appear to be located primarily within




                                                            500839

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

the southwestern area. PCB concentrations apparently decline
with depth, where PCBs'were detected at 5,300 mg/kg, 3,400
mg/kg, and 5.7 mg/kg for the depth intervals 0 to 2 feet below
ground surface (bgs), 5 to 6 feet bgs, and 6 to 6.5 feet bgs,
respectively. A similar trend was observed in another portion
of the southwest area of the Site where PCBs were detected at
1,700 mg/kg, 0.9 mg/kg, and 0.57 mg/kg for the depth intervals
4.5 to 6.5 feet bgs, 8.5 to 10.5 feet bgs, and 11.5 to 13.5 feet
bgs, respectively.

Elevated TPH concentrations were detected in soil samples
collected from the northeastern area, southwestern area, and, to
a lesser extent, the southeastern area. Similar to BTEX
contamination, the spatial distribution of TPHs appears to be
consistent with the estimated extent of free product based on
the 1997 CPT investigation. Vertically, TPHs extended below the
groundwater .table in the northeastern area and southwestern
area, which was encountered at approximately 5 to 6 feet bgs
during soil borings (however, the depth to groundwater was
measured at approximately 2 to 3 feet bgs in nearby on-site
monitoring wells). For instance, TPHs were detected at 8,636
mg/kg and 13,170 mg/kg in soil samples collected from between
9.5 to 10.5 feet bgs of SB-49, and 5.6 to 8.6 feet bgs in SB-50.

Pesticides exceeded the delineation criteria only at isolated
locations in the northeastern area, in the southwestern area,
and in the area west of the slurry wall. In addition, these
isolated and limited exceedances occurred only in the shallowest
sample depth intervals, indicating that the pesticides were
located in the surface soil.

One of the metal contaminants, arsenic, was detected throughout
the Site, but the highest concentrations (up to 265 mg/kg) of
arsenic appear to be clustered in three areas of the Site: area
west of the slurry wall, northwestern area, and northeastern
area.

PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE

The National Contingency Plan (NCP) establishes an expectation
that EPA will use treatment to address the principal threats
posed by a site wherever practicable (NCP Section
300.430 (a) (I) (iii) (A)). The "principal threat" concept is
applied to the characterization of "source materials" at a
Superfund site. A source material is material that includes or




                                                          500840

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

•contains hazardous substances, pollutants or contaminants that
 act as a reservoir for migration of contamination to
 groundwater, surface water or air, or acts as a source for
 direct exposure. Contaminated groundwater generally is not
 considered to be a source material; however, Non-Aqueous Phase
 Liquids in groundwater may be viewed as source material.
 Principal threat wastes are those source material considered to
 be highly mobile that generally cannot be reliably contained, or
 would present a significant risk to human health or the
 environment should exposure occur. The decision to treat these
 wastes is made on a site-specific basis through a detailed
 analysis of the alternatives using the nine remedy selection
 criteria. This analysis provides a basis for making a statutory
 finding that the remedy employs treatment as a principal
 element.

Principal Threat Waste at the Site has been determined to
include free product contaminated with PCBs, grossly
contaminated soils with free product contaminated with PCBs, and
contaminated soils with PCB concentrations exceeding 500 mg/kg.
The grossly contaminated soils herein are defined as soils that
contain visibly identifiable free or otherwise readily
detectable free or residual product.

CURRENT AND POTENTIAL USES

Currently, the Site has been abandoned by its former operators.
NJDEP continues to operate, maintain, and monitor a groundwater
extraction and treatment system to contain groundwater
contamination. The narrow peninsula on which the Site is
located is heavily industrialized. Various chemical
manufacturing facilities, hazardous waste transporters,
manufacturing companies, petroleum facilities, and storage
terminals are situated within the 'immediate area.. Adjacent
facility owners and others have expressed interest in purchasing
the property to be developed for commercial and industrial use.

Although the groundwater is classified as IIA - a drinking water
aquifer, the groundwater is not used for drinking water, and it
is not anticipated to be used for drinking water in the future.
Currently, the effluent from the on-site treatment facility
discharges into the Passaic Ri^ver.




                                                            500841

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS

As part of the RI/FS, EPA conducted a baseline risk assessment,
which is detailed in a report dated August 5, 2009, to estimate
the current and future effects of contaminants on human health
and the environment. A baseline risk assessment is an analysis
of the potential adverse human health and ecological effects of
releases of hazardous substances from a site in the absence of
any actions or controls to mitigate such releases, under current
and future land uses. The baseline risk assessment includes a
human health risk assessment and an ecological risk assessment.
It provides the basis for taking action and identifies the
contaminants and exposure pathways that need to be addressed by
the remedial- action. This section of the ROD summarizes the
results of the baseline risk' assessment for the Site.

Human Health Risk Assessment

A four-step process is utilized for assessing site-related human
health risks for a Reasonable Maximum Exposure (RME) scenario:
Hazard Identification-uses the analytical data collected to
identify the contaminants of potential concern at the Site for
each medium, with consideration of a number of factors explained
below; Exposure Assessment - estimates the magnitude of actual
and/or potential human exposures, the frequency and duration of
these exposures, and the pathways (e.g., ingesting contaminated
well-water) by which humans are potentially exposed; Toxicity
Assessment - determines the types of adverse health effects
associated with chemical exposures, and the relationship between
magnitude of exposure (dose) and severity of adverse effects
(response); and Risk Characterization - summarizes and combines
outputs of the exposure and toxicity assessments to provide a
quantitative assessment of site-related risks. The risk
characterization also identifies contamination with
concentrations which exceed acceptable levels, defined by the
NCP as an excess lifetime cancer risk greater than 1 X 10"^ to 1
X 10"^ or a Hazard Index greater than 1.0; contaminants at these
concentrations are considered chemicals of concern (COCs) and
are typically those that will require remediation at the Site.
Also included in this section is a discussion of the
uncertainties with these risks.

A baseline Human Health Risk Assessment (HHRA) was completed by
EPA for 0U2 to determine the cancer risks and non-cancer hazards
associated with current and future exposure to contaminated


                               10


                                                          500842

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

soils at the Site.

Hazard Identification

This section outlines the data used in the risk assessment, how
it was collected, the criteria for selecting the chemicals of
potential concern (COPCs), and the calculation of the Exposure
Point Concentrations (EPCs).

Data were collected for soil during PDI in 2006 and during the
data gap investigation in 2008 and validated data were submitted
to EPA. Analytical results were presented in two reports: the
2007 Louis Berger Draft PDI Report and the 2008 CDM.Final NJDEP
data Gap Evaluation Memorandum. Data from 1994 were not
included in the risk assessment as the data were deemed too old
and were composites from test pits rather than discrete soil
samples. Based on the recent data collected, direct contact
risks (dermal/inhalation) were identified throughout the.Site.
A comprehensive list of all COPCs can found in the HHRA in the
administrative record. Only COCs, or those chemicals requiring
remediation at the Site, are listed in Table 1 (Appendix II).

A statistical evaluation of the background dataset was performed
by the Superfund Site Characterization and Monitoring Technical
Support Center for Region 2. The results of the statistical
evaluation are presented in a report titled Statist'ical Analysis
of Background and Site Data,. Syncon Resins Superfund Site, New
Jersey prepared by Lockheed Martin in August 2009. The
comparison of the background data and the Site data for both
surface soil and .subsurface soil indicates that: (1) in surface
soil, the Site.results for arsenic, cadmium, naphthalene,
dieldrin, and 4,4'-DDD exceed background and (2) in subsurface
soil, the Site results for cadmium, benzene, 4,4'-DDT, dieldrin,
and 4,4'-DDD exceed background concentrations.

The following human receptor groups and exposure routes were
evaluated in the HHRA for potential commercial/industrial usage:

Current/Future Land-Use Scenario:
Trespasser - ingestion, dermal contact, inhalation of fugitive
dust/VOCs.

Future Land-Use Scenario:
Site Worker - ingestion, dermal contact, inhalation of fugitive
dust/VOCs; and


                                11


                                                            500843

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Construction/Utility Worker - ingestion, dermal contact^
inhalation of fugitive dust/VOCs.

Exposure Assessment

The exposure assessment evaluates pathways by which people are
or can be exposed to the COCs in different media (e.g., soil,
groundwater). The quantification of exposure is based on
factors including, but are not limited to, the concentrations
that people are or can be exposed to, the potential frequency
(number of days per year), and the duration of exposure (number
of years). The exposure assessment is based on site-specific
parameters that^can reasonably be expected at the Site. RME
values are 'upper bound estimates for each receptor population.
The following is a description of the exposure parameters used
for each receptor in this assessment.

Site Worker - The Site worker is expected to be mostly outdoors,
with some indoor activity. Under future circumstances, this
individual is potentially exposed to contaminated surface soil
via incidental ingestion, dermal contact and inhalation of
fugitive dust and vapors. The soil ingestion rate of the Site
worker is assumed to be 100 mg/day. The skin surface area
calculation (3,300 squared centimeter (cm^) ) used in assessing
dermal exposure assumes the head, hands and forearms are not
covered by clothing. The dermal adherence factor of 0.2-
milligram per squared centimeter (mg/cm^' is the geometric mean
for commercial/industrial heavy equipment operators suggested by
EPA's 2004 Guidance for Dermal Risk Assessment. The exposure
time of 8 hours/day was based on a typical work day. The worker
is expected to be on the Site 250 days a year for 25 years.

Construction/Utility Worker - Since site-specific information is
lacking for a possible future construction scenario, this
assessment assumes that the^construction project would last one
year (260 days of work). Default exposure parameters for the
construction worker, such as a soil ingestion rate of 330 mg/day
and a soil adherence factor of 0.3 mg/cm^ were also used. The
skin surface area used for the Site worker was also used for the
construction/utility worker. The exposure time of 8 hours/day
was based on a typical work day. This assessment assumes that
this receptor is exposed to both surface and subsurface soils-
during construction activities.

Trespasser - Under current and future circumstances, the adult


                               12


                                                           500844

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

trespasser could potentially be exposed to contaminated surface
soil via incidental ingestion, dermal contact and inhalation of
fugitive dust and vapors. In d^eveloping the trespasser
scenario, best professional judgment and site-specific
information were used to identify likely exposure parameters.
A soil ingestion rate of 100 mg/day was used. The skin surface
area used in assessing dermal exposure assumes the head, hands,
forearms, and lower legs are not covered by clothing. The
dermal adherence factor of 0.02 mg/cm^, which comes from EPA's
Risk Assessment Guidance(RAGS) Part E, is the geometric mean for
commercial/industrial adults (age >18) performing ground keeping
activities. The exposure time of 2 hours/day was based on best
professional judgment taking Site conditions into consideration.
To estimate the time individuals might potentially spend on the
Site, the data from the exposure factor handbook (EFH) was used
to calculate the 90^"^ percentile value for time spent in outdoor
recreation. It was determined that the adult trespassers could
potentially spend a maximum of 2 hours per day at the Site, 2
days per week in the summer and 1 day per week in the fall and
spring, assuming 13 weeks per season based on best professional
judgment. Exposure duration is expected to be 25 years, the same
as the Site worker.

Toxicity Assessment

In the toxicity assessment, current toxicological human health
data (i.e., reference doses and concentrations, and slope
factors) were obtained for each of the COPCs from EPA's
Integrated Risk Information System, EPA's Provisional Peer
Reviewed Toxicity values (PPRTVs) developed by the Office of
Research and Development/ National Center for Environmental'
Assessment/Superfund Health Risk'Technical Support, and the
California Environmental Protection Agency toxicity values (Tier
3 ) .   •


Table 2 (Appendix II) provides data on non-cancer health effects
associated with the COCs. The toxicity values presented are the
oral reference dose (RfD), the absorbed RfD for dermal exposure,
and the inhalation reference concentrations (RfC). The non-
cancer health endpoint (i.e., the target organ) associated with
the chemical can also be found on these tables. For all
scenarios, chronic (^ 7 year exposure) RfDs and RfCs were used
as they would also be protective of sub-chronic exposures.

Table 3 (Appendix II) provides dose-response information in the


                               13


                                                           500845

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

form of the cancer slope factor for the ingestion, dermal
contact, and inhalation routes. The weight of evidence (WOE)
for each chemical, which is used to characterize the extent to
which the available human epidemiology and animal studies
indicate that a chemical may cause cancer in humans, is also
shown. The WOE is categorized into six groups: (A) Known Human
Carcinogen; (B-1) Probable Human .Carcinogen - based on limited
evidence of carcinogenicity in humans and sufficient evidence of
carcinogenicity in animals; (B-2) Probable Human Carcinogen -
based on sufficient evidence of carcinogenicity in animals; (C)
Possible Human Carcinogen; (D) Not classifiable as a'human
carcinogen; and (E) Evidence chemical is not a carcinogen in
humans.

Risk Characterization

This final step in the HHRA combines the exposure and toxicity
information to provide a quantitative assessment of Site risks.
Exposures are evaluated based on the potential risk for
developing cancer and the potential for non-cancer health
hazards. The methodology used to estimate the cancer risks and
non-cancer hazards are described below. Risk and hazard
calculations by receptor and timeframe are shown in Tables 7.1
through 7.3 of Appendix B of the HHRA. These cancer risks and
non-cancer hazards are summarized in the Table 9 series of the
HHRA. Any risks or hazards that are above' EPA' s level of
concern are shown in the Table 10 series of the HHRA.

Areas of pure product (MW-11, MW-19, TP-08, SB-49, etc.) and/or
high-levels of PCBs (lagoon #1 of the southwest area) should be
considered as hot spots and may need to be treated as Principal
Threat Waste.             •

While VOCs do not present an unacceptable direct contact risk,
their presence in soils suggests that a fracture vapor intrusion
risk may be introduced if buildings are constructed on the
property.

Since shallow groundwater flow at the Site is in the western
direction towards the Passaic River, the potential for VOCs in
groundwater to migrate onto neighboring properties is unlikely.
As a result, the vapor intrusion pathway is only a concern for
future on-site buildings. Regional groundwater flow has been
evaluated. Data will be reviewed and based on the results of
that evaluation, vapor intrusion may be deemed an issue for off-
site receptors in the future and will be evaluated at that time.

                               14


                                                          500846

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Since the Site may be redeveloped in the future, any
construction there would need to be done with consideration of
the potential for vapor intrusion. If development is- pursued,
several options may be considered prior to construction. One
option would involve including a vapor mitigation system into
the building design and sampling the indoor air after the
buildings are constructed to verify that the system is working
as intended. Another option would be to complete construction
and then perform subslab air tests. If vapors are detected
above levels of concern, an appropriate system should be
installed to remove the vapors. Also, due to the presence of
contaminants in groundwater, the potential exists for
construction/u1:ility workers to be exposed via incidental
ingestion and dermal contact pathways. A quantitative risk
above acceptable risk levels from exposure to mixed soils
(exposure to soils across the entire site) has been demonstrated
and is discussed below. Any additional risk from exposure to
contaminated groundwater further supports the need to take an
action at the Site.

It can be seen in Table 4 (Appendix II) that the HI for
noncancer effects from exposure to Aroclor 1242 is 4.8E'4-00 for
the construction/utility worker, from exposure to Aroclor 1248'
is 6,. 4E+00 for the adul't trespasser, 5.11E+01 for the site
worker (outdoor) and 9.66E+02 for the construction/utility
worker and from exposure to Aroclor 1254 is 4.92E+00 for the
construction/utility worker; therefore, noncarcinogenic risks
may occur from the exposure routes evaluated in the risk
assessment.

Results of the HHRA presented in Table 5 (Appendix II) indicate
that Aroclor 1248 concentrations pose a carcinogenic risk to the
site worker (outdoor) and construction/utility worker at 7.3E-04
and 5.5E-04, respectively. Both risk values are greater than
the acceptable risk range of 10-6 to 10-4.

In summary, the risk drivers in soils at the site include
Aroclors 1242, 1248, and 1254. For more information on the
contaminants addressed, please refer to the HHRA document.

The response action selected in the ROD Amendment is necessary
to protect the public health or welfare of the environment from
actual or threatened releases of contaminants into the
environment.


                                15


                                                             500847

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Uncertainties

The process of evaluating human health cancer risks and non-
cancer health hazards involves multiple steps. Inherent in each
step of the process are uncertainties that ultimately affect the
final calculated cancer risks and non-cancer health hazards.
Uncertainties may exist in numerous areas, including the
environmental data used to conduct the risk assessment, the
exposure parameter assumptions, the toxicological information
used in the assessment and the risk characterization when there
is a mixture of chemicals present at a site. Important sources
of uncertainty in this HHRA are discussed below.

Only data from the southwest quadrant of the Site were used in
the estimation of cancer risk and non-cancer hazard for the
construction/utility worker to be most health protective. Based
on the data, this area of the Site is most contaminated and, as
a result, risk for the construction/utility worker with exposure
to mixed soils is likely overestimated.

Additionally, gravel cover on the Site currently prevents direct
contact with soil contaminants, but the thickness of the gravel
cover varies. Some data included in the risk assessment
includes soil samples collected were characterized as either
surface or subsurface soil depending on where the majority of
the interval was located. Therefore, some of the subsurface
intervals extend deeper than ten feet but were used if they were
primarily between 4 and 10 feet below ground surface. As a ^
result, risks and hazards may be either under or overestimated
in each of the soil intervals.

Criteria for Selecting COCs

The risk assessment did not evaluate the entire datasets from
2006 and 2008, but rather focused on select COPCs from the 1986
ROD, exceedences of the NJDEP Non-Residential Soil Remediation
Standards, and Site contaminants suspected to be present as a
result of background conditions. The full list of COPCs can be
found in the HHRA document.

Soil sampling results revealed widespread contamination at the
Site. However, only PCB Aroclors are driving the risk in Site
soils, which pose a direct contact risk.

Tables 4 and 5 (Appendix II)-summarize the risk information for


                               16


                                                          500848

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

each medium used to determine the COCs for the .risk assessment.
The maximum detected concentration for each contaminant chemical
in soil was compared to the corresponding residential values for
soil based on the June 2008 EPA Regional Screening Table (RST).
The screening levels represent a cancer risk of one in a million
(1x10"^) or a hazard quotient of 1. The non-cancer hazard
quotients from the regional screening levels (RSL) table were
adjusted' to 0.1 to account for potential exposures to multiple
chemicals acting on the same organ or syst:em. If a chemical's
maximum concentration was below its respective RSL value, that
chemical was determined to be at a concentration that is
unlikely to cause adverse effects unless it was classified as a
group A carcinogen in which case it was.retained for analysis
regardless of concentration. In the baseline HHRA, group A
carcinogens (i.e., known human carciriogens) are retained.

Since no individual Aroclor screening levels exist in.the RST,
total PCBs were used as a surrogate screening value.

Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from this
site, if not addressed by implementing the response action
selected in the ROD, may present an imminent and substantial
endangerment to the public health, welfare, or the environment.

REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES

The following RAOs have been identified for 0U2:

  •  Reduce or eliminate the direct contact risks associated
     with contaminated soil to levels protective of a
     commercial/industrial use;
  • Improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the existing
     OUl remedy that is currently in place;
  • Remove or treat continuing sources of contamination (i.e..
     Principal Threat Waste) when technically feasible or
     practicable;
  • ' Address potential future exposure through inhalation of
     vapors that may migrate from contaminated soils; and
  • Provide for restricted (industrial) reuse of the Site.

To achieve these RAOs, remediation goals' (RGs) were developed
for contaminants at the Site based on federal or state
promulgated applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements
(ARARs), risk-based concentrations, background concentrations,
and with consideration also given to guidance values. RGs are

                               17


                                                           500849

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

also used to screen alternatives. All principal threat waste
will need to be removed for subsequent off-site treatment and/or
disposal, or on-site treatment. Contaminants at concentrations
exceeding the RGs remaining on site after remediation will
require institutional/engineering controls. (See Table 6 in
Appendix II)'.

Additionally, the OUl remedy has not been able to collect an
adequate amount of contaminated water because of impediments to
groundwater flow. An RAO for 0U2 is to improve the efficiency
and effectiveness of the existing OUl remedy. It is anticipated
that such irnprovement will result from the excavation and off-
site disposal/treatment of buried debris or other impediments to
groundwater flow to the OUl collection system. Therefore, it is
anticipated that once the modified 0U2 remedy is completed,
groundwater flow will improve and, therefore, improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of the existing OUl remedy.

DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

CERCLA requires that each remedial alternative be protective of
human health and the environment, be cost effective, comply with
other statutory laws, and utilize permanent solutions and
alternative treatment technologies and resource recovery
technologies to the maximum extent practicable. In addition,
CERCLA includes a preference for the use of treatment as a
principal element for the reduction of toxicity, mobility or
volume of hazardous substances.

CERCLA requires that if a remedial action is selected that
results in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants
remaining at a site above levels that allow for unlimited use
and unrestricted exposure, EPA must review the action no less
often than every five years after initiation of the action. In
addition, institutional controls (e.g., deed notice and
classification exception area (CEA)) to limit the use of
portions of the property may be required. These use
restrictions are discussed in each alternative as appropriate.
Consistent with expectations set out in the NCP, none of the
remedies rely exclusively on institutional controls to achieve
protectiveness. The time frames below for construction do not
include the time for remedial design or the time to procure
contracts.

As required by CERCLA, a "No Action" alternative (Alternative 1
in the 2000 ROD) was evaluated in the 2000 ROD to establish a




                                                          500850

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

baseline for comparison to the other alternatives. Since the No
Action alternative was previously evaluated in the 2000 ROD, it
will not be discussed further in this ROD Amendment.

Remedial alternatives for the source area and the Site
groundwater are presented below.

Alternative 1 - Excavation and Off-Site Treatment and/or
Disposal; Backfilling with Imported Clean Fill; and
Institutional/Engineering Controls

Estimated Capital Cost: $21,458,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost: n/a
Estimated Present Worth Cost: $21,458,000
Estimated Construction Time Frame: 32 months
Estimated Time to Achieve RAOs: 32 months

This alternative consists of the following major components:

  •   Excavation of soils exceeding RGs, to a depth of about 12.5
      feet;
  •   Post remediation sampling to verify achievement of RGs;
  •   Treatment and/or Disposal of excavated soils at off-site
      facilities in.accordance with applicable regulatpry
      requirements;
  •   Backfilling of recovered existing gravel from completed
      excavation areas to the bottom portion of the subsurface
      excavation;
  •   Backfilling of excavated areas with imported clean fill;
      and
  •   Implementation of institutional/engineering controls.

Contaminated soils would be excavated and transported off site
and disposed of or treated at an appropriate facility. Based on
sample results, it is estimated that a total of 39,000 CY of
contaminated soil would be excavated, of which approximately
24,000 CY is located in the southwestern portion of the Site and
approximately 15,000 CY is located west of the slurry wall and
in the northeastern portion of the Site. Of those quantities,
it is estimated that 6,000 CY will be excavated as PCB Principal
Threat Waste to a depth of approximately 9 feet. Volumes of
soils to be remediated were estimated based on soil sampling
data.




                                19


                                                           500851

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Surface excavations (0 to 2 feet) would-be backfilled with
imported clean fill, with an uppermost 6-inch topsoil layer.
Subsurface excavations (below 2 feet) could be partially
backfilled with the existing gravel cover, which would be tested
and verified that it is clean, followed by backfilling with
clean fill, with an uppermost 6-inch topsoil layer. (See Figure
1 in Appendix I ) . Further, engineering controls could be
implemented if necessary.    There is no associated O&M cost,
since the Site will be excavated and backfilled. Routine Site
O&M activities will continue under OUl. Additionally, this
alternative will allow for excavation of buried debris or other
impediments to groundwater flow to the OUl collection system.
Therefore, this alternative will also improve the effectiveness
and efficiency of the existing OUl remedy that is currently in
place.

A pre-design investigation would be required to further
delineate the areal extent of contamination, and the area and
volume of contaminated soil would be more accurately determined
during the RD.

A deed notice will be placed on the Site to identify the likely
presence of residual contamination to ensure that future
intrusive subsurface activities are properly performed. Based
on the results of the Regional groundwater study, a deed notice
might also require mitigation measures to prevent vapor
intrusion to any buildings to be constructed in the future.
Since this alternative will result in contaminants remaining on
the Site above levels which allow for unrestricted use and
unlimited exposure, a review of the remedy will be conducted no
less than every five years pursuant to Section 121(c) of CERCLA.

Alternative 2 - Excavation; On-Site Low Temperature Thermal
Desorption (LTTD) of Excavated Soil Characterized as Requiring
Treatment; On-Site Backfilling or Off-Site Disposal; Backfilling
with Imported Clean Fill; and Institutional/Engineering Controls

Estimated Capital Cost:, $26,792,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost: n/a
Estimated Present Worth Cost: $26,792,000
Estimated Construction Time Frame: 35 months
Estimated Time to Achieve RAOs: 35 months

This alternative consists of the following major activities:



                               20


                                                          500852

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      Excavation of on-site soils exceeding RGs, to a depth of
      about 12.5 feet;
  •   Post remediation sampling to verify achievement of RGs;
  •   On-site LTTD treatment of excavated soils characterized as
      TSCA waste or RCRA hazardous waste;
  •   Disposal of excavated, non-hazardous soils at off-site
      facilities in accordance with applicable regulatory
      requirements;
  •   Backfilling of recovered existing gravel from completed
      excavation areas to the bottom portion of the subsurface
      excavation;
  •   Backfilling of excavated areas with clean fill or LTTD
      treated soil; and
  •   Implementation of institutional/engineering controls.

Excavated soils that are characterized as TSCA waste or RCRA
hazardous waste would be subject to on-site LTTD treatment. The
LTTD unit currently under consideration is a continuous-feed
indirect-contact system. Contaminants are desorbed from the
soil under elevated temperature in the LTTD treatment unit. The
contaminant-laden off-gas is then condensed into a concentrated
liquid form which would be subsequently transported for off-site
treatment or disposal. Non-condensable off-gas exiting the
condenser would be treated by a vapor-phase activated carbon
treatment system. Therefore, the contaminants are not destroyed
via thermal oxidation in this LTTD unit; rather they are
separated from the contaminated soil for subsequent treatment
/disposal elsewhere.

The estimated quantity of contaminated soil to be excavated is
approximately 39,000 CY. Specifically, in the southwest area,
approximately 24,000 CY of soil would be excavated from depths
of 8.5 feet to 12.5 feet and would require LTTD treatment. The
treated soil would be required to meet the RGs and confirmed by
analytical results prior to reuse as backfill on Site.
Approximately 15,000 CY of non-TSCA soil, located west of the
slurry wall and in the northeastern portion of the Site (see
Figure 1 in Appendix I) will be excavated and disposed of off-
site. Subsurface excavations (below 2 feet) could be partially
backfilled with the existing gravel cover, which would be tested
and verified that it is clean, followed by backfilling with
clean fill, with an uppermost 6-inch topsoil layer. Further,
engineering controls could be implemented if necessary. There
is no associated O&M cost, since the Site will be excavated and


                                21


                                                           500853

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

backfilled. Routine Site maintenance activities will continue
under.OUl. Additionally, this alternative will allow for
excavation of buried debris or other impediments to groundwater
flow to the OUl collection system. Therefore, this alternative
will also improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the
existing OUl remedy that is currently in place.

A deed notice will be placed on the Site to identify the likely
presence of residual contamination to ensure that future
intrusive subsurface activities are properly performed. Based
on the results of the Regional groundwater study, a deed notice
might also require mitigation measures to prevent vapor
intrusion to any buildings to be constructed in the future.
Since this alternative will result in contaminants remaining on
the Site above levels which allow for unrestricted use and
unlimited exposure, a review of the remedy will be conducted no
less than every five years pursuant to Section 121(c) of CERCLA.

COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS

In selecting a remedy, EPA considered the factors set out in
CERCLA §121, 42 U.S.C. §9621, by conducting a detailed analysis
of the viable remedial response measures pursuant to the NCP, 40
CFR §300.430 (e) (9) and OSWER Directive 9355.3-01. The detailed
analysis consisted of an assessment of the individual response
measure against each of nine evaluation criteria and a
comparative analysis focusing upon the relative performance of
each response measure against the criteria.

Threshold Criteria - The first two criteria are known as
"threshold criteria" because they are the minimum requirements
that each response measure must meet in order to be eligible for
selection as a remedy.

1.    Overall Protection of Hviman Health and the Environment
Overall p r o t e c t i o n of human health and the environment addresses
whether each a l t e r n a t i v e provides adequate p r o t e c t i o n of human
health and the environment and describes how r i s k s posed through
each exposure pathway are eliminated, reduced, or c o n t r o l l e d ,
through treatment, engineering c o n t r o l s , and/or i n s t i t u t i o n a l
controls.,
Contaminated soils at the Site present a potential human health
risk. Both Alternatives 1 and 2 would achieve the RAOs and
would be protective of human health and the environment- by
reducing or eliminating the direct contact risks associated with

                                        22


                                                                         500854

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

contaminated soil to levels protective of a
commercial/industrial use, remediating the Principal Threat
Waste at the Site,, and implementing institutional and
engineering controls, as appropriate. Alternative 1 would
remove contaminated surface soil exceeding the RGs and Principal
Threat Waste for off-site disposal or treatment while
Alternative 2 consists of removal of contaminated surface soil
exceeding the RGs and Principal Threat Waste for either disposal
at off-site landfills-(for soil characterized as non-hazardous
waste) or LTTD treatment prior to on-site backfilling (for soil
characterized as TSCA waste or RCRA hazardous waste).
Also, both Alternatives would remove subsurface contaminants.
2.    Compliance with applicable or relevant and appropriate
      requirements (ARARs)
Section 121(d) of CERCLA and NCP §300. 430(f) (1) ( i i ) (B) r e q u i r e
that remedial a c t i o n s at CERCLA s i t e s at l e a s t a t t a i n l e g a l l y
applicable or relevant and appropriate Federal and S t a t e
requirements, standards, c r i t e r i a , and l i m i t a t i o n s which are
c o l l e c t i v e l y r e f e r r e d to as "ARARs," unless such ARARs are
waived under CERCLA section 121 (d) (4) .
Applicable requirements are those cleanup-standards, standards
of control, and other substantive requirements, criteria, or
limitations promulgated under federal environmental or state
environmental or facility siting laws that specifically address
a hazardous substance, pollutant, contaminant, remedial action,
location, or other circumstance found at a CERCLA site. Only
those state standards that are identified by a state in a timely
manner and that are more stringent than federal requirements may
be applicable. Relevant and appropriate requirements are those
cleanup standards, standards of control, and other substantive
requirements, criteria, or limitations promulgated under federal
environmental or state environmental or^ facility siting laws
that, while not "applicable" to a hazardous substance,
pollutant, contaminant, remedial action, location, or other
circumstance at a CERCLA site address problems or situations
sufficiently similar to those encountered at the CERCLA site
that their use is'well-suited to the particular site. Only
those state standards that are identified in a timely manner and
are more stringent than federal requirements may be relevant and
appropriate.

Compliance with ARARs addresses whether a remedy will meet all
of the applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements of



                                           23


                                                                                 500855

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

other federal and state environmental statutes or provides a
basis for invoking a waiver.

Actions taken at any Superfund site must meet all ARARs of
federal and state law or provide grounds for invoking a waiver
of these requirements. These include chemical-specific,
location-specific, and action-specific ARARs.

RGs were developed for the Site based on federal or state
promulgated appropriate or relevant and appropriate requirements
(ARARs), risk-based concentrations, background concentrations,
and with consideration also given to guidance values. RGs are
also used to screen alternatives. All Principal Threat Waste
will need to be removed for subsequent off-site treatment and or
disposal or on-site treatment. Contaminant concentrations above
the RGs rema:ining onsite after remediation will require
institutional/engineering controls. (See Table 6 in Appendix
2).                                               •            -

Alternative 1 would meet the RGs since contaminated surface and
subsurface soil exceeding the RGs and Principal Threat-Waste
would be removed from the Site. Alternative 2 would also meet
the RGs since contaminated surface and subsurface soil exceeding
the RGs and Principal Threat Waste would either be removed from
the Site or be treated to below the RGs prior to placement back
on the Site. With both alternatives if levels of contamination
left on site exceeds RGs, institutional and engineering controls
will be implemented. Both Alternatives 1 and 2 would comply
with location- and action-specific ARARs.             '


Primary Balancing Criteria - The next five criteria, criteria 3
through 7, are known as "primary balancing criteria". These
criteria are factors with which tradeoffs between response
measures are assessed so that the best option will be chosen,
given site-specific data and conditions.

3.    Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence
A s i m i l a r degree of long-term effectiveness and permanence
r e f e r s to expected r e s i d u a l r i s k and the a b i l i t y of a remedy to
maintain r e l i a b l e p r o t e c t i o n of human health and the environment
over time, once clean-up l e v e l s have been met. This c r i t e r i o n
includes the consideration of r e s i d u a l r i s k that will remain on-
s i t e following remediation and the adequacy and r e l i a b i l i t y of
controls.


                                         24


                                                                            500856

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Both Alternatives 1 and 2 would be effective in the long term
and routine Site maintenance activities would be conducted under
the OUl remedy. Under Alternative 1, the contaminated soil
above the RGs would be excavated and transported for off-site
disposal and/or treatment. Under Alternative 2, hazardous waste
would be treated on-site to levels below the RGs prior to
placement back on the Site or off-site disposal.

4.   Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume (TMV) of
contaminants through Treatment
Reduction of t o x i c i t y , mobility, or Volume through treatment
r e f e r s to the a n t i c i p a t e d performance of the treatment
technologies that may be included as p a r t of a remedy.
Alternative 1 may reduce TMV for the contaminated soils that
will require treatment prior to disposal of in a Subtitle C
landfill. Alternative 2,--on the other hand, would involve LTTD
treatment for contaminated soil characterized as TSCA waste or
RCRA hazardous waste and would thus achieve reduction of TMV for
the treated soil.

5.    Short-term Effectiveness
Short-term effectiveness addresses the p e r i o d of time needed to
implement the remedy and any adverse impacts that may be posed
to workers, the community and the environment during
construction and operation of the remedy u n t i l cleanup l e v e l s
are achieved.
Both Alternatives involve construction and excavation and are
considered to have a lower degree of short-term effectiveness.
Excavated materials would require off-site transportation to
disposal facilities, increasing the potential for a release to
occur during shipments, as well as potential traffic and noise
issues. Alternative 2 would have short-term impact to the
community due to nuisances associated with construction and to
the construction workers due to handling the contaminated
material during treatment. It is estimated that it will take
about 32 months to implement Alternative 1 and 35 months for
Alternative 2.

6.    Implementability
Implementability addresses the technical and a d m i n i s t r a t i v e
f e a s i b i l i t y of a remedy from design through construction and
operation. Factors such as a v a i l a b i l i t y of s e r v i c e s and



                                      25


                                                                       500857

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

m a t e r i a l s , a d m i n i s t r a t i v e f e a s i b i l i t y , and coordination with
other governmental e n t i t i e s are a l s o considered.
Alternative 1 would be easily implemented. Excavation would use
conventional construction equipment. No special techniques,
materials, permits, or labor would be required to excavate the
soil and place backfill; supplies and services would be readily
obtainable. Clean soil and topsoil would be needed to backfill
and resurface excavation areas. Disposal facilities with
appropriate permits are available; however, there are only a few
TSCA landfills in the country. Alternative 2 involves the
greatest degree of difficulty to implement due to the processing
issues related to the LTTD treatment of contaminated soil (e.g.,
soil type, moisture content control). -Alternative 2 is also
difficult administratively as the permitting process is lengthy.

7.     Cost
Includes estimated c a p i t a l and operation and maintenance c o s t s ,
and net present-worth values.
Estimated costs for Alternative 1 and 2 are $21.4 million arid
$26.8 million, respectively.   (See Table 7 in Appendix II).

Modifying Criteria - The final two evaluation criteria, criteria
8 and 9, are called "modifying criteria" because new information
or comments from the state or the community on the Proposed Plan
may modify the preferred response measure or cause another
response measure to be considered.

8.     State Acceptance
I n d i c a t e s whether based on i t s review of the RI/FS r e p o r t s and
the Proposed Plan, the s t a t e supports, opposes, and/or has
i d e n t i f i e d any r e s e r v a t i o n s with the s e l e c t e d response measure.
The State of New Jersey has concurred with EPA's Selected Remedy
in this ROD Amendment. (See Appendix V ) .             ,

9.     Community Acceptance
Summarizes the p u b l i c ' s general response to the response
measures described in the Proposed Plan and the RI/FS r e p o r t s .
This assessment includes determining which of the response
measures the community supports, opposes, and/or has
r e s e r v a t i o n s about.

Community acceptance was evaluated after the close of the public


                                                 26


                                                                                          500858

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

comment period. No written or verbal-comments were received
during the public comment period.

SELECTED REMEDY

Based upon consideration of the results of EPA's investigations
at the Site, the requirements of CERCLA, the detailed analysis
of the remedial alternatives and public comments, EPA has
determined that Alternative 1 is the appropriate remedy for the
Site. This remedy best satisfies the requirements of CERCLA
Section 121 and the NCP's nine evaluation criteria for remedial
alternatives, 40 CFR§300.430(e)(9). This remedy includes the
following components:

  •   Excavation of soils exceeding RGs, to a depth of about 12.5
      feet;
  •   Post remediation sampling to verify achievement of RGs;
  •   Treatment and/or Disposal of excavated soils at off-site
      facilities in accordance with applicable regulatory
      requirements;
  •   Backfilling of recovered existing gravel from completed
      excavation areas to the bottom portion of the subsurface
      excavation;
  •   Backfilling of excavated areas with imported clean fill;
      and
  •   Implementation of institutional/engineering controls.

Additionally, this alternative will allow for excavation of
buried debris or other impediments to groundwater flow to the
OUl collection system. In general, this cost-effective remedy
would be protective of human health and the environment by
reducing or eliminating the direct contact risks associated with
contaminated soil to levels protective of a
commercial/industrial use, by remediating the Principal Threat
Waste at the Site, and by implementing institutional and
engineering controls as appropriate. Air monitoring,
engineering controls, and/or appropriate worker personal
protective equipment would be used to protect the community and
workers for short-term impact. This remedy is considered to be
relatively simple to implement since only earthwork activities
would be involved.

Based on all available information, EPA and the State, of New
Jersey believe the Selected Remedy provides the best balance of
trade-offs among the response measures with respect tb the nine

                                27


                                                           500859

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

evaluation criteria. EPA believes that the Selected Remedy will
be protective of human health and the environment, will comply
with ARARs, will be cost effective, and will utilize permanent
solutions and alternative treatment technologies to the maximum
extent practicable.

Consistent with EPA Region 2's Clean and Green policy, EPA will
evaluate the use of sustainable technologies and practices with
respect to any remedial alternative selected for the Site.

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

As previously noted, CERCLA Section 121.(b) (1) mandates that a
remedial action must be protective of human health and the
environment, cost-effective, and utilize permanent solutions and
alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery
technologies to the maximum extent practicable. CERCLA Section
121(b)(1) also establishes a preference for remedial actions
that employ treatment to permanently and significantly reduce
the volume, toxicity, or mobility of the hazardous substances,
pollutants, or contaminants at a site. CERCLA Section 121(d)
further specifies that a remedial action must attain a degree of
cleanup that satisfies ARARs under federal and state laws,
unless a waiver can be justified pursuant to CERCLA Section
121(d)(4). For the reasons discussed below, EPA has determined
that the Selected Remedy meets the requirements of CERCLA
Section 121.

Protection of H\iman Health and the Environment

The Selected Remedy will adequately protect human health and the
environment through excavation and off-site disposal and/or
treatment. The Selected Remedy, will remove soils that act as
the source of contamination to groundwater at the Site. This
action will result in the reduction of exposure levels to
acceptable risk levels within EPA's generally acceptable risk
range of 10~^ to 10"^ for carcinogens and. below an HI of 1.0 for
noncarcinogens. Implementation of•the Selected Remedy will not
pose unacceptable short-term risks or adverse cross-media
impacts. The Selected Remedy will also improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of the existing OUl remedy that is
currently in place.

Compliance with ARARs

The selected remedy will comply with ARARs.   All Principal

                                28


                                                              500860

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Threat Waste will be removed for subsequent off-site
treatment/disposal. Contaminant concentrations above' the RGs
remaining onsite after remediation will require
institutional/engineering controls. (See Table 6 in Appendix
II).

Cost-Effectiveness

In EPA's judgment, the Selected Remedy is cost-effective and
represents reasonable value for the money to be spent. Overall
effectiveness was evaluated by assessing three of the five
balancing criteria in combination (long-term effectiveness and
permanence; reduction in toxicity, mobility and volume through
treatment; and short-term effectiveness). Overall effectiveness
was then compared to costs to determine cost-effectiveness. The
overall effectiveness of the Selected Remedy has been>determined
to be proportional to the costs, and the Selected Remedy,
therefore, represents reasonable value for the money to be
spent.

Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment
Technologies to the Maximiim Extent Practicable

EPA has determined that the Selected Rernedy represents the
maximum extent to which permanent solutions and treatment
technologies can be utilized in a practicable manner at the
Site. EPA has determined that Alternative 1 provides the better
balance of trade-offs with respect to the five balancing
criteria. Alternative 1 satisfies the criteria for long-term
effectiveness and permanence by removing grossly contaminated
soil.

Alternative 1 is implementable since it employs standard
technologies that are readily available.

Five-Year Review Requirements

This remedy will result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or
contaminants remaining on-site above levels that allow for
unlimited use and unrestricted exposure. A statutory review
will be conducted within five years of construction completion
for the Site to ensure that the remedy remains protective of
human health and the environment. .




                                29


                                                           500861

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES

The Proposed Plan for the Site was released for public comment
on August 9, 2010. The comment period closed on September 8,
2010.

No written or verbal comments were submitted during the public
comment period. It was determined that no significant changes
to the selected remedy, as it was originally identified in the
Proposed Plan, were necessary.




                               30


                                                          500862

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX I


 FIGURES




31



             500863

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                Figure 1
Fi


\^
                                                \.:^
 \                                      >
      \            '
                             as«   \        \          \

                                                                    KaRlHWfST                                                                                             11

                                       SLUKRYWAiL              \
                                                                                                                 JiORTHEAJI
                                                                                                                                                                            ^..


                                                               /-
                                   V                                                               • ^f.-   ^
                                            ' \
                                                  \        \                    'SOUIHVEST
                                                                                             4-^   t.-                            5QUTICA5T i
                                                                                                                                                                               ^^

          \
                                                                                 -%
               1° -• an


                                                                       •-t''
                                                                                                                »*:k!i«-MJgiJLL
                                                                                                                                  ' -m^'aies Ka K^fta ^oi wi^'jii i.
 '•           ^ca c .1 r»i
                                                                                                                                                                                    r
                                                                                                                                                                                  . i'
                                                                                                                                                                                  '-a-,




                                                                                      32                                                                               500864

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Figure 2




   33      500865

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Figure 3




   34      500866

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                      Figure 4 -
        Approximate Area of Soil to be Remediated

                                                        V*6'


                                                          I
^^J.^




                           35


                                                    500867

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX II


 TABLES




    36


              500868

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   Table 1

                   Summary of Chemicals of Concern and
               Medium Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
Scenario Timeframe           Current/Future Trespasser
Medium:                      Surface Soil
Exposure IVIedium            Surface Soil

                               Concentration                             Frequency     Exposure
              Chemical of        Detected          Concentrations                                    EPC
Exposure                                                                     of          Point               Statistic
               Concern                                 Units                                         Units
  Point                                                                  Detection   Concentration
                                min       max
             Aroclor 1248    0.0175(U)   5300(D)         mg/kg            54/108         542.5       mg/kg      (1)

Footnotes:
   (1) 99% Chebyshev (Mean, Sd) UCL




                                                                    37
                                                                                                                         500869

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   Table 1

                   Summary of Chemicals of Concern and
               Medium Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
Scenario Timeframe:          Future Site Worker (Outdoor)
Medium:                      Surface Soil
Exposure Medium:             Surface Soil

                               Concentration                         Frequency      Exposure
              Chemical of        Detected          Concentrations                                 EPC
Exposure                                                                 of           Point               Statistic
               Concern                                 Units                                      Units
  Point                                                              Detection    Concentration
                                min        max
             Aroclor 1248    0.0175(U)   5300(D)        mg/kg        •   54/108       542.5       mg/kg      (1)

Footnotes:
   (1) 99% Chebyshev (Mean, Sd) UCL




                                                                    38                                                500870

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        Table 1

                    Summary of Chemicals of Concern and
                Medium Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
Scenario Timeframe:              Future Construction/Utility Worker
Medium:                          Surface and Subsurface Soil (2 to 10 feet bgs/water table)
Exposure Medium:                 Surface and Subsurface Soil (SW quadrant)

                                    Conbentration                          Frequency       Exposure
               Chemical of            Detected          Concentrations                                      EPC
                                                                               of            Point                    Statistic
                Concern                                     Units                                           Units
Exposure                                                                   Detection     Concentration
  Point                             min        max
               Aroclor 1242      0.0175(U)    86(D)          mg/kg              5/52          20.06         mg/kg        (1)
               Aroclor 1248      0.018(U)    5300(D)         mg/kg             39/52          518.5         mg/kg        (2)
               Aroclor 1254      0.0175(U)    41(U)          mg/kg              1/52           2.64         mg/kg        (3)

Footnotes:
   (1) 99% Chebyshev (Mean, Sd) UCL
   (2) 97.5% Chebyshev (Mean, Sd) UCL
   (3) MAX, 95%UCL



               Summary of Chemicals of Concern and Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations

This table presents the COCs and EPCs for each of the COCs detected in soil (i.e., the concentration that will be used to
estimate the exposure and risk from each COC in soil). The table includes the range of concentrations detected for each
COC, as well as the frequency of detection (i.e., the number of times the chemical was detected in the samples collected at
the site), the EPC and how it was derived.




                                                                                                                                  500871
                                                                          39

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        Table 2

                                              Non-Cancer Toxicity Data Summary
Pathway: Oral/Dermal

                                                                                                                   Combined      Source
                                                            Absorp.                                    Primary
  Chemical of        Chronic/     Oral RfD     Oral RfD                     Adjusted     Adj. Dermal              Uncertainty/   of RfD:   Date of
                                                           Efficiency                                  Target
   Concern          Subchronic     Value         Unit                     RfD (Dermal)    RfD Units                Modifying     Target     RfD
                                                           (Dermal)                                    Organ
                                                                                                                    Factors      Organ

  Aroclor 1242(1)     Chronic      2.00E-05    mg/kg-day     80-96%         2.00E-05      mg/kg-day    IMMUNO         300          IRIS    2/23/2009
  Aroclor 1248(1)     Chronic      2.00E-05    mg/kg-day     80-96%         2.00E-05      mg/kg-day    IMMUNO         300          IRIS    2/23/2009
  Aroclor 1254(1)     Chronic      2.00E-05    mg/kg-day     80-96%         2.00E-05      mg/kg-day    IMMUNO •       300          IRIS    2/23/2009


Footnotes:
   (1) Aroclors screened as Aroclor 1254.

Definitions:
    IMMUNO: Immune System
    IRIS:    Integrated Risk Information System




                                                                            40                                                      500872

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                           Table 2

                                                Non-Cancer Toxicity Data Summary
Pathway: Inhalation
                                                                                Combined
                                    Inhaltion                    Primary                        Source of
  Chemical of        Chronic/                    Inhalation                    Uncertainty/                       Date of
                                       RfC                       Target                         RfD: Target
   Concern          Subchronic                   RfC Units                      Modifying                          RfD
                                      Value                       Organ                           Organ
                                                                                 Factors
  Aroclor 1242(1)       N/A             N/A          N/A           N/A                N/A            N/A             N/A
  Aroclor 1248(1)       N/A             N/A          N/A           N/A                N/A            N/A             N/A
  Aroclor 1254(1)       N/A             N/A          N/A           N/A                N/A            N/A             N/A


Footnotes:
   (1) Aroclors screened as total PCBs.

Definitions:
    N/A: Not available (NCEA confirmed that all chemicals without toxicity information listed above do not have provisional or surrogate values available)


                                                               Summary of Toxicity Assessment

 This table provides non-carcinogenic risk information which is relevant to the contaminants of concern in soil. When available, the chronic toxicity data have
 been used to develop oral reference doses (RfDs) and inhalation reference doses (RfDi). Lead does not have toxicity values and was evaluated qualitatively in
 the risk assessment.




                                                                                 41
                                                                                                                                                 500873

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                     Table 3

                                                          Cancer Toxicity Data Summary
 Pathway: Oral/Dermal
                                                                                           Adjusted
                                                                Oral Absorption                                                    Weight of Evidence/
  Chemical of           Oral Cancer                                                       Cancer Slope
                                                 Units             Efficiency                                         Units         Cancer Guideline         Source          Date
   Concern              Slope Factor                                                         Factor
                                                                  (Dermal) (1)                                                        Description
                                                                                            (Dermal)
  Aroclor 1248(1)           2.00E+00         (mg/kg-day)'              80-96%                 2.00E-*-00            (mg/kg-day)'           B2                 IRIS (2)     02/23/09

Footnotes:
    (1) Aroclors screened as total PCBs.
    (2) Oral cancer slope factor for PCBs obtained from IRIS for high risk and persistence (soils and sediments).


 Definitions:                                                                         Weight of Evidence Categories:
  IRIS: Integrated Risk Information System                                              (A) Know Human Carcinogen
  N/A:     Not available (NCEA confirmed that all chemicals without toxicity            (B1) Probable Human Carcinogen - based on limited evidence of carcinogenicity in humans and
           information listed above do not have provisional or surrogate values               sufficient evidence of carcinogenicity in animals
           available)                                                                   (B2) Probable Human Carcinogen - based on sufficient evidence of carcinogenicity in animals
                                                                                        (C) Possible Human Carcinogen
                                                                                        (D) Not classifiable as a human carcinogen
                                                                                        (E) Evidence chemical is not a carcinogen in humans




                                                                                                  42
                                                                                                                                                                            500874

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                     Table 3

                                                            Cancer Toxicity Data Summary
 Pathway: Inhalation
  Chemical of                                                       Weight of Evidence/ Cancer
                     Unit Risk                   Units                                                             Source                Date
   Concern                                                            Guideline Description
  Aroclor 1248(1)           1.00E-04            (ug/m^)"'                            B2                              IRIS              02/23/09

Footnotes:
    (1) Aroclors screened as total PCBs.


 Definitions:                                                                         Weight of Evidence Categories:
  IRIS:       Integrated Risk Information System                                        (A) Know Human Carcinogen
  N/A:        Not available (NCEA confinned that all chemicals without toxicity         (B1) Probable Human Carcinogen - based on limited evidence of carcinogenicity in humans and
              information listed above do not have provisional or surrogate values            sufficient evidence of carcinogenicity in animals
              available)                                                                (B2) Probable Human Carcinogen - based on sufficient evidence of carcinogenicity iri animals
                                                                                        (C) Possible Human Carcinogen
                                                                                        (D) Not classifiable as a human carcinogen
                                                                                        (E) Evidence chemical is not a carcinogen in humans




                                                                         Summary of Toxicity Assessment

 This table provides carcinogenic risk information which is relevant to the contaminants of concern in soil. Toxicity data are provided for both the oral
 and inhalation routes of exposure. Lead does not have toxicity values and. was evaluated qualitatively in the risk assessment.




                                                                                                 43
                                                                                                                                                                           500875

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                 Table 4

                         Risk Characterization Summary- Non-Carcinogens
Scenario Timeframe:              Current/Future
Receptor Population:             Trespasser
Receptor Age:                    Adult

                   Exposure        Exposure       Chemical of       Primary                        Non-Carcinogenic Risk
   Medium
                    Medium           Point         Concern        Target Organ
                                                                                 Ingestion   Inhalation    Dermal     Exposure Routes Total
 Surface Soil     Surface Soil    Surface Soil    Aroclor 1248      IMMUNO       5.52E+00                 8.81 E-01         6.40E+00
                                                                                  Surface Soil Hazard Index Total =         6.40E+00
                                                                                                Total IMMUNO HI =           6.40E+00


Scenario Timeframe:              Future
Receptor Population:             Site Worker (Onsite)
Receptor Age:                    Adult
                   Exposure        Exposure        Chemical of      Primary                         Non-Carcinogenic Risk
   Medium
                     Medium           Point           Concern     Target Organ   Ingestion   Inhalation   Dermal     Exposure Routes Total
 Surface Soil     Surface Soil    Surface Soil    Aroclor 1248      IMMUNO       2.65E+01                 2.45E+01          5.11 E+01
                                                                                  Surface Soil Hazard Index Total =         5.11 E+01
                                                                                                Total IMMUNO HI =           5.11 E+01




                                                                    44                                                        500876

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        Table 4

                             Risk Characterization Summary - Non-Carcinogens
Scenario Timeframe:                   Future
Receptor Population:                  Construction/Utility Worker
Receptor Age:                         Adult
                    Exposure            Exposure          Chemical of       Primary                            Non-Carcinogenic Risk
   Medium
                     Medium               Point             Concern       Target Organ     Ingestion    Inhalation   Dermal     Exposure Routes Total
                                         Surface/        Aroclor 1242       IMMUNO         3.37E+00                   1.41E+00            4.78E+00
   Surfac^e/          Surface/
                                        Subsurface
Subsurface Soil    Subsurface Soil                       Aroclor 1248       IMMUNO         8.71 E+01                  8.79E+02            9.66E+02
                                         Soil (SW
(SW quadrant)      (SW quadrant)
                                         quadrant)       Aroclor 1254       IMMUNO         4.43E-01                   4.48E+00            4.92E+00
                                                                                            Surface Soil Hazard Index Total =             9.76E+02
                                                                                                          Total IMMUNO HI =               9.76E+02*


*The Hazard Index Total represents the summed HQs for all chemicals of potential concern at the site, not just those chemicals requiring remedial
action which are shown here.


                                                  Summary of Risk Characterization - Non-Carcinogens

 The table presents hazard quotients (HQs) for each route of exposure and the hazard index (sum of hazard quotients) for all routes of exposure for the
 Chemicals of Concern. The Risk Assessment Guidance for Superfund states that, generally, a hazard index (HI) greater than 1 indicates the potential for
 adverse non-cancer effects.




                                                                             45
                                                                                                                                            500877

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                  Table 5

                            Risk Characterization Summary - Carcinogens
Scenario Timeframe:           Future
Receptor Population:          Site Worker (On-site)
Receptor Age:                 Adult
               Exposure       Exposure                                                             Carcinogenic Risk
  Medium                                    Chemical of Concern
                Medium           Point                                    Ingestion     Inhalation       Dermal      Exposure Routes Total
                Surface         Surface
                                                  Aroclor 1248            3.79E-04                       3.50E-04               7.30E-04*
                 Soil             Soil
                                                                                                        Total Risk =            7.78E-04*


Scenario Timeframe:           Future
Receptor Population:          Construction/Utility Worker
Receptor Age:                 Adult
               Exposure       Exposure                                                              Carcinogenic Risk
  Medium                                     Chemical of Concern
                Medium           Point                                    Ingestion      Inhalation       Dermal      Exposure Routes Total
                Surface/        Surface/
              Subsurface      Subsurface
                                                   Aroclor 1248           4.97E-05                       5.02E-04               5.52E-04*
                Soil (SW        Soil (SW
               quadrant)       quadrant)
                                                                                                   Total Risk =           5.64E-04*
*The Total Risk represents the summed risks for all chemicals of potential concern at the site, not just those chemicals requiring remedial
action which are shown here.
                                               Summary of Risk Characterization - Carcinogens
 The table presents cancer risks for each route of exposure and for all routes of exposure combined for the Chemicals of Concern. As stated in
 the National Contingency Plan, the acceptable risk range for site-related exposure is 10-6 to 10-4.




                                                                            46                                                              500878

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          Table 6 - Remediation Goals for COCs in Soil
                               NJDEP Soil Remediation          EPA Regional                                            Site-Specific Site
                                     standard                 Screening Levels        OSWER Guidance on             Background 95% UPL'*'
                                Non-Residential Direct                                Remedial Actions for
                                    Contact Soil                                      Superfund Sites with           Surface        Subsurface      Principal Threat Waste
       Contaminant              Remediation Standard              Industrial          PCB Contamination '^'           Soil             Soil            Requirements'''          Remediation Goals <""'>
 VOCs
 Benzene                                    5                         5.6                       N/A                     „            0.01 (ND)                N/A                            5
 Ethylbenzene                            110,000                      29                        N/A                                                           N/A                            29
 Toluene                                 91,000                     46.000                      N/A                                                           N/A                         46,000
 Xylenes (total)                         170,000                     2,600                      N/A                                                           N/A                         2.600
 PAHs
 Naphthalene                               17                         20                        N/A                   0.102              _                    N/A                            17
 Pesticldes/PCBs
 Aldrin                                    0.2                       0.1                        N/A                                                           N/A                            0.1
 Dieldrin                                  0.2                       0.11                       N/A                  0.00407        0.0061 (ND)               N/A                           0.11
 4,4'-DDD                                  13                         7.2                       N/A                  0.00446           0.0144                 N/A                            7.2
 4,4'-DDT                                   8                          7                        N/A                      _             0.0747                 N/A                             7
 Heptachlor                                0.7                       0.38                       N/A                                                           N/A                           0.38
                                                                                                                                                                                1 (use engineering control)
                                                                                                                                                                                10 (surface soil)
 Polychlorinatedbiphenyls                                                                                                                                                       500 (remove as Principal
 (PCBs)                                     1                        0.74               25 (subsurface soil)                                                  500                    Threat Waste)
 Metals
 Arsenic                                   19                         1.6                       N/A                   38.86              _                    N/A                          38.86
 Cadmium                                   78                         800                       N/A                    2.86            5.286                  N/A                           78
 Petroleum Free Product
                                                                                                                                                     Remove any petroleum free   Remove any petroleum free
                                                                                                                                                      product contaminated with   product contaminated with
                                                                                                                                                          PCBs and grossly            PCBs and grossly
                                             I-
                                                                                                                                                        contaminated soils with     contaminated soils with
 Petroleum free product                                                                                                                                 petroleum free product      petroleum free product
 containing PCBs                            N/A                         N/A                      N/A                      N/A             N/A          contaminated with PCBs      contaminated with PCBs
Notes:               All units in mg/kg              NA: non-applicable             ND: non-detect                  Numbers highlighted in yellow are selected as the remediation goals
     (1)
          Guidance on Remedial Actions for Superfund Sites with PCB Contamination (OSWER Directive No. 9355.4-01) provides guidance on selection of remediation goals and remedial actions for
          PCBs at a Superfund site.
     (2)
          UPL: Upper Prediction Level based on EPA statistical analysis of background data.
     (3)
          According to the EPA guidance - A Guide to Principal Threat and Low Level Threat Wastes (November 1991), Principal Threat Waste refers to those source area materials considered to be
          highly toxic or highly mobile that generally cannot be reliably contained or would present significant risk to human health or the environment should exposure occur.
     (4)
          All Principal Threat Waste will need to be removed for subsequent off-site treatment/disposal or onsite treatment. Contaminant concentrations above the remediation goals remaining onsite
          after remediation will require engineering/institutional control.
     (5)
          The selection of the remediation goals, with the exception of those for PCBs and free product, involves a two-step process: the remediation goals were selected such that they represent the
          more stringent criteria between the NJDEP NRDCSRS and the EPA Regional Screening Level (RSL) for industrial soil (2) the remediation goals would be the higher of the
          standards/screening levels and the site-specrfic background levels. For PCBs, the NJDEP NRDCSRS, OSWER Guidance on Remedial Actions for Superfund Sites with PCBs
          Contamination, and Principal Threat Waste requirements were used to establish the remediation goals.




                                                                                                      47                                                                              500879

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          Table 7
Comparison of Total Present Worth Costs for Alternatives 1 and 2

                                                                      Alternative 1 Total        Alternative 2 Total
I t e m Feature of W o r k                                            Present Worth Cost         Present Worth Cost


A      General Requirements
    0 1 General Conditions                                                        $813,171                    $990,480
    02 Permits                                                                     $69,875                     $87,344
    03 Safety and Health Requirements                                             $155,472                    $509,215
    04 Temporary Facilities and Utilities                                          $54,153                     $66,381
    05 Security                                                                   $123,155                    $159,839
    06 Surveying                                                                  $145,864                    $194,777
    07 Erosion Control                                                             $46,292                     $50,659
    08 Decontamination                                                             $36,684                     $42,798


B      Pre-Design                                                                                '
       Pre-Design Investigation and Analysis                                      $400,000                    $400,000
           allowance, based on past project experience.


C      Remedial Design
       Remedial Design                                                            $934,579                  $1,869,159
           allowance, based on past project experience.


D      Site Preparation
     9 Concrete Slab Demolition                                                   $595,685                    $595,685
    10 Perimeter Wellpoint Dewatering System                                      $303,083                    $303,083
    11 Onsite Water Treatment System                                              $280,374                    $646,345


E      Excavation, Sampling, and Backfill
    12 Excavation                                                                 $673,421                  $1,053,367
    13 Post-Excavation Sampling                                                   $130,142                    $130,142
    14 Backfill                                                                   $931,959                    $665,560


F      Low-Temperature Thermal Treatment                                                    $0             $10,131,889


G      Transportation and Disposal
    15 TSCA Waste for TSCA Landfill                                             $1,639,444                             $0
    16 Hazardous Waste Requiring Thermal Treatment                              $3,712,988                             SO
    17 Hazardous Waste Not Requiring Thermal Treatment (Subtitle C)             $3,278,889                             $0
    18 Non-Hazardous Waste (Subtitle D)                                         $1,446,415                  $1,446,415
    19 Product Oil Recovered f r o m Dewatering (TSCA waste)                      $161,586                    $161,586


H      Final Site Restoration
    20 Final Site Restoration (Allowance)                                          $43,672                     $43,672


1      Closure Documents
    2 1 RA Report and As-Built Drawings (Allowance)                                $87,344                     $87,344




                                                               48


                                                                                                           500880

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        Table 7
Comparison of Total Present Worth Costs for Alternatives 1 and 2

                                                                    Alternative 1 Total        Alternative 2 Total
i t e m Feature of W o r k                                          Present Worth Cost         Present Worth Cost
                                                                                               -
      PRE-DESIGN INVESTIGATION AND REMEDIAL DESIGN COSTS
      Pre-Design Investigation                                  '              $400,000                     $400,000
      Remedial Design                                                          $934,579                   $1,869,159
      Total A/E Firm Cost                                                     $1,335,000                  $2,270,000
      RA CONTRACTOR COSTS
      Prime Contractor Own Work                                               $3,637,870                  $4,322,547
      Subcontractors
          Security Subcontractor                                               $123,155                     $159,839
       . Surveying Subcontractor                                               $145,864                     $194,777
          Dewatering Subcontractor                                             $303,083                     $303,083
          Water Treatment Subcontractor                                        $280,374                     $646,345
          Treatment Subcontractor                                                         $0            $10,131,889
          T&D Subcontractor                                                 $10,239,322                   $1,608,001
      Subtotal RA Contractor Cost                                           $14,730,000                 $17,367,000
          G&A (5%)                                                             $737,000                     $869,000
      Subtotal RA Contractor Cost w i t h G/A                               $15,467,000                 $18,236,000
          Profit, except on T&D (8%)                                           $419,000                   $1,331,000
          Profit, T&D, reduced fee (2%)                                        $205,000                      $33,000
      Subtotal RA Contractor Cost w i t h Profit                            $16,091,000                 $19,600,000
          Bond (1.5%)                                                          $242,000                     $294,000
          Contingency (10%)                                                  $1,610,000                   $1,960,000
      TOTAL RA CONTRACTOR COST                                              $17,943,000                 $21,854,000
      ENGINEERING DURING CONSTRUCTION COSTS
          Supervision, Inspection, and Management/Title II (9.8%)            $1,758,414                   $2,141,692
      TOTAL ENGINEERING DURING CONSTRUCTION COSTS                            $1,759,000                   $2,142,000
      TOTAL PROJECT COST
          A/E COST                                                           $1,335,000                   $2,270,000
          RA CONTRACTOR COST                                                $17,943,000                 $21,854,000
          ENGINEERING DURING CONSTRUCTION COSTS                              $1,759,000                   $2,142,000
      SUBTOTAL PROJECT COST                                                 $21,037,000                 $26,266,000
          Escalation (2%)                                                      $421,000                     $526,000
      TOTAL PROJECT COST                                                    $21,458,000                 $26,792,000




                                                              49


                                                                                                          500881

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        APPENDIX


ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX




            50


                              500882

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

000000108386   1111-01-01     NJD064263817    2    SYNCON RESINS SUPERFUND SITE,                                       EPA, REGION 2                                           SYNCON
               00:00:00.0                          OPERABLE UNIT TWO, ADMINISTRATIVE                                                                                           RESINS
                                                   RECORD FILE UPDATE, INDEX OF
                                                   DOCUMENTS.
000000108528   1111-01-01     NJD064263817    1    SYNCON RESINS SUPERFUND SITE,                      NOT AVAILABLE,   EPA. REGION 2                                           SYNCON
               00:00:00.0                          OPERABLE UNIT TWO, ADMINISTRATIVE                  NOT AVAILABLE                                                            RESINS
                                                   RECORD FILE, INDEX OF DOCUMENTS.
000000108529   1999-10-01     NJD064263817   25    Report: Proposed Plan, Syncon Resins Superfund                      NJDEPTOF                                                SYNCON     500001   500025
               00:00:00.0                          Site, Town of Keamy. Hudson County, prepared                        ENVIRONMENTAL                                           RESINS
                                                   by New Jersey Department of Environmental                           PROTECTION
                                                   Protection. Site Remediation Program, Bureau of
                                                   Community...
000000058824   2000-09-27     NJD064263817   92    RECORD OF DECISION (ROD). SYNCON                                    EPA. REGION 2                                           SYNCON     500026   500117
               00:00:00.0                          RESINS-02. (9/27/00 COVER MEMO                                                                                              RESINS
                                                   AHACHED)
000000108384   2007-02-01     NJD064263817   188   Report: Draft Pre-Design Investigation (PDI)                        THE PMK GROUP. INC.;   EPA. REGION 2;STATE              SYNCON     500477   500664
               00:00:00.0                          Report, Appendices, Syncon Resins Superfund                         THE LOUIS BERGER       OF NEW JERSEY.                   RESINS
                                                   Site, Keamy, New Jersey, Remedial Design                            GROUP. INC.            DEPARTMENT OF
                                                   Services, Temi Contract No. A-54678, prepared                                              ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                   by The Louis Berger Group, Inc. and The PMK                                                PROTECTION
                                                   Group, Inc..
000000108383   2007-02-14     NJD064263817   102   Letter to Mr Craig Wallace, Site Manager, New      MCGONIGAL,       THE LOUIS BERGER       NEW JERSEY            WALLACE,   SYNCON     500375   500476
               00:00:00.0                          Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,     SEANT            GROUP. INC.            DEPARTMENT OF         CRAIG      RESINS
                                                   Division of Remediation Management and                                                     ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                   Response, Bureau of Design and Construction,                                               PROTECTION
                                                   from Mr. SeanT. McGonlgal, P.E., Project
                                                   Manager...
000000108530   2008-12-01     NJD064263817   117   Report: Data Investigation Summary, Syncon                          CDM FEDERAL            US ARMY CORPS OF                 SYNCON     500118   500234
               00:00:00.0                          Resins Superfund Site, Operable Unit 2, Keamy,                      PROGRAMS CORP          ENGINEERS-KANSAS                 RESINS
                                                   New Jersey, USACE Contract No. W912DQ-06-D-                                                CITY DISTRICT
                                                   0007, Tasl< Order No. 018, prepared by CDM
                                                   Federal Programs Corporation, prepared for U.S.
                                                   Army Corps...
000000108459   2009-08-05     NJD064263817   140    Report: Human Health Risl< Assessment, Syncon                                                                              SYNCON     500235   500374
               00:00:00.0                           Resins, Keamy, New Jersey, August 5, 2009.                                                                                 RESINS
000000108385   2010-08-01     NJD064263817    13     Report: Superfund Program Proposed Plan, U.S.                     EPA, REGION 2                                           • SYNCON   500665   500677
               00:00:00.0 .                        . Environmental Protection Agency, Region II,                                                                                 RESINS
                                                     Syncon Resins Superfund Site, prepared by U.S.
                                                     Environmental Protection Agency, Region 2,
                                                     August 2010.
000000108387   2010-08-01     NJD064263817   149    Report: U.S. Amiy Corps of Engineers, Kansas                       CDM FEDERAL ,          US ARMY CORPS OF                 SYNCON     500678   500826
               00:00:00.0                           City District, Final Focused Feasibility Study                     PROGRAMS CORP          ENGINEERS - KANSAS               RESINS
                                                    Report. Syncon Resins Superfund Site. Operable                                            CITY DISTRICT
                                                    Unit 2. Keamy, New Jersey, USACE Contract No.
                                                    W912DQ-08-D-0008, Task Order No. 017,.,




                                                                                                          51
                                                                                                                                                                                  500883

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          APPENDIX IV

                  RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY



The Proposed Plan and supporting documentation for 0U2 was
released to the public for comment on August 9, 2010. These
documents were made available to the public at the EPA
Administrative Record File Room, 290 Broadway, 18^"^ Floor, New
York, New.York; and the Kearny Main Public Library, Kearny, New
Jersey.

On August 9, 2010, EPA issued a notice in the Jersey Journal
local newspaper which contained information relevant to the
public comment period for the Site, including the duration of
the comment period, the date of the public meeting and
availability of the administrative record. Information
regarding the public meeting was posted on EPA's webpage. The
•public comment period began on August 9, 2008 and ended on
September 8, 2008.

EPA held a public meeting on August 19, 2010 to explain EPA's
preferred soil remedy. The purpose of this meeting was to
inform local officials and interested citizens about the
Superfund process, to discuss the Proposed Plan and receive
comments on.the Proposed Plan, and to respond to questions from
area residents and other interested parties. However, except
for a visit by a Township official, no one from the public
attended the meeting.




                               52


                                                          500884

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       APPENDIX V

STATE CONCURRENCE LETTER




           53




                           500885

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  ^ t a t c of Jfefo 3|era^g
                                    DEPARIMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
CHRIS CHRISTIE                                                                                                        BOB MARTIN
  Governor                                                                                                             Commissioner

KIM GUADAGNO
 U. Governor


           Mr. Waller Mugdan, Director
           Emergency and Remedial Response Division
           U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
           Region II
           290 Broadway
           New York, NY 10007-1866

           Re:       Syncon Resins Superfiind site
                     Record of Decision Amendment


           Dear Mr. Mugdan:

           The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) completed its review of
           ttie "Record of Decision Amendment ~ Operable Unit 2, Syncon Resins Superfund Site,
           Keamy, Hud.son County, New Jersey" prepared by the U.S. Environmental Protection
           Agency (EPA) Region 11 in September 2010 and concurs with the selected remedy to
           modify the September 27, 2000 Record of Decision (ROD) to address contaminated soils.

           The major components of the amended 0U2 remedy that the Department concurs with
           include:

                 •   Excavation of soils exceeding PRGs to a depth of approximately 12.5 feet;

                 •   Off-site treatment and/or disposal of excavated soils;

                 •   Backfilling with recovered existing gravel from completed excavation areas to the
                     bottom portion of the subsurface excavation;

                 •   Backfilling of excavated areas with imported clean fill; and,

                 •   Implementation of institutional/engineering controls.

           The amended remedy will: reduce or eliminate the direct contact risks associated with
           contaminated soil to levels protective of a commercial/industrial use; improve the
           effectiveness of the existing Operable Unit I remedy operated and maintained by DEP;
           remove or treat continuing sources of contamination (i.e., principal threat waste) when



                           New Jersey Is an Equal Opportunity Employer • Printed on Rec)'cled Paper and Recyclable   500886

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

technically feasible or practicable; address potential future exposure through inhalation of
vapors that may migrate from contaminated soils; and, provide for restricted reuse of the
site.


DEP appreciates the opportunity to participate in the decision making process to select an
appropriate remedy and is looking forward to future cooperation with EPA in further
remedial work at this site.

If you have any questions, please call me at 609-984-3074.

                                      Sincerely,




                                      Edward Putnam, Assistant Director
                                      Publicly Funded Remediation Element
                                      Site Remediation Program



C: Dave Sweeney, Assistant Commissioner, Site Remediation Program, DEP
   Carole Petersen, Chief, New Jersey Remediation Branch, EPA Region II




                                                                                       500887
