LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: Declaration for the Record of Decision (for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation site)
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/109381
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: ecffb1ffad158ddfd23d82da2ae201b34c20ea35f96382cbd09330b61d68a1fe
Source PDF pages: 90
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

             DECLARATION FOR THE RECORD OF DECISION
                                                          SDMS Document

SITE NAME AND LOCATION
                                                             109381
Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation
City of Beverly, Burlington County, New Jersey

STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE
This decision document presents the selected remedial action for
the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation site, which was chosen
in accordance with the reguirements of the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, as
amended, and to the extent practicable, the National Oil and
Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan. This decision
document is based on the administrative record file for this
site.
The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy
concurs with the selected remedy.

ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE
Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from the
Cosden site, if not addressed by implementing the response action
selected in this Record of Decision, may present an imminent and
substantial threat to public health, welfare, or the environment.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY
The selected remedy represents the first and only planned
operable unit for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation site.
It addresses contaminated soils and the building on the site and
ground-water contamination in the underlying aquifer.
The major components of the selected remedy include the
following:
     •    In-situ stabilization of approximately 8,000 cubic
          yards of soil contaminated with inorganic compounds and
          polychlorinated biphenyls;
     •    Decontamination and demolition of the building on the
          site with disposal of the building debris at an
          appropriate off-site facility;

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       •    Extraction of contaminated ground water with on-site
            treatment and recharge to the underlying aquifer; and
       •    Appropriate environmental monitoring to ensure the
            effectiveness of the remedy.

  DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS
  The selected remedy is protective of human health and the
  environment, complies with Federal and state requirements that
  are legally applicable or relevant and appropriate to the
  remedial action, and is cost-effective. The remedy utilizes
  permanent solutions and alternative treatment (or resource
  recovery) technologies to the maximum extent practicable, and it
  satisfies the statutory preference for remedies that employ
  treatment which reduces toxicity, mobility or volume as their
  principal element.
  Because this remedy will result in hazardous substances remaining
  on the site above health-based levels (although in a stabilized
  form), a review will be conducted within five years after
  commencement of the remedial action to ensure that the remedy
  continues to provide adequate protection of human health and the
  environment.




^tlohstantine Sidamon-Erist
  Regional Administrator

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

             RECORD OF DECISION
              DECISION SUMMARY


  Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Site

City of Beverly, Burlington County, New Jersey




United States Environmental Protection Agency
                  Region II
             New York, New York

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  1
                        TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                  PAGE
SITE NAME, LOCATION, AND DESCRIPTION               2
SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES            2
HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION              3
SCOPE AND ROLE OF RESPONSE ACTION                  4
SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS                    4
SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS                              6
DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES                11
SUMMARY OF COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES    17
SELECTED REMEDY                                    24
STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS                           26
DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES               29


ATTACHMENTS
APPENDIX I.   FIGURES
APPENDIX II.  TABLES
APPENDIX III. ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX
APPENDIX IV.  STATE LETTER OF CONCURRENCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  1
                        TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                  PAGE
SITE NAME, LOCATION, AND DESCRIPTION               2
SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES            2
HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION              3
SCOPE AND ROLE OF RESPONSE ACTION                  4
SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS                    4
SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS                              6
DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES                11
SUMMARY OF COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES   ' 17
SELECTED REMEDY                                     24
STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS                            26
DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES                29


ATTACHMENTS
APPENDIX I.   FIGURES
APPENDIX II.  TABLES
APPENDIX III. ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX
APPENDIX IV.  STATE LETTER OF CONCURRENCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE NAME, LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION
The Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Superfund Site (the
Site) is located in the southeastern corner of the City of
Beverly in Burlington County, New Jersey. The Site is at the
intersection of Manor Road and Cherry Street within a residential
area of Beverly. It is bounded on the north and east by
residential streets, on the south by Conrail tracks and farmland,
and on the west by undeveloped land. The nearest residence is
approximately 300 feet to the north of the Site. The Beverly
Elementary School is located 0.2 miles to the northeast. The
neighboring area is suburban with some light industry. The
Delaware River is approximately 4,000 feet to the north, and
Rancocas Creek approximately 1.5 miles to the southwest of the
Site. Population within a one-mile radius of the Site is
approximately 800 people.

The Site encompasses 6.7 acres and consists of a single process
building that is situated in the eastern part of the property; a
concrete platform that was used as a drum staging area is west of
the process building (see Figure 1). The western two-thirds of
the property is undeveloped and heavily vegetated.

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES
Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation was a paint formulation and
manufacturing facility which produced coatings for industrial
applications. In the manufacturing process, pigments were mixed
with resins and solvents in both ball and sand mills. The
material was then placed into a mixing tank where other
ingredients were added to produce the final coating products.
Mixing tanks were then washed out with solvents, and the rinsate
was transferred to drums. Organic solvents used in the
manufacturing process were recycled until 1974. After 1974,
drums containing spent solvents were stored on site; some of
these drums leaked onto the ground and caused soil and ground-
water contamination. Solvents were also stored in underground
storage tanks, which may have leaked.

A grass fire that occurred at the Site on April 22, 1980 prompted
the Burlington County Department of Public Safety to report the
Site conditions to the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection and Energy (NJDEPE). Subsequent site visits by the
NJDEPE revealed the presence of surface spills, and several
hundred unsecured drums. Various court actions and negotiations
undertaken by NJDEPE against Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation
resulted in a judicial consent order on February 5, 1985 that
ordered Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation to clean up the
Site. Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation initiated the cleanup
in February 1985, but abandoned cleanup efforts after 88 of 695
drums were removed. In January 1986, the NJDEPE then undertook

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

an emergency removal of the drummed material, and cleanup of
surface spills around the drum storage areas.
The Site was placed on the National Priorities List (NPL) in July
1987. On December 17, 1987, the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) issued a Special Notice Letter to Mr. Louis Oiler,
President, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation, informing him of
his potential liability under CERCLA, and provided him the
opportunity to undertake or finance the Remedial Investigation
(RI) and Feasibility Study (FS). No response was received. On
July 29, 1992, EPA issued General Notice Letters to the Cosden
Chemical Coatings Corporation and to Mr. Louis Oiler, President,
Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation, informing them of their
potential liability, providing them the opportunity to comment on
the Proposed Plan for the Site, and encouraging them to either
finance or voluntarily undertake the remediation at the Site. No
response was received by EPA.
Paint manufacturing continued on a small scale until May 1989,
during which time additional drums accumulated on site. The
plant owner ceased operations in May 1989. In June 1989, EPA
initiated emergency cleanup activities at the Site by
constructing a fence around areas of soil contamination; and
began removing the remaining drums, paint cans, pigment bags,
mixing tanks, and underground storage tank contents. On May 28,
1990, as the removal action was nearly completed, a fire occurred
inside the process building which consumed a majority of the
building. On May 31, 1990, the biailding was condemned by the
Beverly City building inspector.
Ebasco Services Incorporated was tasked by EPA to initiate an RI
and FS. The purpose of the RI was to define the nature and
extent of contamination at the Site. The FS evaluates
technologies to clean up the contamination identified at the
Site. Field activities for Phase I of the RI began in November
1988.

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Public availability sessions were conducted on November 11, 1988,
August 31, 1989, and February 20, 1991 to keep residents informed
of Site activities and progress. The results of the Phase I
field investigation and the scope of the Phase II field
investigation were presented in the public availability session
held on February 20, 1991. In January 1991, the Phase II field
investigation was initiated. The RI, FS and Risk Assessment
reports were completed in June 1992.
The RI report, FS report, and the Proposed Plan for the Site were
released to the public for comment on July 27, 1992. These
documents were made available to the public in the administrative

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

record file at the EPA Docket Room in Region II, 26 Federal
Plaza, New York, NY and the information repositories at:
    Beverly City Hall               Burlington County Library
    Municipal Building              Woodlane Road
    Broad Street                    Mt. Holly, NJ 08060
    Beverly, NJ 08010
    (609) 387-0205
The notice of availability for the above-referenced documents was
published in the Burlington County Times on July 27, 1992. The
public comment period on these documents was held from July 27,
1992 to August 26, 1992.
On August 6, 1992, EPA conducted a public meeting at the Beverly
City Hall to inform local officials and interested citizens about
the Superfund process, to discuss the findings of the RI and FS
and the proposed remedial activities at the Site, and to respond
to any questions from area residents and other attendees.
EPA responses to the comments received at the public meeting and
in writing during the public comment period are included in the
Responsiveness Summary section of this Record of Decision.

SCOPE AND ROLE OF RESPONSE ACTION
As a result of the complex distribution of contaminants
throughout the site, EPA decided to address the Site by
segregating the three types of contaminated media (soils, ground
water, and the Cosden building). The three categories of
contaminated media are evaluated individually with regard to the
risk posed to human health and the environment, the potential for
contaminant migration, and the development of remedial
alternatives. Therefore, this Record of Decision (ROD) includes
remedial alternatives to address the soils, ground water, and the
Cosden building.

SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS
An RI was performed to determine the type and concentrations of
contaminants in the various media at the Site, and in the nearby
vicinity. Samples were collected from soils, ground water, and
in the building. Details of the sampling efforts may be found in
the RI report. The collected samples were analyzed using the EPA
Contract Laboratory Program (CLP) procedures.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

site Geology and Hydrology
The Site is located in the Atlantic Coastal Plain physiographic
province of southern New Jersey. Unconsolidated sediments in the
shallow subsurface soil at the Site are alluvial deposits
consisting mainly of sand and gravel with minor amounts of clay.
It is difficult to distinguish these sediments from the lithology
of the underlying Raritan and Magothy formations; thus, these
units are typically combined when discussing Coastal Plain
Stratigraphy.
The most productive aquifers in the Beverly area, and a
significant source of municipal water, are part of the Potomac-
Raritan-Magothy (PRM) aquifer system. This system is composed of
three sandy aquifers (designated lower, middle, and upper) which
are separated by intervening confining units composed of silt and
clay. The middle aquifer exists beneath the Site. All but one
of the monitoring wells installed at the site were completed in
the middle aquifer; one well was extended to bedrock to confirm
the absence of the lower PRM aquifer in the Site area. An EPA
well survey conducted in May 1991 found no private wells used for
drinking water in the vicinity of the Site.
Water-level measurements taken from monitoring wells at the Site
indicate that there is a low hydraulic gradient at the site and
that it is not possible to clearly identify a predominant ground-
water flow direction. However, regional ground-water flow is
towards pumping centers in the southeast. The water table is
located approximately twenty feet beneath the ground surface.
Elevations of the water table across the Site generally vary
within one tenth of a foot.
There is no defined surface drainage at the Site. The major
surface water feature in the area is the Delaware River,
approximately 4,000 feet north of the Site. The 100-year flood
of the Delaware River is expected to occur no closer than 3000
feet north of the Site. The closest distance that the 500-year
flood is expected to occur is approximately 1900 feet to the
north.
Nature and Extent of Contamination
Volatile organic compounds (VOCs), polynuclear aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs), polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), inorganics
(metals), and asbestos were the primary contaminants detected at
the Site. The RI identified contaminants in the soil, ground
water, and in the building located on site (See Table 1).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Soil
The predominant soil contaminants and respective ranges of
concentration detected, in parts per million (ppm), are: VOCs -
toluene (not detected (ND) - 1,600), ethylbenzene (ND - 1,600),
trichloroethylene (ND - 1.6), and xylene (ND - 7,900); PAHs - (ND
- 3), phthalate esters (ND - 17); PCBs - (ND - 120); and metals -
chromium (6 - 36,100), cadmium (1.1 - 2.6), lead (3.7 - 6580),
and beryllium (0.2 - 0.6). Metals contamination accounts for
approximately 8,000 cubic yards (yd^) of the contaminated soil;
of this amount, approximately 350 yd' are also contaminated with
PCBs greater than 1 ppm (See Figure 2). Soil contamination, for
the most part, is limited to the top four feet of soil. The
manufacturing processes at the Site involved the mixing of
pigments with resins and solvents to make paints and industrial
coatings. A history of poor waste handling practices and the
presence of leaking drums contributed to the soil contamination
at the Site.
Ground water
The predominant ground-water contaminants and respective ranges
of concentration detected, in parts per billion (ppb), are: VOCs
- toluene (ND - 1,800), ethylbenzene (ND - 590), and xylenes (ND
- 1,340), trichloroethene (ND - 84); and metals - beryllium (ND -
3.4), and chromium (ND - 388). The estimated dimensions of the
contaminated ground-water plume are: 200 feet wide by 100 feet
long by 60 feet deep (See Figure 3). The contaminated aquifer at
the site is the middle PRM aquifer. The ground-water plume is
situated beneath the main area of the Site, and is the result of
contamination that has migrated through the soil to the ground
water.
Building
The predominant building contaminants are: metals - copper, lead,
chromium, and zinc; PCBs; and asbestos. Additionally, the
building has been condemned because of structural failure, and is
an imminent hazard to personnel involved in on-site activities.

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS
Based upon the results of the RI, a baseline risk assessment was
conducted to estimate the risks associated with current and
future site conditions. The baseline risk assessment estimates
the human health and environmental risk which could result from
the contamination at the Site if no remedial action were taken.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Human Health Risk Assessment
A four-step process is utilized for assessing site-related human
health risks for a reasonable maximum exposure scenario: Hazard
Identification—contaminants of concern at the Site are
identified based on several factors such as toxicity, frequency
of occurrence, and concentration (Table 2). Exposure Assessment-
-estimates the magnitude of actual and/or potential human
exposures, the frequency and duration of these exposures, and the
pathways (e.g., ingesting contaminated well water) by which
humans are potentially exposed (Table 3). T o x i c i t y A s s e s s m e n t —
determines the types of adverse health effects associated with
chemical exposures, and the relationship between magnitude of
exposure (dose) and severity of adverse effects (response)
(Table 4). Risk Characterization—summarizes and combines
outputs of the exposure and toxicity assessments to provide a
quantitative (e.g., one-in-one-million excess cancer risk)
assessment of site-related risks. The reasonable maximum
exposure was evaluated (Table 5).

EPA uses reference doses (RfDs) to calculate noncarcinogenic risk
and slope factors to calculate the carcinogenic risk attributable
to a particular contaminant. An RfD is an estimate of a daily
exposure level that is not likely to result in any appreciable
risk of deleterious effects during a person's lifetime. A slope
factor establishes the relationship between the dose of a
chemical and the response and is commonly expressed as a
probability of a response per unit intake of a chemical over a
lifetime. Although EPA has established RfDs and slope factors
for many chemicals, there are chemicals that currently do not
have RfDs, slope factors, or similarly accepted toxicological
parameters. Consequently, the risk due to such contaminants
cannot be quantified. This is of particular significance at the
Site since lead, a major contaminant of concern, does not have an
RfD or slope factor. Therefore, lead was qualitatively evaluated
independent of the other contaminants of concern.
The Baseline Risk Assessment identified contaminants of concern
which would be representative of site risks. These contaminants
included: methylene chloride, tetrachlorethane, trichloroethene,
acetone, benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene, xylenes, arsenic,
beryllium, cadmium, chromium, carcinogenic PAHs, pesticides,
asbestos, and PCBs. Several of the contaminants, including
arsenic, beryllium, methylene chloride, PCBs, and PAHs, are known
to be, or are, probable human carcinogens.
The Baseline Risk Assessment evaluated site-specific exposure
scenarios that represent situations in which humans may be
exposed to contaminants originating from the Site under present
and future land use patterns. Under current conditions, the
exposure pathways of concern are trespassers' exposure to surface
soil both inside and outside the fenced area, and exposures of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                8
nearby residents and other receptors to volatile organic
contaminants released into the air from the Site surface and
subsurface soil. Under a potential residential development
scenario, the key routes of exposure which were identified are
on-site residential exposures to surface soils and volatilized
contaminants in air, and exposures through the consumption of
water from wells installed in the unconsolidated aquifer which
lies beneath the Site. In addition, it was assumed that future
workers at the Site could be exposed to subsurface soil during
excavation or grading activities. Current federal guidelines for
acceptable exposure are an excess carcinogenic risk in the range
of 10"* to 10"* (approximately one in ten thousand to one in one
million).
Lifetime cancer risks were calculated for all of the various
pathways under the present and future land-use scenarios. Under
current conditions, the highest risks were those associated with
dermal contact and ingestion of Site soils. Estimated cancer
risks for soil ingestion and dermal contact under the present use
scenario were 2.1 x 10"* for children, and 1.9 x 10"* for adults,
which are well within the guidelines for acceptable exposure.
These risk numbers mean that two additional children out of one
million and two additional adults out of one million are at risk
of developing cancer if the soils outside the fenced area are
ingested. Under a potential future residential development
scenario, which is considered the most conservative exposure
scenario, the estimated risks due to dermal contact and ingestion
of Site soils is 2.7 x 10'* (2.7 in a hundred thousand) for
adults, and 3.1 x 10"' for children, which are also within the
guidelines for acceptable exposure. However, lead, which is not
included in the quantitative risk assessment because of technical
infeasibility, has been found at concentrations above EPA health-
based guidance levels.
Under future land use scenarios, the highest risks were those
associated with ingestion of ground water. Estimated cancer
risks for ingestion of ground water were 2.8 x 10"* (2.8 in ten
thousand) for adults, and 9.0 x 10'* for children. In addition,
the concentrations of the following contaminants were found above
promulgated Federal and/or State Maximum Contaminant Levels
(MCLs): toluene, xylene, trichloroethene, chromium, and lead.
To assess the overall potential for noncarcinogenic effects
posed, EPA developed the Hazard Index (HI). This index measures
the assumed simultaneous subthreshold exposures to chemicals,
which could result in an adverse health effect. Current federal
guidelines for acceptable exposures are a maximum health HI equal
to 1.0. The results indicated that, in the present and future
use scenarios, direct contact and ingestion of contaminated soil
do not pose an unacceptable risk to human health. The His are
estimated to be 0.054 for children, and 0.015 for adults in the

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               9
present use scenario; and 0.52 and 0.11, respectively, in the
future use scenario. However, ingestion of contaminated ground
water in the future use scenario does pose an elevated risk to
human health. The His were estimated to be 1.6 for children, and
1.1 for adults.
Lead, which was previously identified as not having an RfD or
slope factor, is present in the soil at a maximum concentration
of 6580 ppm, and on and in the building at percentage levels
(greater than 10,000 ppm). Exposure to lead has been associated
with human noncarcinogenic effects. The major adverse effects in
humans caused by lead include alterations in red blood cell
production and the nervous system. High concentrations in the
blood can cause severe irreversible brain damage and possible
death. EPA has also classified lead as a B2 carcinogen, which
indicates that it is considered a probable human carcinogen.
EPA has developed health based cleanup levels for lead in soil
based on a model that predicts blood lead levels in the most
sensitive populations (children) from exposure to lead
contaminated air, dust, drinking water, soil, and diet. EPA
guidance recommends using a soil cleanup level of 500-1000 ppm
until RfDs and slope factors are established. Considering the
potential future residential development of the Site, the lower
end of EPA's recommended soil cleanup range (500 ppm) is being
applied at the Site.
EPA has also developed health based cleanup levels for PCBs in
soil. The recommended soil action level for sites in residential
areas with PCB contamination is 1 ppm.
MCLs have been exceeded in ground water underlying the Site. The
ground water is being contaminated with metals and volatile
organic chemicals from soils on the Site.
With regard to the on-site building, conventional Superfund risk
assessment methodology is not directly applicable. The
predominant contaminant in the building is lead and, as
previously identified, lead does not have an RfD. Additionally,
the EPA lead model used to develop acceptable levels in soils
would not be applicable to the short-term exposure scenario for
the building. Therefore, the levels of lead on the building
surfaces were compared to the maximum lead levels for interior
surfaces as defined by the Federal Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD). The HUD standard is 2.1 milligrams per
square meter (mg/m^) . Wipe samples in the building measured from
140 to 450 mg/m^. These levels represent an unacceptable short-
term exposure risk (trespasser scenario); therefore, remediation
is warranted to reduce the risk associated with exposure to the
lead contaminated building surfaces.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                10
Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from the
Site, if not addressed by the preferred alternative, or one of
the other active measures considered, may present a current or
potential threat to public health, welfare, or the environment.
Environmental Risk Assessment
The environmental evaluation provides a qualitative assessment of
the actual or potential impacts associated with the Site on
plants and animals (other than people or domesticated species).
The primary objectives of this assessment are to identify the
ecosystems, habitats, and populations likely to be found at the
Site and to characterize the contaminants, exposure routes and
potential impacts on the identified environmental components.
There were no endangered species, sensitive ecosystems, or
sensitive habitats identified on the Site. The environmental
assessment concluded that adverse impacts to on-site plants and
animals from on-site contamination is not likely.
Uncertainties
The procedures and inputs used to assess risks in this
evaluation, as in all such assessments, are subject to a wide
variety of uncertainties. In general, the main sources of
uncertainty include:
- environmental chemistry sampling and analysis
- environmental parameter measurement
- fate and transport modeling
- exposure parameter estimation
- toxicological data.
Uncertainty in environmental sampling arises in part from the
potentially uneven distribution of chemicals in the media
sampled. Consequently, there is significant uncertainty as to
the actual levels present. Environmental chemistry-analysis
error can stem from several sources including the errors inherent
in the analytical methods and characteristics of the matrix being
sampled.
Uncertainties in the exposure assessment are related to estimates
of how often an individual would actually come in contact with
the chemicals of concern, the period of time over which such
exposure would occur, and in the models used to estimate the
concentrations of the chemicals of concern at the point of
exposure.
Uncertainties in toxicological data occur in extrapolating both
from animals to humans and from high to low doses of exposure, as
well as from the difficulties in assessing the toxicity of a
mixture of chemicals. These uncertainties are addressed by

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               11
making conservative assumptions concerning risk and exposure
parameters throughout the assessment. As a result, the Risk
Assessment provides upper-bound estimates of the risks to
populations near the Site, and is highly unlikely to
underestimate actual risks related to the Site.
More specific information concerning public health risks,
including a quantitative evaluation of the degree of risk
associated with various exposure pathways, is presented in the
Risk Assessment Report.

REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES
Remedial action objectives are specific goals to protect human
health and the environment. These objectives are based on
available information, applicable or relevant and appropriate
requirements (ARARs), and risk-based levels established in the
risk assessment. The following remedial action objectives were
established for the Site:
     •    Prevent exposure to contaminant sources that present a
          significant human health risk and;
     •    Restore contaminated ground water to drinking water
          standards.

DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES
The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act, as amended (CERCLA) requires that each selected
site remedy be protective of human health and the environment, be
cost effective, comply with other statutory laws, and utilize
permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies and
resource recovery alternatives to the maximum extent practicable.
In addition, the statute includes a preference for the use of
treatment as a principal element for the reduction of toxicity,
mobility, or volume of the hazardous substances.
Fifteen remedial alternatives for addressing the contamination
associated with the Site were evaluated in detail in the FS.
These included for soils: thermal desorption, in-situ vacuum
extraction, capping, incineration, and stabilization; and for
ground water: air stripping, carbon absorption, and ultraviolet
treatment. The Risk Assessment, which was prepared concurrently
with the FS, showed that VOC contamination in the soils on the
Site does not pose an unacceptable risk to human health or the
environment. Accordingly, the remedial alternatives brought
forward from the FS for evaluation in the Proposed Plan and this
Record of Decision do not include the specific treatment of VOCs

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  12
in the on-site soils, which include: thermal desorption, in-situ
vacuum extraction, and incineration.
The estimated capital cost, operation and maintenance (O&M) cost,
and net present worth costs of each of the alternatives are
provided below for comparison purposes. It should be noted that
the noted times for implementation reflect only the time required
for actual construction and does not include the time necessary
to design the remedy, negotiate with responsible parties, or
procure contracts for design and construction.
The alternatives that remain after screening are:
                   SOIL REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES
The soil remedial alternatives discussed below were developed to
address metals and PCB contamination. The volatile organic
contaminants in the soil are not above the EPA risk based
remediation goals for direct contact or ingestion. Accordingly,
the soil remedial alternatives have been developed to effectively
reduce the potential ingestion and dermal contact risks
associated with metals and PCBs.
Alternative s-i: No Action
     Estimated Capital Cost: $0
     Estimated 5 Year Review Cost: $20,000 per review
     Estimated Present Worth: $55,600 (includes six 5 yr reviews)
     Estimated Construction Time: none
CERCLA and the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution
Contingency Plan (NCP) require the evaluation of a No Action
alternative to serve as a point of comparison with other remedial
action alternatives. The No Action alternative for the on-site
soils would allow the Site to remain in its present condition.
Because this alternative would result in contaminants remaining
on site, CERCLA requires that the Site be reviewed at least every
five years. If justified by the review, remedial actions may be
implemented to remove or treat the wastes. No other action is
proposed under this alternative.
Alternative S-2: Limited Action
     Estimated Capital Cost: $0
     Estimated Annual Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Cost: $0
     Estimated 5 Year Review Cost: $20,000 per review
     Estimated Present Worth: $55,600 (includes six 5 yr reviews)
     Estimated Construction Time: none
The Limited Action alternative would allow the site to remain in
its present condition, but would require that the perimeter fence
be maintained and deed restrictions imposed to restrict access.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               13
Because this alternative would result in contaminants remaining
on site, CERCLA requires that the Site be reviewed at least every
five years.
Alternative S-3: Capping
     Estimated Capital Cost: $599,400
     Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $121,000
     Estimated 5 Year Review Cost: $20,000 per review
     Estimated Present Worth: $2,515,100 (includes six 5 yr
     reviews)
     Estimated Construction Time: six months
In this alternative, approximately 135 yd' of contaminated soil
outside the main area of contamination would be excavated and
moved to the main contaminated area. Following consolidation, an
area of approximately 51,000 square feet area would be graded and
capped with an asphalt cap. This alternative would require deed
restrictions to protect the capped area. Because this
alternative would result in contaminants remaining on site,
CERCLA requires that the Site be reviewed at least every five
years. Additional monitoring wells would be installed and
sampled to ensure the effectiveness of the remedial action.
Alternative s-4: Excavation, Off-Site Stabilization and Disposal,
and Backfill
     Estimated Capital Cost: $7,187,850
     Estimated Annual O&M: $0
     Estimated Present Worth: $7,187,850
     Estimated Construction Time: six months
This alternative would require that a total of approximately
8,000 yd' of soil be excavated and treated off site. Soil
excavation would be limited to approximately a 51,000 square foot
area. The soils, which are contaminated with PCBs, and metals,
would be excavated and transported off site to a permitted
stabilization facility. Clean soil would be used to backfill the
excavated area.
Alternative S-5: Excavation, On-site Stabilization, and On-site
Backfill
     Estimated Capital Cost: $2,098,950
     Estimated 5 Year Review Cost: $20,000 per review
     Estimated annual O&M Cost: $106,600
     Estimated Present Worth: $3,793,250 (includes six 5 yr
     reviews)
     Estimated Construction Time: one year
The soil contaminated with PCBs and metals (approximately 8,000

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               14
yd') would be stabilized using solidification on site. The
contaminated soil would be excavated and loaded into a batch
plant and mixed with reagents such as portland cement, fly ash,
or silicate. The solidified material would be deposited back on
the Site. Additionally, a small pile of concentrated PCB
contaminated soil would be disposed of off site. Deed
restrictions would be imposed to ensure that the stabilized
material is not disturbed. Additional monitoring wells would be
installed and sampled to ensure the effectiveness of the remedial
action.
Alternative S-6: In-Situ Stabilization
     Estimated Capital Cost: $1,573,700
     Estimated 5 Year Review Cost: $20,000 per review
     Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $106,600
     Estimated Present Worth: $3,268,000 (includes six 5 yr
     reviews
     Estimated Construction Time: one year
The soil contaminated with PCBs and metals (approximately
8,000 yd') would be stabilized using ih-situ solidification. This
system incorporates mechanical mixing of the contaminated soil
and injection of reagents into the soil to immobilize both PCBs
and inorganic contaminants. The stabilizing additives create a
cement-like mass that would cure in place. Additionally, a small
pile of concentrated PCB contaminated soil would be disposed of
off site. Deed restrictions would be imposed to ensure that the
stabilized material is not disturbed. Additional monitoring
wells would be installed and sampled to ensure the effectiveness
of the remedial action.


               GROUND WATER REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES
Alternative GW-l: No Action
     Estimated Capital Cost: $0
     Estimated 5 Year Review Cost: $ 20,000 per review
     Estimated Present Worth: $55,600 (includes six 5 yr reviews)
     Estimated Construction Time: none
As stated under Alternative S-1, the NCP and CERCLA require the
evaluation of a No Action alternative to serve as a point of
comparison with other remedial action alternatives. Under the No
Action alternative, contaminated ground water would remain on
site. Because this alternative would result in contaminants
remaining on site, CERCLA requires that the Site be reviewed at
least every five years. If justified by the review, remedial
actions may be implemented to remove or treat the wastes. No
other action is proposed under this alternative.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               15
Alternative 6W-2: Limited Action
     Estimated Capital Cost: $ 231,400
     Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $ 90,000
     Estimated 5 Year Review Cost: $ 20,000
     Estimated Present Worth: $ 1,670,500 (includes six 5 yr
     reviews)
     Estimated Construction Time: six months
The Limited Action alternative for the contaminated ground water
underlying the Site would include a long-term monitoring program
and an institutional control program to regulate the use of the
aquifer. The monitoring program would include the installation
and sampling of additional monitoring wells.
Alternative GW-3: On-site Ground-Water Extraction and Treatment,
and Recharge to the Aquifer
This alternative would provide for on-site extraction and
treatment of contaminated ground water at the Site. The ground
water would be extracted, treated, and recharged to the aquifer.
Available ground-water treatment technologies are presented as
options.
     Option 1: Precipitation, Air Stripping, and Reinjection.
          Estimated Capital Cost: $1,438,000
          Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $478,900
          Estimated Present Worth: $8,799,900
          Estimated Construction Time: six months
     This option would consist of a treatment system which begins
     with precipitation of inorganic contaminants, such as
     metals. After removal of inorganics, the treated stream
     would be fed into an air stripping unit designed to remove
     volatile organic compounds. It is anticipated that, for
     organics, treatment would need to continue until the
     volatile organic contaminants in the soil no longer
     represent a source of ground-water contamination. However,
     it is expected that the precipitation treatment would
     continue, after the organics are removed, due to the
     difficulty expected in removing the metals contamination
     from the ground water. Organics in the air stream may
     require that the air stream be passed through a carbon
     absorption unit before emission to the atmosphere. This
     would be determined during design. The sludge resulting
     from the inorganics precipitation and the organics captured
     in the activated carbon would be disposed of off site.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               16
    Option 2: Precipitation, Activated Carbon Treatment, and
    Reinjection
         Estimated Capital Cost: $1,522,800
         Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $494,200
         Estimated Present Worth: $9,119,600
         Estimated Construction Time: six months
    This option would consist of a treatment system which begins
    with precipitation of inorganics such as metals. The
    treated stream would then be fed into a liquid phase carbon
    absorption system designed to remove volatile organic
    compounds. The sludge resulting from the inorganics
    precipitation and the organics captured in the activated
    carbon would be disposed of off site.
    Option 3: Precipitation, Ultra Violet (UV) Oxidation, and
    Reinjection
         Estimated Capital Cost: $1,669,200
         Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $666,900
         Estimated Present Worth: $11,951,100
         Estimated Construction Time: six months
    This option would consist of a treatment system which begins
    with precipitation of inorganics such as metals. Inorganics
    removal would be followed by UV oxidation. The UV oxidation
    process uses UV radiation, and hydrogen peroxide and/or
    ozone, to destroy toxic organic compounds in water. Organics
    in the off gases may require that the gases be captured
    prior to release to the atmosphere. The sludge resulting
    from the inorganics precipitation, and the organics
    captured, would be disposed of off site.

                 BUILDING REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES
Alternative B-1: No Action
     Estimated Capital Cost: $0
     Estimated 5 Year Review Cost: $20,000
     Estimated Present Worth: $55,600 (includes six 5 yr reviews)
     Estimated Construction Time: none
The No Action alternative would allow the building to remain in
its present condition. Because this alternative would result in
contaminants remaining on site, CERCLA requires that the Site be
reviewed at least every five years. If justified by the review,
remedial actions may be implemented to remove or treat the
wastes. No other action is proposed under this altetnative.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  17
Alternative B-2: Limited Action
     Estimated Capital Cost: $30,800
     Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $10,200
     Estimated 5 Year Review Cost: $20,000
     Estimated Present Worth: $243,200 (includes six 5 yr
     reviews)
     Estimated Construction Time: none
The Limited Action alternative would allow the building to remain
in its present condition but would require that the perimeter
fence be maintained to restrict access. Because this alternative
would result in contaminants remaining on site, CERCLA requires
that the Site be reviewed at least every five years. No other
action is proposed under this alternative.
Alternative B-3: Decontamination, Demolition, and On-site
Disposal
     Estimated Capital Cost: $2,852,600
     Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $7,700
     Estimated 5 Year Review Cost: $20,000
     Estimated Present Worth: $3,026,600 (includes six 5 yr
     reviews)
     Estimated Construction Time: six months
This alternative would consist of decontaminating the building to
secure a non-hazardous waste classification (NJAC 7:26 ID-27),
demolition and on-site disposal of the remaining structure, and
the construction of an asphalt cap over the remaining debris.
Decontamination would include: removal and off-site disposal of
asbestos and PCB contaminated debris piles; and hydroblasting
and/or grit blasting of contaminated floors, walls, process
vessels, and tanks. Any recyclable debris and equipment would be
recycled. The decontaminated building would then be demolished
and disposed of on site as clean fill. Material not suitable as
clean fill would be disposed of at an appropriate off-site
landfill. An asphalt cap would then be placed over the resulting
clean fill.   This alternative would require land use
restrictions for the capped area.
Alternative B-4: Decontamination, Demolition, and Off-site
Disposal
     Estimated Capital Cost: $3,104,900
     Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $0
     Estimated Present Worth: $3,104,900
     Estimated Construction Time: six months
This alternative would consist of decontaminating the building to
secure a non-hazardous waste classification (NJAC 7:26 ID-27),
demolition and off-site disposal of the remaining structure.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               18
Decontamination would include: removal and off-site disposal of
asbestos and PCB contaminated debris piles; and hydroblasting
and/or grit blasting of contaminated floors, walls, process
vessels, and tanks. Any recyclable debris and equipment would be
recycled. The decontaminated building would then be demolished
and disposed of off site.
SUMMARY OF COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES
In accordance with the NCP, a detailed analysis of each remedial
alternative was conducted with respect to each of nine criteria.
This section discusses and compares the performance of the
remedial alternatives considered against these criteria. All
selected alternatives must at least attain the Threshold
Criteria. The selected alternative should provide the best
balance among the nine criteria. The Modifying Criteria were
evaluated following the public comment period.
During the detailed evaluation of remedial alternatives, each
alternative was assessed utilizing nine evaluation criteria as
set forth in the NCP. These criteria were developed to address
the requirements of Section 121 of CERCLA to ensure all important
considerations are factored into remedy selection decisions.
Threshold Criteria
     1.   Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment
          addresses whether or not an alternative provides
          adequate protection and describes how risks posed
          through each pathway are eliminated, reduced, or
          controlled through treatment, engineering controls, or
          institutional controls.
     2.   Compliance with Applicable and Relevant and Appropriate
          Reguirements (ARARs) addresses whether or not an
          alternative will meet all of the ARARs of the Federal
          and State environmental statutes or provide a basis for
          invoking a waiver.
Primary Balancing Criteria
     3.   Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence refers to the
          magnitude of residual risk and the ability of an
          alternative to maintain reliable protection of human
          health and the environment over time once remedial
          objectives have been met.
     4.   Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume addresses
          the statutory preference for selecting remedial actions
          that employ treatment technologies that permanently and
          significantly reduce toxicity, mobility, or volume of
          the hazardous substances as a principal element.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               19
    5.    Short-term Effectiveness refers to the period of time
          that is needed to achieve protection, as well as the
          alternative's potential to create adverse impacts on
          human health and the environment that may result during
          the construction and implementation period.
     6.   Implementability is the technical and administrative
          feasibility of a remedy, including the availability of
          materials and services needed to implement a particular
          alternative.
     7.   Cost includes estimated capital and operation and
          maintenance costs, and the present worth costs.
Modifying Criteria
     8.   State acceptance indicates whether, based on its review
          of the RI/FS and the Proposed Plan, the State supports,
          opposes, and/or has identified any reservations with
          the preferred alternative.
     9.   Community acceptance refers to the public's general
          response to the alternatives described in the Proposed
          Plan and the RI and FS reports. Responses to public
          comments are addressed in the Responsiveness Summary of
          this ROD.
A comparative analysis of the remedial alternatives based upon
the evaluation criteria noted above follows.

Overall Protection
The soil No Action (S-1) and Limited Action (S-2) alternatives do
not offer adequate protection of human health and the environment
because the levels of metals and PCBs found in the soils would
remain. Alternatives S-1 and S-2 would not reduce the human
health hazards associated with direct contact and ingestion of
metals and PCB contaminated soils. The capping alternative (S-3)
would effectively control the dermal contact and ingestion
pathways, and therefore provide adequate protection of human
health. Alternative S-4, by removing all contaminated soil for
off-site disposal, would offer the greatest level of overall
protection at the Site, but would move the potential threat to
another location. Alternatives S-5 and S-6 would offer adequate
overall protection by immobilizing metals and PCB contamination
in the soils.

On-site ground water is contaminated above Federal and/or State
MCLs; therefore, overall protection of human health would not be
accomplished with Alternative GW-l. Institutional controls
contained in Alternative GW-2 would provide minimal protection by

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               20
restricting use of the contaminated ground water. The active
remediation outlined in Alternative GW-3 would restore the
contaminated ground water to drinking water quality, and would
provide overall protection of human health. It is expected to
also significantly reduce the level of volatile organic compounds
in the soil.
Alternatives B-1 and B-2 would not adequately protect human
health from the hazards associated with the Cosden building.
Lead has been identified within the building at levels which pose
unacceptable risks during acute exposures (trespasser scenario);
therefore, institutional controls would not provide adequate
protection. Alternatives B-3 and B-4 would minimize hazards
associated with direct contact and ingestion of lead
contamination in the building. In addition, health risks to on-
site workers associated with asbestos and the potential for
physical injury from the condemned structure would not be
addressed.
Compliance with ARARs
Alternatives S-1, S-2, and S-3 would not meet the risk-based
guidance for cleanup of lead or PCBs. Alternatives S-4, S-5, and
S-6 would meet them. On-site solidification in Alternatives S-5
and S-6 may also be reguired to comply with the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) Land Disposal Restrictions
(LDRs), based upon metals content and leachability
characteristics. Waivers from ARARs are not anticipated for any
of the active cleanup alternatives. If the selected treatment
technology cannot meet the LDR standards for characteristic
wastes, a treatability variance may be required.
Contaminant levels in the ground water are above established
MCLs, which are the applicable requirements for drinking water,
and would not be expected to appreciably attenuate. Therefore,
Alternatives GW-l and GW-2 would not meet contaminant-specific
ARARs. Alternative GW-3 would treat the ground water until
promulgated State and Federal MCLs are attained; ARARs for
extraction and recharge of ground water would also be met.
Contaminant-specific ARARs for building remediation do not exist;
therefore. Alternatives B-1 and B-2 would not have to meet any
ARARs. However, specific ARARs do exist for asbestos removal and
building demolition. Since the building is structurally unsafe,
contaminant-specific ARARs for disposal of construction debris
will be used. Based on this. Alternatives B-3 and B-4 would meet
all ARARs.
Long-Term Effectiveness
The No Action and Limited Action alternatives (S-1, S-2, GW-l,
GW-2, B-1, and B-2) would, not provide an acceptable reduction in

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               21
risk in the soil, ground water, or the building. Each of these
alternatives would result in hazardous substances remaining on
site; this would require that EPA review the Site at least every
five years.
Alternative S-3 would provide an acceptable reduction in risk by
eliminating direct contact exposure; however, hazardous
substances would remain on site, requiring long-term maintenance
and deed restrictions to preserve its protectiveness. Each of
the treatment alternatives (S-4, S-5, and S-6) would remediate
the soil for metals and PCB contamination, and therefore, would
represent permanent solutions. However, Alternatives S-5 and S-6
would require long-term monitoring and deed restrictions to
ensure the integrity of the stabilized material on the site.
Alternative GW-3 would be consistent with the long-term
effectiveness goals for the Site by treating the ground water
until MCLs are achieved, or until it becomes technically
infeasible to attain remediation goals. Ground-water treatment
objectives would be equally well served by any of the three
treatment options.
Alternative B-3 would provide an adequate reduction in risk by
protecting against health hazards associated with direct contact
and ingestion of lead and PCBs, and physical injury from the
collapsed building. Since this alternative would include on-site
capping of the building debris, it would require long-term
maintenance and deed restrictions to preserve its protectiveness.
Alternative B-4 would permanently remove the contaminants and
physical hazards associated with the building, and would be the
most effective long-term solution.
Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility or Volume of Contaminants
The No Action and Limited Action alternatives (S-1, S-2, GW-l,
GW-2, B-1, and B-2) would achieve only minimal reduction in
toxicity of organics, through natural biodegradation and
volatilization; while metals and PCBs would persist at high
concentrations.
Alternative S-4 would reduce the toxicity and volume of the
metals and PCBs. Alternatives S-5 and S-6 would achieve
effective reduction in mobility of the metals and PCBs through
stabilization. The stabilization process, however, would
increase the volume of the contaminated matrix up to 40 percent,
because of the addition of the solidifying reagents.
Alternative GW-3 and the associated options are all equally
effective in the reduction of toxicity, mobility, and volume of
contaminants in the ground water.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               22
Alternatives B-3 and B-4 would be equally effective in the
reduction of the toxicity, mobility, and volume of contaminants
to acceptable levels.
Short-Term Effectiveness
The No Action and Limited Action alternatives (S-1, S-2, GW-l,
GW-2, B-1, and B-2) would have no short-term impacts.
All of the soil treatment alternatives involve disturbing the
soil, which will generate dust and volatile emissions to some
degree. Alternative S-3 would have minimal short-term impacts
during the construction of the cap. The excavations planned in
Alternatives S-4, S-5, and S-6 would have the greatest short-term
impacts; these alternatives may require air monitoring and
engineering controls to reduce airborne dust and emissions. Since
Alternative S-6 would be conducted in-situ, it would have fewer
short-term impacts than S-4 and S-5. Preliminary modeling of the
emissions that can be expected during the excavation activities
in Alternatives S-3, S-4, S-5, and S-6, indicates that the
short-term impacts would be minimal. The amount of time until
protectiveness is achieved is approximately six months, and is
about the same for all of the soil treatment alternatives. All of
the soil alternatives would require the implementation of a
health and safety plan to minimize any risks to on-site workers
and nearby residents.

The installation and sampling of extraction and monitoring wells
in Alternative GW-3 would have a minimal short-term impact. A
health and safety plan would be implemented to minimize the well
installation and sampling risks. The estimated time to restore
the aquifer to drinking water standards is approximately thirty
years, and is the same for all three treatment options.
The asbestos removal, decontamination, and demolition activities
in Alternatives B-3 and B-4 have the potential for adverse short-
term impacts. An air monitoring program would be required to
evaluate the type and degree to which engineering controls are
implemented. The health and safety plan would incorporate
procedures to minimize risks to on-site workers and off-site
residents.
Implementability
There are no difficulties with respect to implementing the No
Action alternatives (S-1, GW-l, and B-1), as they would only
involve five year reviews. The Limited Action alternatives (S-2,
GW-2, and B-2) are also easily implementable, as they only
involve fence maintenance, five year reviews, and deed
restrictions.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               23
The capping under Alternative S-3 is readily available and easily
implemented. However, Alternative S-3 may not be consistent with
future residential use of the property. Alternative S-4 may be
difficult to implement due to the limited availability of an off-
site facility that is permitted to stabilize and dispose of the
hazardous substances contained in the on-site soils. The
solidification of metals and PCB contaminated soil is common to
Alternatives S-5 and S-6, and is an easily implemented and proven
technology. However, some active treatment of volatile organic
contaminants will likely be necessary to ensure that the in-situ
stabilization process is not adversely affected. This may
include a soil vapor extraction process to remove high
concentrations of volatiles below the ground surface. The need
for organics removal will be based on treatability studies during
design.
The ground-water extraction and recharge systems in Alternative
GW-3 are easily implementable. Precipitation, and the air
stripping and carbon absorption treatment options are well proven
technologies. The UV oxidation technology, on the othet hand, is
relatively new. The UV treatment option may experience problems
in start-up and require treatability studies to determine
effectiveness in achieving effluent limitations.
Asbestos removal in Alternatives B-3 and B-4 is widely done and
relatively easy to implement. Decontamination of the building
surfaces, which is common to these alternatives, is also easily
implementable. Demolition is a routine practice and should not
pose any problems.
A common implementation problem in remediation at Superfund sites
is the increased traffic resulting from the transport of
equipment, materials, and substances designated for off-site
disposal. Therefore, traffic control programs will be required.
Another common implementation problem may be the availability of
an on-site staging area. Any planned ground-water and/or soil
remediation alternatives will require various staging areas for
materials, equipment, decontamination, and support services. The
limited availability of a staging area would likely require that
the building demolition materials be disposed of off site.
Additionally, any intrusive soil remediation and/or building
demolition would require the removal and disposal of the four
underground storage tanks.
Cost (Also, see Table 6)
Estimated present worth costs for stabilization range from
$3,268,000 for Alternative S-6 (in-situ stabilization) to
$7,187,850 for Alternative S-4 (off-site stabilization).
Alternative S-6 is the most cost-effective alternative for metals
and PCB soil contamination that is protective of human health and
the environment.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               24
The estimated present worth of the treatment options in
Alternative GW-3 is $8,799,900 for Option 1, $9,119,600 for
Option 2, and $11,951,100 for Option 3. Alternative GW-3 with
Option 1 (air stripping) is the most cost-effective alternative
that will be protective of human health and the environment.
The estimated present worth of the building alternatives is
$3,026,600 for Alternative B-3 (decontamination, demolition, and
on-site disposal), and $3,104,900 for Alternative B-4.
Alternative B-4 (decontamination, demolition, and off-site
disposal) is the most cost-effective alternative that will be
protective of human health and the environment.
State Acceptance
The State of New Jersey concurs with the selected alternatives
presented in this Record of Decision.
Community Acceptance
Community acceptance was evaluated after the close of the public
comment period. Written comments received during the public
comment period, as well as verbal comments during the public
meeting on August 6, 1992, were evaluated. The response to those
comments are addressed in the Responsiveness Summary.
Comments received during the public comment period indicated that
the local residents were satisfied with the preferred alternative
for the building, however, recommended different alternatives for
the soil and ground water. The residents, in a letter to EPA,
were not supportive of the in-situ stabilization process or the
ground-water pumping and treatment system. The residents
proposed off-site disposal of the contaminated soil and no action
for the contaminated ground water.

SELECTED REMEDY
After review and evaluation of the seven remedial alternatives in
accordance with Section 121 of CERCLA and Section 300.430 of the
NCP, the EPA and NJDEPE presented Alternative GW-3 with Option 1,
Alternative S-6, and Alternative B-4 to the public as the
preferred alternative. The input received during the public
comment period is presented in the Responsiveness Summary, which
is part of this document. The public comments that were received
encompassed a wide range of issues, but did not necessitate any
major changes in the general remedial approach proposed for the
Site. Accordingly, the preferred alternative was selected.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  25
The major components of the selected remedy include the
following:
For soils:
             In-situ stabilization of 8,000 yd' of inorganic and PCB
             contaminated soil.
For ground water:
     •    On-site ground-water extraction, precipitation,
          treatment by air stripping, and recharge to the
          aquifer.
For the building:
     •    Decontamination, demolition, and off-site disposal of
          building debris.
The goal of the ground-water portion of the remedial action is to
restore the ground water to its beneficial use, in this case, a
potential source of drinking water. However, EPA recognizes that
the selected remedy may not achieve this goal because of the
technical difficulties associated with achieving ground-water
cleanup levels. It may become apparent, during implementation or
operation of the ground-water extraction/treatment system that
contaminant levels have ceased to decline and are remaining
constant at levels higher than the remediation goal. In such a
case, the system's performance standards and/or the remedy may be
reevaluated. Performance monitoring of the ground-water
extraction and treatment system will be implemented. The data
collected would be used to suggest system adjustments or
modifications to provide more effective or efficient attainment
of cleanup levels. Such adjustments or modifications may
include: increasing or decreasing the extraction rate, initiating
a pulsed pumping schedule, installing additional extraction
wells, or ceasing extraction at wells where cleanup levels have
been achieved. Monitoring data will be used to assess the
effectiveness of the modifications implemented and may be used to
re-assess the time frame reguired to achieve cleanup levels.

The levels of volatile organic contamination in the soils do not
pose unacceptable dermal contact or ingestion risks;
consequently, no active remedial measures are necessary to
address these risks. However, the volatile organic contaminants
in the soil represent a continuing source of ground-water
contamination; it is expected that these volatile contaminants
would be gradually reduced through natural soil flushing and the
ground-water pumping and treatment program. In addition,
although no active treatment of volatiles in the soil are
necessary to address direct contact or ingestion risks, treatment

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               26
will be necessary of some of the more contaminated soils, if it
is confirmed during design that the in-situ stabilization process
may be compromised.
The soil and ground-water cleanup levels for the Site are listed
in Table 7. NJDEPE has requested that soil and ground-water
contamination at the Site be remediated to the levels specified
in its Proposed Cleanup Standards for Contaminated Sites
(February 1992). These proposed standards are not recognized as
ARARs
The EPA and NJDEPE have agreed that site-specific risk-based
cleanup levels will be used for soil and ground-water
remediation. EPA recognizes NJDEPE's request that soil and
ground water be remediated to the levels specified in its
Proposed Cleanup Standards for Contaminated Sites (February
1992). These proposed standards are not recognized as ARARs
under Section 121(d) of CERCLA because they are not yet
promulgated. However, EPA has determined that further
remediation of the soil and ground water at the Site to the
levels requested by NJDEPE, would not conflict, or be
inconsistent, with the selected remedy. The NJDEPE may agree to
undertake, and fund the incremental cost associated with this
additional cleanup.
In summary, the selected remedy achieves ARARs more quickly, or
as quickly, and at less cost than the other options. Therefore,
it will provide the best balance among alternatives with respect
to the evaluating criteria. EPA and the NJDEPE believe that the
preferred alternative will be protective of human health and the
environment, will comply with ARARs, will be cost eff^ective, and
will utilize permanent solutions and alternative treatment
technologies or resource recovery technologies to the maximum
extent practicable. The remedy also will meet the statutory
preference for the use of treatment as a principal element.

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS
Under its legal authorities, EPA's primary responsibility at
Superfund sites is to undertake remedial actions that are
protective of human health and the environment. In addition.
Section 121 of CERCLA establishes several other statutory
requirements and preferences. These specify that when complete,
the selected remedial action for this site must comply with
applicable, or relevant and appropriate environmental standards
established under federal and state environmental laws unless a
statutory waiver is justified. The selected remedy also must be
cost effective and utilize permanent solutions and alternative
treatment technologies or resource-recovery technologies to the
maximum extent practicable. Finally, the statute includes a
preference for remedies that employ treatment that permanently

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  27
and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity, or mobility of
hazardous wastes. The following sections discuss how the
selected remedy meets these statutory requirements.
Protection of Hiunan Health and the Environment
The selected remedy is protective of human health and the
environment, dealing effectively with the threats posed by the
contaminants which were identified.
The principal threat posed by the Site is the contaminated soils.
Stabilizing the contaminated on-site soil will protect against
future direct contact, ingestion, and inhalation hazards.
Additionally, the stabilization will prevent the infiltration of
soil contaminants into the ground water.
Capturing and treating the contaminated on-site ground water will
protect against future ingestion hazards. The contaminants in
the ground water will be reduced to levels that are acceptable
for drinking water.
Decontamination of the building will protect against future
inhalation and ingestion hazards. Demolition and off-site
disposal will eliminate the physical hazards, associated with the
condemned building, for on-site workers.
Compliance with ARARs
The selected remedy will comply with the substantive requirements
of the following statutes and regulations.
Chemical-specific ARARs (Tables 7 and 8)
The contaminants of concern in the ground water will be reduced
to levels that meet Federal and/or State MCLs.
The contaminants of concern in the soil will be treated to reduce
the direct contact, ingestion, and inhalation exposure risks to
1 X 10"* for carcinogens, and to an HI less than 1.0 for
noncarcinogens.
Action-specific ARARs (Table 9)
The ground-water treatment system will be designed to treat the
extracted ground water to MCLs prior to recharge to the aquifer.
All sludge produced by the ground-water treatment system will be
handled and disposed of in accordance with the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act, the Hazardous and Solid Waste
Regulations of 1984, the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act,
and the Occupational Safety and Health ACT.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               28
The air stripper element of the ground-water treatment system
will be designed to meet the New Jersey Air Pollution Control
Regulations for VOC and toxic emissions (NJAC 7:27-16 & 17).
The stabilized soil will meet RCRA standards for leachability and
toxicity.
PCB contaminated soil will be disposed of in accordance with the
Toxic Substances Control Act.
The decontaminated building debris will be disposed of in
accordance with the New Jersey Regulations for the Identification
of Hazardous Waste.
Location-specific ARARs
There are no location-specific ARARs associated with the soil,
ground water, or building remedies.
Advisories, Guidance and Criteria To Be Considered TTBCs)
The shipment of hazardous wastes off site to a treatment/disposal
facility will be conducted in accordance with EPA's Office of
Solid Waste and Emergency Response Directive No. 9834.11,
"Revised Procedures for Planning and Implementing Off-site
Response Actions". The intent of this directive is to ensure
that facilities authorized to accept CERCLA-generated waste are
in compliance with RCRA operation standards.
Cost-Effectiveness
Of the alternatives which most effectively address the threats
posed by Site contamination, the selected remedy provides for
overall effectiveness in proportion to its cost. The estimated
total project cost is $15,172,800.
Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment
Technologies to the Maximum Extent Practicable
Contaminants in the ground water will be removed and treated
before reinjection and/or surface discharge. Hazardous wastes
generated by the treatment process will be disposed of at an
approved off-site facility. This will significantly reduce the
toxicity, mobility and volume of the contaminants, and offer a
permanent solution to the risks posed by the contaminated ground
water.
The treatment of soils and debris contaminated with PCBs over
50 ppm at an approved off-site facility will significantly reduce
the toxicity, volume and mobility of the contaminants.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               29
The stabilization of soil contaminated with metals and PCBs less
than 50 ppm will reduce the mobility of these contaminants and,
therefore, represents a permanent solution to the risks posed Ijy
the contaminated soil. However, the toxicity and volume of the
contaminated soil will not be reduced. Considering the
relatively large volume of metals and PCB contaminated soil
(8000 yd') , EPA believes that the selected remedy represents the
maximum extent to which the toxicity, mobility, and volume can be
reduced in a cost-effective manner.
Decontamination of the building and off-site disposal of the
building debris will permanently remove the physical and health
hazards associated with it.
Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element
The selected ground-water remedy satisfies the preference for
treatment as a principal element. The on-site contaminated
ground water will be extracted and treated, using precipitation
for metals and air stripping for VOCs, to reduce the levels of
contaminants, thereby reducing the risk to human health.
The statutory preference for remedies that employ treatment as a
principal element will also be satisfied for the contaminated on-
site soil. The metal and PCB contaminated soil will be
stabilized in-situ, thereby reducing risk to human health.

DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES
The Proposed Plan for the Site was released to the public on
July 27, 1992. The Proposed Plan identified the preferred
alternatives for ground water, soil, and the building
remediation. EPA reviewed all written and verbal comments
received during the public comment period. Upon review of these
comments, EPA determined that no significant changes to the
selected remedy, as it was originally identified in the Proposed
Plan, were necessary.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    30

APPENDIX I

 FIGURES

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        Figure 2



           PRINCIPAL A R E A S ^ O F SOIL CXDNTAMINATION


        Open                                      RESfDENTtAL
        Fi«ld                                        AUCA



                                                    CharryStret

                                                                                                 '-///,




I   I   > < t    I   ( ^

                 CONRAIL
                RAK.-ftOAD
                 TAACtCS
                           «


                               y
                               I   < LI < I   I   » i   I

                                                        Optn
                                                            I   4   1 I   «   < « « I   I   <   > I   1   ^   \   \   \   \

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

t-




                                              Figure 3




         PRINCIPAL AREASXJEJSROUND-WATER CONTAMINATION



              Open                          REdfDENlUL
              FUtd                             AREA



                                               ChrryStr—t
                                                                                       I

         I    t ••'< < < 4 •. < « < > I < « I :-t •< « I 4 4 t I I • i < > • I < I I I I t I I
     I       < < I I I I < < 4t 4I - LOi •I I I 4 I I 1 I I i I I I I i 4 I > « 4 I » I > «

                      CONRAIL                   Op«n
                     RA>L-ROAD
                      TRACKS

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    31

APPENDIX   II

  TABLES

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                               Table 1

Predominant Site Contaminants and Range of Concentration Detected



      CONTAMINANT                             SOIL (ppm)     GROUND WATER (ppb)

 Toluene                                      ND -1.600           ND-1,800
 Ethylbenzene                             ^ N D > 1.600           ND-590
 Xylene                          - - - 3 * « a ^ D . 7,900        ND-1.340
 Trichlorofe'.nene                             ND - 1.6            ND-84
 Lead                                         3.7 - 6,580         ND • 29.5
 Cadmium                                       1.1-2.6               ND
 Chromium                                     6-36.000            ND-388
 Beryllium                                     0.2.0.8             ND - 3.4
 Polychlorinated Biphenyls                     ND.120                ND           I
1 (PCBs)


ppm     =    parts per million            •




ppb     =    parts per billion
ND      =    Not Detected

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      Table 2

                         SUMMARY OF COSDEN CHEMICAL SITE
                            CONTAMINANTS OF CONCERN

Chlorinated Volatile Organicji

      Chlorofomi                                  SG
      ChJorora ethane                           ' SG
      cis-l,2>Dichloroethene                      SG
      Methylene Chloride                          SG
      Tetrachloroethene      .— i w               SI. SS. SG, GAS
      1,1,2-Trichloroethane                       SG
      Trichloroethene                             SI, SS. SG. GAS

Nonchlorinated Volatile Oreanics

      Acetone                                     SG
      Benzene                                     SG
      Carbon Disulfide                            SG
      Eihylbenzine                                SI, SS
      Toluene                                     SI. SS. SG, GAS
      Xylenes                                     SG *

Semivoladl; Organics

      CPAHs                                       SI. SO, SS
      BEHP                                        SI. SG
      2,4-DiiLethylphenol                         SG
      2-Methylphenol                              SG
      4-Methylphenol                              SG
      Naphthalene                                 SI, SG
      N-Nitrosodipropylaniine                     SS

PestJcide&TCBs

      Aroclor 1254                                SI, SS
      4.4'-DDT                                    SO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             Table 2 (cont'd)

                       SUMMARY OF COSDEN CHEMICAL SITE
                          CONTAMINANTS OF CONCERN

Metals

           Antimony                             SI. SO. SS. SG
           Arsenic                              SI. so. SS.SG
           Barium                               SI. so. SS,SG
           Beryllium                            SI. SO. SS.SG
           Cadmium                              SI. so. SG
           Chromium                             SI. so. SS.SG
           Copper                               SI. so. SS.SG
           Manganese                            SI. so. SS.SG
           Mercury                              SI. so. SS,SG
           Nickel                               SI. so. SG
           Selenium                             SG
           Silver                               SG
           Thallium                             SI.SS
           Vanadium                             SI. so. SS.SG
           Zinc                                 SI. so. SS.SG

SI s Su.'face Soil Inside Fence
SO = Surface SoD Outside Fence
SS f Subsurface Soil
SG = Shallow Aquifer Groundwater
GAS = SoD Gas Survey




Eintj.yK

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             . able 3

                                              CO*inFN CHEMICAL SITE
                                    POTENTIAL EXPOSUIIE PATHWAYS AND POPULATIONS


             PATHWAY                                                                  POPULATION


                                                 CURRENT SITE LAND USE

o   Surface SoU
          Incidental Ingestion (in(:kle and outside fence)                         . Trespassers on eito


                                                                          I1
          Dermal Contact (insfde and outside fence)

o   Air
          Inhalation of Ah borne (vapor phase) cfiemlcals (ofl^lte)                Residents RvtriQ near site


                                                  FUTURE SITE LAND USE

o   Surf^KoSoR
          Inddenfal Ingestion                                                      Residents living onsite
          Dermal Contact                                                           Ftosidents living onsite
          Inhalation of Airborne (vapor phase) chemicals                           nesKienis Rvmgonsiie

o   Subsurface Son
         Ihddental Ingestion                                                       Construction woricers
         Dermal Contact                                                            Construction workers
         Inhalation of Airborne (vapor phase) cfiemlcals                           uonstrucnon woTKers

o   Groundwater
         Ingestion                                                                 Residents living onsite

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                               Table 4
                       TOXICITY DATA FOR NONCARCINOGENIC EFFECTS
                                DOSE RESPONSE EVALUATION
                                  COSDEN CHEMICAL SITE


For Groundwater
                                                   Oral RfD        Inhalation RfD
Chemical Name                                    fmg/kg/dav)

acetone                                            1.0 E**
carbon disulfide                                   1.0 E*           1.0 E4 1
chloroform                                         1.0 E-"
methylene chloride                                 6.0 E-"          3.0 E*"
4-methyl-2-pentanone                               5.0 E""          8.0 E-"
Tetrachloroethylene                                1.0 E-°
toluene                                            2.0 E-"          2.0 E*"
 1,1.2 • trichloroethane                           4.0 E-"
mixed xylenes                                      2.0 E*"          3.0 E ^
bis (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate                       2.0 E-"
2,4-dimethylphenol                                 2.0 E-"
o-cresol                                           5.0 E-"
p-cresol                                           5.0 E-"
naphthalene                                        4.0 E-"
antimony                                           4.0 E-"
arsenic                                            1.0x10^          3.0 E-°*
barium                                             5.0 X 10-*       5.0 E-"
beryllium                                          5.0 E-"
cadmium                                            5.0 E ^
chromium                                           5.0 E-"
copper                                             3.7 E-"
DDT                                                5.0 E-»*
Ethylbenzene                                       1.0 E^'          1.0 E*"
manganese                                          1.0 E-"          4.0 X 10"
mercury                                            3.0 E-~          3.0 X 10-'
nickel                                             2.0 E-«
selenium                                           5.0 E-"
silver                                             3.0 E »
vanadium                                           7.0 E "
zinc                                               2.0 E *


Note: Toxicity values arefirom"Risk Assistant", 1992.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      Table 4 (cont'd)

                          TOXICITY DATA FOR CARCINOGENIC EFFECTS
                                 DOSE RESPONSE EVALUATION
                                   COSDEN CHEMICAL SITE


                                          Cancel• Potency
Chemical Name                                Slope                 Unit Risk
                                          (mg/kg/'day)*            (Mg/iT^r
benzene                                    2.9 X 10-'              8 J x 10^
chloroform                                 6.1 X10-'               2.3 X10'
methyl chloride                            13 X 10-'               1.8 X 10-*
methylene chloride                         7 J x 10»               2.1 X10'
perchloroethylene                          5.1 X10»                5.2 X lO'
1,1.2-trichloroethane                      5.7 X 10-*              1.6 X 10-*
bis (2-ethylbexyl) phthalate               1.4 X io-»
beryllium                                  4 3 X IQP
tricboloroethylene                         1.1 X 10-'              1.7 X 10^
3,4-benz (a) pyrene                        5.8 E 'fOO
N-nitrosodi-n-propylamine                  7.0 X 10°
Polychlorinated biphenyls                  7.7 E*"

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             Table 5

                       COSOCN CHEMICAL SITE
                   r^UMMAHY OF WSKS ACROSS PATHWAYS
                           mESTNT-USE




                                  CAUCMOOENK; fVSKS          NONCAnCMOOEMC mTATO MOICtS


wpctproR   »(nmM              ADULTS          CHUmEN           ADULTS          CULOrCN




                               s.oc«r            IM
                                                        Ii     t.«E4S            IM
                               7.«E«r          t.1E«S          s.oc4n           «x«
                               asE«f             NA            4.4E48            m
                                                               1.1E4S           UIE49
                               1.7C4M          •.1E«r          a«4n             i.«c-ac
                               a.aE4N          1JE4*           iX4a             S.4C4B




           01-

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                          Table 5 (cont'd)
                                                                                       COSDEN CHEMICAL STTE
                                                                                   SUMMARY OF WSKS ACROSS PATHWAYS
                                                                                           FUTURE-USE




                                                                                                  CARCMOQENIC RISKS          NONCARCINOGENIC HAZARD MOICES


RECEPTOR           PATHWAY                                                                    ADULTS              CHILDREN    ADULTS            CHILDREN




                       wipBOTon* w m v rwno9 lOvf^n^                                          1.4E-08              7.7E«       S.6&03            ZJIBW
                                                                                              8.6E-07              4JE-0Q      3.3E4»            0.9E-Oe
                   ^^Mn^   f* mJB lit MJrik C M M   b ^ d f ^ A "^   Inn   Mifai
                                                                                              7.1E4M               •.8E4)8     3.7E44            2.2E-03
                   IIWIfNi UOfIMm W n i o O l • WWKS9 rwnKm f O f n l H |
                                                                                                                               1.2E4n            6.96-03
                   UmnWi vOiMKSIvinn DON * v U M K M rOTIvV fOfrWMf
                                                                                              1.8E4S               8.8E-46     9.2E-0e           l.gE-01
                   mraHHKin <n VOMMPS inuin K H ^ | I |
                                                                                              2.8E.04              9.0E4»     I.IE-fOI          1.flE401
                   QreundvMiilir InQMMon
                                                                                              3.1E-04              1.2E4M     1.1E+01           1.7E+01




           NOIM*   ( 1 | - RMcs flnd h n a r a IndloM calouNrtBd uslfig soU Q M doAa lo oslknato •mlsalon ralM.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              Table 6

Summary of Estimated Capital and Present Worth Costs

Alternative 8-1: No Action.
     Estimated Capital Cost: $0
     Estimated 5 Year Review Cost: $20,000 per review
     Estimated Present Worth: $55,600 (includes six 5 yr reviews)
     Estimated Construction Time: none
Alternative 8-2: Limited Action.
     Estimated Capital Cost: $0
     Estimated Annual Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Cost: $0
     Estimated 5 Year Review Cost: $20,000 per review
     Estimated Present Worth: $55,600 (includes six 5 yr reviews)
     Estimated Construction Time: none
Alternative 8-3: Capping.
     Estimated Capital Cost: $599,400
     Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $121,000
     Estimated 5 Year Review Cost: $20,000 per review
     Estimated Present Worth: $2,515,100
     Estimated Construction Time: six months
Alternative S-4: Excavation, 0ff-8ite Stabilization and Disposal,
and Backfill.
     Estimated Capital Cost: $7,187,850
     Estimated Annual O&M: $0
     Estimated Present Worth: $7,187,850
     Estimated Construction Time: six months
Alternative 8-5: Excavation, On-Site Stabilization, and On-site
Backfill
     Estimated Capital Cost: $2,098,950
     Estimated 5 Year Review Cost: §20,000
     Estimated annual O&M Cost: $106,600
     Estimated Present Worth: $3,793,250
     Estimated Construction Time: one year
Alternative S-6: In-Situ Stabilization
     Estimated Capital Cost: $1,573,700
     Estimated 5 Year Review Cost: $20,000
     Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $106,600
     Estimated Present Worth: $3,268,000
     Estimated Construction Time: one year

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                        Table 6 (cont'd)

               GROUND WATER REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES
Alternative 6W-1: No Action.
     Estimated Capital Cost: $0
     Estimated 5 Year Review Cost: $ 20,000 per review
     Estimated Present Worth: $55,600 (includes six 5 yr reviews)
     Estimated Construction Time: none
Alternative ow-2: Limited Action.
     Estimated Capital Cost: $ 231,400
     Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $ 90,000
     Estimated 5 Year Review Cost: $ 20,000
     Estimated Present Worth: $ 1,670,500
     Estimated Construction Time: six months
Alternative 6W-3: On-Site Ground Water Extraction and Treatment,
and Recharge to the Aquifer.
     Option 1: Precipitation, Air Stripping, and Reinjection.
          Estimated Capital Cost: $1,438,000
          Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $478,900
          Estimated Present Worth: $8,799,900
          Estimated Construction Time: six months
     Option 2: Precipitation, Activated Carbon Treatment, and
     Reinjection.
          Estimated Capital Cost: $1,522,800
          Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $494,200
          Estimated Present Worth: $9,119,600
          Estimated Construction Time: six months
     Option 3: Precipitation, Ultra Violet (UV) Oxidation, and
     Reinjection.
          Estimated Capital Cost: $1,669,200
          Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $666,900
          Estimated Present Worth: $11,961,100
          Estimated Construction Time: six months

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          Table 6 (cont'd)
                  BUILDING REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES
Alternative B-i: No Action.
     Estimated Capital Cost: $0
     Estimated 5 Year Review Cost: $10,100
     Estimated Present Worth: $13,400
     Estimated Construction Time: none
Alternative B-2: Limited Action.
     Estimated Capital Cost: $30,800
     Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $10,200
     Estimated Present Worth: $243,200
     Estimated Construction Time: none
Alternative B-3: Decontamination, Demolition, and On-site Disposal.
     Estimated Capital Cost: $2,852,600
     Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $7,700
     Estimated 5 Year Review Cost: $20,000
     Estimated Present Worth: $3,026,600
     Estimated Construction Time: six months
Alternative   B-4:   Decontamination,    Demolition,   and   Off-site
Disposal.
     Estimated Capital Cost: $3,104,900
     Estimated Annual O&M Cost: Not Applicable (N/A)
     Estimated Present Worth: $3,104,900
     Estimated Construction Time: six months

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              Table 7

                        SUMMARY OF CHEMICALS OF CONCERN AND
                             CORRESPONDING ARARs/TBCs

                                         GROUND WATER
         Site Contaminant              Maximum Concentration          ARAR               TBC=    1
                                           Detected (ppb)             (ppb)              (ppb)
     Toluene                                    1,800                 1,000 ^'^          1.000   1
     Tricliloroethene                            84                      1'               N/A    I
     Ethylbenzene                                590                  700^=^             700
                                                                        442              N/A
     Xylene                                     1.340
     Chromium (total)                            388                   100^'^             100
     Lead (at tap)                               29.5                 15 0-0             N/A
1'                                 '


           Federal Drinking Water Standard (IV1CL) (40 CFR Part 141)
           New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act (SIVICL) (NJAC 7:10-16)
           Non-zero Maximum Contaminant Level Goals (MCLGs)
           Treatment Technique
N/A        Not Applicable



                                                SOIL
         Site Contaminant              Maximum Concentration                    ARAR'
                                           Detected (ppm)
     Beryllium                                   1.5                               1=
     Chromium                               36,100 (total)                    78,000 (+3)'       I
                                                                         390 (+6)^
     Lead                                       6,580                             500'
     PCB                                         120                               1"

            Defines the aerial extent of soil to be stabilized (approximately 8000 yd^)
            Calculated from 1x10"* risk, then deferred to the practical quantification limit.
            Calculated from 1x10"* risk
            Established by OSWER directive #9355.4-02
            Established by OSWER directive #9355.4-01

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                 Sheet 1 of 2
                                                                   Table 8

                                             CONTAMINANT-SPECIFIC ARARs, CRITERIA AND GUIDANCE


REGULATORY LEVEL   ARAR IDENTIFICATION              STATUS             REGULATORY SYNOPSIS                            FS CONSIDERATION

Federal            RCRA Maximum Contaminant'        Relevant and       Provides standards for 14 toxic com-           The promulgated values are included
                   Levels (MCLs)                    Appropriate        pounds and pesticides for protection           in the SDWA MCLs. The combined
                                                                       of groundwater. These standards are            standards are compared with the
                                                                       equal lo the MCLs established by               maximum contaminant levels at the
                                                                       SDWA.                                          site to determine the level of
                                                                                                                      contamination.

Federal            SDWA Manmuffl Contaminant'       Relevant and       Provides standards for toxic                   The pmmulgated values are used as
                   Leveb (MCLs)                     Appropriate        compounds for public drinking                  standards lo determine the level of
                                                                       water.                                         treatment for groundwater discharge.

Federal            SDWA MCL Ooab'                   Relevant and       EPA has promulgated contaminants levels        MCLGs are used as reference values to
                                                    Appropriate        and has proposed olhera for public             indicate contaminant levels for the
                                                                       water system. The MCLGs are health             site.
                                                                       goals and are set at leveb that
                                                                       would result in no known or anticipated
                                                                       adverse health effects with an adequate
                                                                       margin of safety.

Federal            RCRA IdciMincation of            Relevant and       Provides regulations concerning                Win be used to determine RCRA listed
                   Hazardoot Waste (40 CFR 261)     Appropriate        identification and classification of           and characteristic waste present at
                                                                       RCRA Hazardous Waste.                          the site.

Federal            RCRA Land Disposal Restriction   Applicable         Limits land disposal options and provides      Treatment standards or BDAT requiie-
                   (LDR) (40 CFR 268)                                  treatment standards for contaminants           ments must be met prior to land dis-
                                                                       prior to disposal.                             posal. Effective for CERCLA soil
                                                                                                                      and debris as of November 1990.

Federal            National Ambient Air Quality     Applicable         These standards provide acceptd>le             Remediation technologies that could
                   Standards (NAAQS) (40 CFR 50)                       limits for pvticulate matter, sulfur           release contaminants into the air
                                                                       dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, carbon              will be designed to meet these
                                                                       monoxide, ozone, and lead that must            standards.
                                                                       not be exceeded in ambient air.

Federal            Toxic Substance Control Act      Applicable         Requires materials containing PCB concen-      Treatment standards will be used for PCB
                   (TSCA) PCB Regulations                              trations greater than 50 ppm to be incin-      remediation and disposal.
                   (40 CFR 761)                                        erated, disposed of in a TSCA landfill or
                                                                       alternate treatment to reduce PCBs to 2 ppm.

    EI2M.LYN
                       I f H.1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                          Sheet 2 of 2
                                                                           Table 8 (cont'd)
                                                       CONTAMINANT-SPECIFIC ARARs. CRFTERIA AND GUIDANCE


REGULATORY LEVEL           ARAR IDENTIFICATION                STATUS               REGULATORY SYNOPSIS                          FS CONSIDERATION

Federal                    TSCA PCB Spin Cleanup              Applicable           These regulations provide requirements and   Remediation of soil contaminated and
                           and Disposal Regulations                                cleanup levels for PCB spills and disposal   PCBs win comply with these regulations.
                           (40 CFR 761)                                            of PCB contaminated media.

Federal                    EPA Ride Reference Doses           To Be Considered     RfDs are considered to be the levels         EPA Reference Doses are used to
                           (Rf[)s)                                                 unlikely to cause significant adverse        characterize risk associated with
                                                                                   health effects associated with a             non-carcinogens in various media.
                                                                                   threshold mechanism of action in
                                                                                   human exposure for a lifetime.

New Jersey                 New Jersey RegUlatioiit            Applicable           Provides regnlatioiis oonoenung the          WiU be Died to determine listed and
                           for the Identification of                               identification and classification of         diaracleristic hazardous waste at the
                           Hazardous Waste (NJAC 7:26-8)                           Hazardous Waste                              site.

New Jeney                  New Jeney GromJwatw *              Applicable           Provides quality standards for               The leveb win be compared to leveb
                           Quality Standards                                       groundwater based on aquifer                 at the site to determine
                                                                                   characteristics and use.                     conlanunant migration.

New Jcney                  New Jersey Safe Drinking '         Rclevant and         Provides quality standards for               These levds wUl be compared to
                           Water Act Maximum Contaminant      Appropriate          drinking water.                              contaminant levels at the site
                           Levels (MCLs) (NJAC 7:10-16)                                                                         to deleimine contaminant
                                                                                                                                migration.

New Jcney                  New Jersey Amnent Air              Applicable           Provides guidance regarding                  Remedial activities which cause
                           Quality Standards (NJAC 7:27-13)                        air emissions.                               air emissions wiO conform to
                                                                                                                                these standards.

New Jcney                  New Jeney RCRA MCLl                Rdevantand           Provides standards for toxic                 These standards win be compared with
                           (NJAC7:14A-6.15)'                  Appropriate          compounds for the protection                 oontamioation levels at the site to
                                                                                   of groundwater.                              determine the level of contamination.


1) Applies to alternatives inchiding groundwater monitoring




    EI20R.LYN

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                 Page 1 of 3
                                                                       Table 9
                                                               ACTION-SPECIFIC ARARs


R E G U L A T O R Y LEVEL        ARARS                                           STATUS         R E G U L A T O R Y SYNPOSIS

A   Common to all Alternatives   OSHA - General Industries Standards             Applicable     These standards regulate the S-hour time weighted
                                 (29 CFR 1910)                                                  average concentration for wotker exposure to various
                                                                                                compounds. Timing requiiements for workers at hazardous
                                                                                                wastes operations are also specified.

                                 OSHA • Safety and Health Standards              Applicable     This regulation specifies the tjrpe of safety
                                 (29 CFR 1926)                                                  equipment and procedures to be followed during site
                                                                                                remediation.

                                 OSHA - Recordkeeping. Reporting and             Applicable     This regulation outlines the recordkeeping and
                                 Rdated Regulations                                             reporting requirements for an employer under OSHA.
                                 (29 CFR 1904)

                                 RCRA TSDP Regulation                            Relevant and   Provides standards for hazardous waste treatment faciUties
                                 (40 CFR 264 and 265 subparts A, B. C,           Appropriate    with regard to design and operation of treatment, storage and
                                 D. B, P. G, L, and N)                                          disposal systems (ie, general facility standards, landfdls.
                                                                                                incinerators, oontainen. etc.)

                                 RCRA Requirements                               Rdevant and    Provides manifest and record keeping requirements for
                                 for Transportfflg Waste for                     Appropriate    generators of hazardous waste.
                                 Off-Site Disposal (40 CFR 263)*

                                 RCRA Standards for Generaton of                 Rdevant and    General standards for generaton of hazardous waste.
                                 Hazardous Waste (40 CFR 262)                    Appropriate

                                 RCRA Nonhazaidoas Waste Management              Relevant and   Provides standards for Hie management of nonhazardous
                                 Standards (40 CFR 257)'                         Appropriate    waste under RCRA Subpart D.

                                 RCRA Groundwater Monitoring Requirements        Rdevant and    This regulation details requiremente for
                                 (40 CFR 264 Subpart F)^                         Appropriate    groundwater monitoring programs.

                                 National Emission Standards for                 Applicable     Provides standards for acceptable limits for
                                 Hazardous Air PoUutants (NESHAPS)                              specific chemicals in air emissions. Requirements
                                 (40 CFR 61)                                                    address operational, record keeping, and general emission
                                                                                                standards thft apply to air pollution control equipment


    BI2m.LYN

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                         Sheet 2 of 3
                                                          Table 9 (cont'd)
                                                      ACnON-SPECinC ARARS



REGULATORY LEVEL         ARARS                                         STATUS         REGULATORY SYNPOSIS

                         DOT Rules for Hazardous                       Applicable     Provides requirements for the transportation
                         Materials Transport (49 CFR 171)*                            of hazardous waste.

                         New Jersey Department of Transportation       Applicable     Provides requirements for Itie transportation of
                         Regulations for Transport of Hazardous                       hazardous waste.
                         Waste (NJAC 7:26-3 and 7)

                         New Jeney Standards for the                   Retevantand    This regulation oudnies general waste facilily
                         Design and Operation of Hazardous             Appropriate    requirements with regard to waste aiuilysis,
                         Waste Treatment Facilities (NJAC 7:26)                       security measures, inspection and training requirements.

                         New Jcney Noise PoUulion                      Applicable     Provides standards for the control of noise polhilion.
                         Regnlaiions (NJAC 7:29)




B.   Onmdwater           NPDE5 Regulations                             Relevant and   Provides regulations tat discharge of the ttcatmenl
                         (40 CFR 122)                                  Appropriate    system effluent and stormwater ranoff. Refen to effluent
                                                                                      limitations for discharge to surface water.

                         New Jersey PoUution Disdiarge                 Rdevantand     Provides regulations for discharge of pollutanb
                         Elimination System Regulations                Appropnale     to surface water of the Stale.
                         NJAC (7:14A)

C.   Soil and Buikling   RCRA Closure and PMt-Closure                  Relevant and   This regulation details specific requiremenb for
                         Standards (40 CFR 264, Subpart O)             Appropriate    dosure and post-closure of hazardous waste
                                                                                      facilities.

                         RCRA Subtitle D Nonhazardous                  Relevant and   Provides regulations for the management of non-
                         Waste Management Standards                    Appropriate    hazardous waste.
                         (40 CFR 257)'



     BI2IM.LYN

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                               Sheet 3 of 3
                                                                                Table 9 (cont'd)
                                                                           ACTION-SPECIFIC ARARs


REGULATORY LEVEL                             ARARS                                          STATUS             REGULATORY SYNPOSIS

                                             RCRA Land Disposal Restrictions                Applicable         Regulates land disposal of hazardous waste. Provides
                                             (LDRs) (40 CFR 268)                                               treatment levels which must be met before land disposal of
                                                                                                               hazardous waste may occur.

                                            TSCA PCB Spin Cleanup and Disposal              Applicdile         Remediation and disposal of PCB contaminated soib will be
                                            Regulations (40 CFR 761)                                           in compliance with these regulations.

                                            New Jersey RCRA Cknure and Post-                Rdevant and        TMs regulation details specific requiremenb for
                                            Cknure Standards (NJAC 7:26)                    Appropriate        dosure and post<losme of hazardous waste facilities.

                                             New Jersey Asbestos Regulations                Rdevant and        Remediation of asbestos wiU comply with pertinent sections
                                             (NJAC 12:120 and 8:60)                         Appropriate        of these regulations.

                                             New Jersey Standards lor Generaton             Applicable         General Standards for generaton of hazardous waste.
                                             of Hazardous Waste (NJAC 7:26)

                                             New Jersey Air Pollution Control               Applicable         Provides guidelines for die control of Air
                                             Requiremenb (NJAC 7:27)                                           contaminanb.

                                             New Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment           To Be Considered   Provides guidelines for sofl erosion and sediment
                                             Control Act Requiremenb'                                          control plans.




   1) Applies to ahennlives involving excavation only.

   2) Applies to altemative which involve on-site disposal.

   3) Applies to altematives which involve off-site transportation

   4) Applies to groundwater monitoring.




   EI2aM.LYN

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

            32
       APPENDIX III
ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                               Index Document Number Order                                        Page: 1
                                       COSOEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Documents

                                                       «»»aK»««g«»«g»sas»«»»m«»ggggggsxssssassggxgscgga


Document Nunber: COS-001-0001 To 0014                                                 Date: 06/07/85

Title: Potential Hazardous Waste Site, Site Inspection Report, Part 1, Site Location and Inspection
       Information (for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation site)

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Nazur, Deborah:    NJ Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP)
Recipient: none: none



Document Number: COS-001-0015 To 0022                                                 Date:   / /

Title: (Maps, graphic drawings, and a geological description pertaining to the Cosden Chemical Coatings
       Corporation site)

     Type: GRAPHIC
   Author: none: none
Recipient: none: none
 Attached: COS-001-0023      COS-001-0025

Document Number: COS-001-0023 To 0024                   Parent: COS-001-0015          Date:    / /

 'tie: (Newspaper article entitled:) 2 Agencies investigate paint dump

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Lerner, Gail C : Burlington County Times
Recipient: none: none



Document Number: COS-001-002S To 0025                   Parent: COS-001-0015          Date: 07/18/84

Title: (Newspaper article entitled:) Agencies probe paint dump in Beverly

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Lerner, Gail C : Burlington County Times
Recipient: none: none



Docunent Number: COS-001-0026 To 0026                                                 Date: 08/14/84

Title: (Memo detailing a July, 1984, NJDEP inspection of the Noleta - Cosden Chemical Coatings Drum
       site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Bonanni, Daniel J.: NJ Dept of Law t Public Safety
Recipient: none: NJ Dept of Law & Public Safety




                                                                                                                    -ii'

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                                Index Docunent Numt>er Order                                             Page: 2
                                        COSDEH CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Documents

                                          SSgXSBSSggggxxsggssgsgXggggBgggggggggggSggggSggggSggSgggggggggggSSgBBBgggggggSSS


Docunent Number: COS-001-0027 To 0027                                                  Date: 08/14/84

Title: (Memo detailing an August 10, 1984, NJDEP inspection of the Noleta - Cosden Chemical Coatings
       site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Bonanni, Daniel J.: NJ Dept of Law t Public Safety
Recipient: file: NJ Dept of Law & Public Safety



Docunent Number: COS-001-0028 To 0028                                                  Date: 08/14/84

Title: (Memo discussing an August 13, 1984, surveillance at Cosden Industrial Coatings site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Bonanni, Daniel J.: NJ Dept of Law 8 Public Safety
Recipient: none: NJ Dept of Law & Public Safety


Docunent Nun^r: COS-001-0029 To 0029                                                   Date:    / /

Title: (Map of the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation site area)

     Type: GRAPHIC
   Author: none: none
Recipient: norte: none



Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0030 To 0036                                                  Date: 10/01/88

Title: Site Analysis, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corp., Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: FINANCIAL/TECHNICAL
   Author: Uarner, Eric D.: Bionetics Corporation
Recipient: Garofalo, Donald: Environmental Photographic Interpretation Center (US EPA)
 Attached: COS-001-0037

Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0037 To 0055                    Parent: COS-001-0030          Date: 02/01/89

Title: Site Analysis, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation, Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: FINANCIAL/TECHNICAL
   Author: Uarner, Eric D.: Bionetics Corporation
Recipient: Garofalo, Donald: Environmental Photographic Interpretation Center (US EPA)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                            I n d e x Docunent Nunber O r d e r                                          Page: 3
                                    COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Documents


                                                                   Bgngggggggggggggggggggggggnnscggggggggggggssncggggggggg


Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0056 To 0057                                                    Date: 09/01/88

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Final Field Operations Plan for the Cosden Chemical Coatings
       Corporation site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author; Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Alvi, Shaheer: US EPA
           Breville, Maggie: US EPA
 Attached: COS-001-0058

Docunent Number: COS-001-0058 To 0174                      Parent: COS-001-0056          Date: 09/01/88

Title: Final Field Operations Plan (FOP), Remedial Investigation Phase 1, Cosden Chemical Coatings
       Corporation Site, Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Weiss, Jonathan S.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: none


Document Nunber: COS-001-0175 To 0273                                                    Date: 10/01/88

Title: Final Field Operations Plan (FOP) Remedial Investigation Phase I, Cosden Chemical Coatings
       Corporation Site, Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: none: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA


Document Number: COS-001-0274 To 0275                                                    Date: 09/28/90

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Final Phase II Field Operations Plan for the Cosden Chemical
       Coatings Corporation site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Alvi, Shaheer: US EPA
           Marsenison, Paul: US EPA
 Attached: COS-001-0276

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                                Index Document Number Order                                           Page: 4
                                        COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Docunents

CgSggggSSSSSSSSSSSggggggSSSSSSSSSXSSSSSggggggXxgggggggggggggggggggBggggsggggsgssxSSSgSSggBgggggggggggSgSgSXggSSXggggssgg



Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0276 To 0471                    Parent: COS-001-0274          Date: 09/01/90

Title: Final Field Operations Plan, Remedial Investigation Phase II, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation
       Site, Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: none: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA


Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0472 To 0473                                                  Date: 09/21/88

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Final Work Plan for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation
       site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Alvi, Shaheer: US EPA
           Breville, Maggie: US EPA
 Attached: COS-001-0474

Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0474 To 0554                    Parent: COS-001-0472          Date: 09/01/88

Title: Final Work Plan, Remedial Investigation - Phase I, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Site,
       Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Weiss, Jonathan S.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA



Docunent Number: COS-001-0555 To 0810                                                  Date: 10/01/89

Title: Final Interim RI Report, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corp. Site, Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: REPORT
   Author: none: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                                Index Docunent Nunber Order                                            Page: 5
                                        COSOEN CHEMICAL CQATIHGS CORPORATION SITE Docunents

»BB»Bg«BSBgBBggSEBBB»»BBSBgBBBgBBBa»BgBB»BB»B»»B«»»BBBBgBB»»BgBg»gB»g«»«g»rB»»»gBBgBggBg«B«gBSBXB«»BBgSgggBX»B««B«»«Ba


Docunent Number: COS-001-0811 To 0812                                                  Date: 06/30/92

Title: (Letter forwarding the Final Contaminant Fate and Transport Study/Risk Assessment Report for
       the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation aite)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Hacker, Jill: US EPA
           Marsenison, Paul: US EPA
 Attached: COS-001-0813

Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0813 To 1145                     Parent: COS-001-0811         Date: 06/01/92

Title: Final Contaminant Fate and Transport Study/Risk Assessment - Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation
       Site, Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Sielski, Mark: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA



Docunent Nunber: COS-001-1146 To 1147                                                  Date: 06/30/92

Title: (Letter forwarding the Final Phase II Results Report for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation
       site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Hacker, Jill: US EPA
           Marsenison, Paul: US EPA
 Attached: COS-001-1148

Docunent Nuifcer: COS-001-1148 To 1487                    Parent: COS-001-1146         Date: 06/01/92

Title: Final Phase II Results Report - Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Site, Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Sielski, Mark; Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                                Index Docunent Nuifcer Order                                           Page: 6
                                        COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Docunents

gggSSSggggXEggggXgggSggXXgSgZBSSgggggXSSBESSgSggSBXBSgXBBggggggggXSBBXXBgggggggggggBgSBBgggggggSBgXgSggSBEXBSgXSgggggg



Document Nuidber: COS-001-1488 To 1490                                                 Date: 07/15/92

Title; (Letter forwarding the revised Draft Final Feasibility Study Report for the Cosden Chemical
       Coatings Corporation site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Hacker, Jill: US EPA
           Marsenison, Paul: US EPA
 Attached: COS-001-1491

Document Nunber: COS-001-1491 To 1910                    Parent: COS-001-1488          Date: 07/01/92

Title: Draft Final Feasibility Study Report - Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Site, Beverly,
       New Jersey

     Type: REPORT
Condition: DRAFT
   Author: Sielski, Mark: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA



Document Nunber: COS-001-1911 To 1920                                                  Date: 12/17/87

Title: (Special Notice Letter)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Luftig, Stephen D.: US EPA
Recipient: Oiler, Louis: Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation



Docunent Nui^r: COS-001-1921 To 1922                                                   Date: 02/25/88

Title: (104(e) Request for Information Letter)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Uzzo. Thomas K.: US EPA
Recipient: Oiler, Louis: Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                             Index Docunent Number Order                                                  Page: 7
                                     COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Docunents

    «g«ggggSggggBggBSgBSaggggaggggg=gggaggaggggg»«BBBggBBggggg»a.^«BgBBgggggg««BBBgggggagSggBgBgBXBBggggB«BBBgB



Docunent Number: COS-001-1923 To 1928                                                 Date: 07/29/92

Title: (Notice Letter for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Callahan, Kathleen C : US EPA
Recipient: Oiler, Louis: Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation



Document Nunber: COS-001-1929 To 1933                                                 Date: 07/29/92

Title: (Notice Letter for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Callahan, Kathleen C : US EPA
Recipient: Oiler, Louis: Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation



Document Number: COS-001-1934 To 1937                                                 Date: 11/30/88

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Final Community Relations Plan for the Cosden Chemical Coatings
       Corporation site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Peterson, Lisa: US EPA
 Attached: COS-001-1938

Docunent Nunber: COS-001-1938 To 1957                  Parent: COS-001-1934           Date: 11/01/88

Title: Final Community Relations Plan, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Site, City of Beverly,
       Burlington County, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Rumpp, James H. Jr.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA



Docunent Number: COS-001-1958 To 1960                                                 Date: 01/12/90

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Draft Public Information Meeting Summary for the Cosden Chemical
       Coatings Corporation site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Johnson, Lillian: US EPA
 Attached: COS-001-1961

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                                Index Document Nuitwr Order                                               Page: 8
                                        COSOEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Docunents

                         gBaBSBgxBxxxgggsggBxxggggg«gg»gggg«aBB«BBgBg«gBgggggirirTrgBgggBgggB«BBggggggggsggggga


Docunent Nunber: COS-001-1961 To 1981                    Parent: COS-001-1958          Date: 01/01/90

Title; Draft Public Information Meeting Sumiary, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Site, City
       of Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
Condition: DRAFT
   Author: Zanzalari, Gerry: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA


Docunent Number: COS-001-1982 To 2069                                                  Date: 08/06/92

Title: (Public Meeting Transcript for a hearing on the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Proposed
       Plan)

     Type: LEGAL DOCUMENT
   Author: Johnson Cahill, Mary: Degnan & Bateman
Recipient: none: none

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                             Index Chronological Order                                                 Page: 1
                                     COSOEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Docunents

«BBBggggggggggggagggggaggggBgxxxgBxxaxBgaxgxBgB»ggggggg»g«»»BBgBBggggBBggggggBagggggBgggggggggggggggggggggggggggggBgsgai


Document Nunber: COS-001-0015 To 0022                                                Date:   / /

Title: (Maps, graphic drawings, and a geological description pertaining to the Cosden Chemical Coatings
       Corporation site)

     Type: GRAPHIC
   Author: none: none
Recipient: none: none
 Attached: COS-001-0023   COS-001-0025

Document Number: COS-001-0023 To 0024                  Parent: COS-001-0015          Date:   / /

Title: (Newspaper article entitled;) 2 Agencies investigate paint dump

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Lerner, Gail C : Burlington County Times
Recipient: none: none


Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0029 To 0029                                                Date:   / /

Title: (Map of the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation site area)

     Type: GRAPHIC
   Author: none: none
Recipient: none: none



Document Number: COS-001-0025 To 0025                  Parent: COS-001-0015          Date: 07/18/84

Title: (Newspaper article entitled:) Agencies probe paint dump in Beverly

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Lerner, Gail C : Burlington County Tines
Recipient: none: none


Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0026 To 0026                                                Date: 08/14/84

Title: (Memo detailing a July, 1984, NJDEP inspection of the Moleta - Cosden Chemical Coatings Drun
       site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Bonanni, Daniel J.: NJ Dept of Law & Public Safety
Recipient: none: NJ Dept of Law & Public Safety

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                              Index Chronological Order                                        Page; 2
                                      COSOEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Docunents




Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0027 To 0027                                                Date: 08/14/84

Title: (Memo detailing an August 10, 1984, NJDEP inspection of the Moleta • Cosden Chemical Coatings
       site)

     Type; CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Bonanni, Daniel J.: NJ Dept of Law t Public Safety
Recipient: file: NJ Dept of Law & Public Safety



Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0028 To 0028                                                Date: 08/14/84

Title: (Memo discussing an August 13, 1984, surveillance at Cosden Industrial Coatings site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Bonanni, Daniel J.: NJ Dept of LawftPublic Safety
Recipient: none: NJ Dept of Law & Public Safety



Docunent Number: COS-001-0001 To 0014                                                Date: 06/07/85

Title: Potential Hazardous Waste Site, Site Inspection Report, Part 1, Site Location and Inspection
       Information (for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation site)

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Mazur, Deborah:   NJ Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP)
Recipient: none: none



Document Number: COS-001-1911 To 1920                                                Date: 12/17/87

Title: (Special Notice Letter)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Luftig, Stephen D.; US EPA
Recipient: Oiler, Louis: Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation



Docunent Number: COS-001-1921 To 1922                                                Date: 02/25/88

Title: (104(e) Request for Information Letter)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Uzzo, Thomas K.: US EPA
Recipient: Oiler, Louis: Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                                Index Chronological Order                                             Page: 3
                                        COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Docunents

ggggggBagggggxgEgaBgBggggggaBBggggggggggggggBBgggggBgggggagaBXBggXBBBgBgBBggggggggggaggggggBggggggggaagaagggggggggggBg



Document Nunber: COS-001-0056 To 0057                                                  Date: 09/01/88

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Final Field Operations Plan for the Cosden Chemical Coatings
       Corporation site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.; Ebasco Services
Recipient: Alvi, Shaheer; US EPA
           Breville, Maggie; US EPA
 Attached: COS-001-0058

Docunent Number: COS-001-0058 To 0174                    Parent; COS-001-0056          Date; 09/01/88

Title: Final Field Operations Plan (FOP), Remedial Investigation Phase I, Cosden Chemical Coatings
       Corporation Site, Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Weiss, Jonathan S.: Ebasco Services
Recipient; none: none



Docunent Nuiter: COS-001-0474 To 0554                    Parent; COS-001-0472          Date: 09/01/88

Title: Final Work Plan, Remedial Investigation - Phase I, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Site,
       Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Weiss, Jonathan S.; Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA


Document Nunber: COS-001-0472 To 0473                                                  Date: 09/21/88

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Final Work Plan for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation
       site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.; Ebasco Services
Recipient: Alvi, Shaheer: US EPA
           Breville, Maggie: US EPA
 Attached; COS-001-0474

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                            Index Chronological Order                                            Page; 4
                                    COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Docunents



Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0030 To 0036                                                  Date: 10/01/88

Title: Site Analysis, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corp., Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: FINANCIAL/TECHNICAL
   Author: Warner, Eric D.: Bionetics Corporation
Recipient: Garofalo, Donald: Environmental Photographic Interpretation Center (US EPA)
 Attached: COS-001-0037

Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0175 To 0273                                                  Date: 10/01/88

Title: Final Field Operations Plan (FOP) Remedial Investigation Phase I, Cosden Chemical Coatings
       Corporation Site, Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: none: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA


Docunent Nurber: COS-001-1938 To 1957                 Parent: COS-001-1934             Date; 11/01/88

Title: Final Community Relations Plan, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Site, City of Beverly,
       Burlington County, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Rumpp, James H. Jr.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA


Docunent Number: COS-001-1934 To 1937                                                  Date: 11/30/88

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Final Community Relations Plan for the Cosden Chemical Coatings
       Corporation site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE                                                          *
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Peterson, Lisa: US EPA
 Attached: COS-001-1938

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                                Index Chronological Order                                         Page: 5
                                        COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Docunents




Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0037 To 0055                    Parent: COS-001-0030          Date: 02/01/89

Title: Site Analysis, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation, Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: FINANCIAL/TECHNICAL
   Author: Warner, Eric D.: Bionetics Corporation
Recipient; Garofalo, Donald; Environmental Photographic Interpretation Center (US EPA)



Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0555 To 0810                                                  Date: 10/01/89

Title: Final Interim RI Report, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corp. Site, Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: REPORT
   Author: none: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA


Docunent Nunber; COS-001-1961 To 1981                    Parent; COS-001-1958          Date: 01/01/90

Title: Draft Public Information Meeting Summary, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Site, City
       of Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
Condition: DRAFT
   Author: Zanzalari, Gerry: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA



Docunent Nunber: COS-001-1958 To 1960                                                  Date: 01/12/90

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Draft Public Information Meeting Summary for the Cosden Chemical
       Coatings Corporation site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author; Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Johnson, Lillian: US EPA
 Attached: COS-001-1961




                                                                                                                    01

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                                Index Chronological Order                                           Page: 6
                                        COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Documents




Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0276 To 0471                    Parent: COS-001-0274          Date: 09/01/90

Title: Final Field Operations Plan, Remedial Investigation Phase II, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation
       Site, Beverly, New Jersey

     Type; PLAN
   Author: none; Ebasco Services
Recipient: none; US EPA



Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0274 To 0275                                                  Date: 09/28/90

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Final Phase II Field Operations Plan for the Cosden Chemical
       Coatings Corporation site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Alvi, Shaheer: US EPA
           Marsenison, Paul: US EPA
 Attached; COS-001-0276

Boeunent Nunber: COS-001-0813 To 1145                    Parent: COS-001-0811          Date: 06/01/92

Title: Final Contaminant Fate and Transport Study/Risk Assessment - Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation
       Site, Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Sielski, Mark: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA



tocunent Nurber: COS-001-1148 To 1487                    Parent: COS-001-1146          Date: 06/01/92

Title: Final Phase II Results Report - Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Site, Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Sielski, Mark: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                            Index Chronological Order                                              Page; 7
                                    COSOEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Docunents




Document Nunber: COS-001-0811 To 0812                                               Date: 06/30/92

Title: (Letter forwarding the Final Contaminant Fate and Transport Study/Risk Assessment Report for
       the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation aite)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Hacker, Jill: US EPA
           Marsenison, Paul: US EPA
 Attached: COS-001-0813

Docunent Nunber: COS-001-1146 To 1147                                               Date: 06/30/92

Title: (Letter forwarding the Final Phase II Results Report for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation
       site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.; Ebasco Services
Recipient: Hacker, Jill: US EPA
           Marsenison, Paul: US EPA
 Attached: COS-001-1148

Doci^ent Nunber: COS-001-1491 To 1910                 Parent: COS-001-1488          Date: 07/01/92

Title: Draft Final Feasibility Study Report - Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Site, Beverly,
       New Jersey

     Type: REPORT
Condition: DRAFT
   Author; Sielski, Mark: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA



Docunent Nunber: COS-001-1488 To 1490                                               Date: 07/15/92

Title: (Letter forwarding the revised Draft Final Feasibility Study Report for the Cosden Chemical
       Coatings Corporation site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.; Ebasco Services
Recipient: Hacker, Jill: US EPA
           Marsenison, Paul: US EPA
 Attached: COS-001-1491

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                             Index Chronological Order                                         Page: 8
                                     COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Docunents




Docunent Nuitier: COS-001-1923 To 1928                                              Date: 07/29/92

Title: (Notice Letter for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Callahan, Kathleen C : US EPA
Recipient; Oiler, Louis: Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation


Docunent Nunber: COS-001-1929 To 1933                                               Date: 07/29/92

Title: (Notice Letter for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Callahan, Kathleen C : US EPA
Recipient: Oiler, Louis: Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation



Docunent Number: COS-001-1982 To 2069                                               Date; 08/06/92

Title: (Public Meeting Transcript for a hearing on the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Proposed
       Plan)

     Type: LEGAL DOCUMENT
   Author: Johnson Cahill, Mary: Degnan & Bateman
Recipient: none: none

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                                Index Author Name Order                                               Page; 1
                                        COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINCS CORPORATION SITE Docunents

»gggSBgggggaasaaggaxgxg8BgaggaBxgxxggxxgggagggggagg»gggBgaB»BgggsxxaaxgagsaaaggagggggxgxgagxgxggggssaxxsggaggggBggaxaga


Document Nunber: COS-001-0015 To 0022                                                  Date:   / /

Title: (Maps, graphic drawings, and a geological description pertaining to the Cosden Chemical Coatings
       Corporation site)

     Type: GRAPHIC
   Author: none: none
Recipient: none: none
 Attached: COS-001-0023   COS-001-0025

Docunent Number; COS-001-0029 To 0029                                                  Date:   / /

Title: (Map of the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation site area)

     Type: GRAPHIC
   Author: none: none
Recipient: none: none



Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0175 To 0273                                                  Date: 10/01/88

Title: Final Field Operations Plan (FOP) Remedial Investigation Phase I, Cosden Chemical Coatings
       Corporation Site, Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: none: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA



Document Nunber: COS-001-0276 To 0471                    Parent: COS-001-0274          Date: 09/01/90

Title: Final Field Operations Plan, Remedial Investigation Phase II, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation
       Site, Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: none: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                            Index Author Name Order                                            Page: 2
                                    COSOEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Docunents




Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0555 To 0810                                               Date: 10/01/89

Title: Final Interim RI Report, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corp. Site, Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: REPORT
   Author: none: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA



Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0026 To 0026                                               Date: 08/14/84

Title: (Memo detailing a July, 1984, NJDEP inspection of the Moleta - Cosden Chemical Coatings Drun
       site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Bonanni, Daniel J.: NJ Dept of Law ft Public Safety
Recipient; none: NJ Dept of Law & Public Safety



Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0027 To 0027                                               Date: 08/14/84

Title: (Memo detailing an August 10, 1984, NJDEP inspection of the Moleta - Cosden Chemical Coatings
       site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Bonanni, Daniel J.: NJ Dept of Law ft Public Safety
Recipient: file: NJ Dept of Law & Public Safety



Document Number: COS-001-0028 To 0028                                               Date: 08/14/84

Title: (Memo discussing an August 13, 1984, surveillance at Cosden Industrial Coatings site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Bonanni, Daniel J.: NJ Dept of Law ft Public Safety
Recipient: none: NJ Dept of Law & Public Safety



Document Nunber: COS-001-1923 To 1928                                               Date; 07/29/92

Title: (Notice Letter for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation aite)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Callahan, Kathleen C ; US EPA
Recipient: Oiler, Louis; Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                                I n d e x A u t h o r Name O r d e r                                   Page; 3
                                     COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Documents


  gggggggggggsaaagggggggggggggggasaggggSBSBgggBggxgasgggggggggggagggaBsBBassggagggxxaBaaggggSBgggagaaagaagggaxgaaaagazgs


Docunent Nunber: COS-001-1929 To 1933                                                      Date: 07/29/92

Title: (Notice Letter for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation site)

     Type; CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Callahan, Kathleen C : US EPA
Recipient: Oiler, Louis: Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation



Document Nunber: COS-001-1982 To 2069                                                      Date: 08/06/92

Title: (Public Meeting Transcript for a hearing on the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Proposed
       Plan)

     Type; LEGAL DOCUMENT
   Author; Johnson Cahill, Mary; DegnanftBateman
Recipient: none: none



Docunent Number: C0S-0Q1-0023 To 0024                               Parent: COS-001-0015   Date:   / /

Title: (Newspaper article entitled:) 2 Agencies investigate paint dump

     Type; CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Lerner, Gail C : Burlington County Times
Recipient: none: none



Document Nunber: COS-001-0025 To 0025                               Parent: COS-001-0015   Date: 07/18/84

Title; (Newspaper article entitled:) Agencies probe paint dump in Beverly

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Lerner, Gail C : Burlington County Times
Recipient: none: none



Document Number: COS-001-1911 To 1920                                                      Date: 12/17/87

Title: (Special Notice Letter)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Luftig, Stephen D.: US EPA
Recipient: O U e r , Louis: Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                            Index Author Name Order                                           Page; 4
                                    COSOEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Docunents




Document Nunber: COS-001-0001 To 0014                                               Date: 06/07/85

Title: Potential Hazardous Waste Site, Site Inspection Report, Part 1, Site Location and Inspection
       Information (for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation site)

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Mazur, Deborah: NJ Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP)
Recipient: none: none



Docunent Number: COS-001-1938 To 1957                 Parent: COS-001-1934          Date: 11/01/88

Title: Final Community Relations Plan, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Site, City of Beverly,
       Burlington County, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Runpp, James H. Jr.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA



Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0056 To 0057                                               Date: 09/01/88

Title; (Letter forwarding the enclosed Final Field Operations Plan for the Cosden Chemical Coatings
       Corporation site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Alvi, Shaheer: US EPA
           Breville, Maggie: US EPA
 Attached: COS-001-0058

Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0274 To 0275                                               Date: 09/28/90

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Final Phase II Field Operations Plan for the Cosden Chemical
       Coatings Corporation site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Alvi, Shaheer: US EPA
           Marsenison, Paul: US EPA
 Attached; COS-001-0276

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                            Index Author Name Order                                                Page; 5
                                    COSOEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Docunents




Document Number: COS-001-0472 To 0473                                               Date: 09/21/88

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Final Work Plan for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation
  '    aite)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient; Alvi, Sh^eer: US EPA
           Breville, Maggie: US EPA
 Attached: COS-001-0474

Docunent Number: COS-001-0811 To 0812                                               Date; 06/30/92

Title: (Letter forwarding the Final Contaminant Fate and Transport Study/Risk Assessment Report for
       the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation site)

     Type; CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Hacker, Jill: US EPA
           Marsenison, Paul: US EPA
 Attached: COS-001-0813

Document Nunber: COS-001-1146 To 1147                                               Date: 06/30/92

Title: (Letter forwarding the Final Phase II Results Report for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation
       site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Hacker, Jill: US EPA
           Marsenison, Paul: US EPA
 Attached: COS-001-1148

Docunent Nunber: COS-001-1488 To 1490                                               Date; 07/15/92

Title: (Letter forwarding the revised Draft Final Feasibility Study Report for the Cosden Chemical
       Coatings Corporation site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Hacker, Jill: US EPA
           Marsenison, Paul: US EPA
 Attached: COS-001-1491

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                            Index Author Name Order                                                   Page: 6
                                    COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Docunents

SBsxxxBxxsaxxxxxxxsaaaaaaaagxagaaaggBggaxggggsxxggggsgxgasBggggassxgggaxgggssBggxsSBBBBgggasgaaaaaaasxgxgggggaaggaBBBg


Document Nunber; COS-001-1934 To 1937                                               Date: 11/30/88

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Final Community Relations Plan for the Cosden Chemical Coatings
       Corporation site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Peterson, Lisa: US EPA
 Attached: COS-001-1938

Docunent Number: COS-001-1958 To 1960                                               Date: 01/12/90

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Draft Public Information Meeting Summary for the Cosden Chemical
       Coatings Corporation site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author; Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Johnson, Lillian: US EPA
 Attached: COS-001-1961

Docunent Nunber: COS-001-0813 To 1145                 Parent: COS-001-0811          Date; 06/01/92

Title: Final Contaminant Fate and Transport Study/Risk Assessment - Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation
       Site, Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Sielski, Mark: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA



Docunent Nunber: COS-001-1148 To 1487                 Parent: COS-001-1146          Date: 06/01/92

Title: Final Phase II Results Report - Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Site, Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Sielski, Mark: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                                Index Author Name Order                                         Page: 7
                                        COSOEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Docunents

                               ggaaBggggsgggaagaBgBBggagaggggggaaaBBgggggBgggggaggaxgggaa


Document Nunber: COS-001-1491 To 1910                    Parent: COS-001-1488          Date: 07/01/92

Title: Draft Final Feasibility Study Report - Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Site, Beverly,
       New Jersey                            *

     Type: REPORT
Condition: DRAFT
   Author: Sielski, Mark: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA


Docunent Number: COS-001-1921 To 1922                                                  Date: 02/25/88

Title: (104(e) Request for Information Letter)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Uzzo, Thomas K.: US EPA
Recipient: Oiler, Louis: Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation


Docunent Number: COS-001-0030 To 0036                                                  Date; 10/01/88

Title: Site Analysis, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corp., Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: FINANCIAL/TECHNICAL
   Author: Uarner, Eric D.: Bionetics Corporation
Recipient: Garofalo, Donald: Enviromental Photographic Interpretation Center (US EPA)
 Attached: COS-001-0037

Docunent Number: COS-001-0037 To 0055                    Parent: COS-001-0030          Date: 02/01/89

Title: Site Analysis, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation, Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: FINANCIAL/TECHNICAL
   Author: Warner, Eric D.: Bionetics Corporation
Recipient: Garofalo, Donald: Environmental Photographic Interpretation Center (US EPA)



Docunent Number: COS-001-0058 To 0174                    Parent: COS-001-0056          Date: 09/01/88

Title: Final Field Operations Plan (FOP), Remedial Investigation Phase I, Cosden Chemical Coatings
       Corporation Site, Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Weiss, Jonathan S.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: none

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/15/92                                Index Author Name Order                                         Page: 8
                                        COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE Docunents




Document Nuitwr: COS-001-0474 To 0554                     Parent: COS-001-0472         Date: 09/01/88

Title: Final Work Plan, Remedial Investigation - Phase I, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Site,
       Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Weiss, Jonathan S.: Ebasco Services
Recipient; none: US EPA



Docunent Nunber: COS-001-1961 To 1981                     Parent: COS-001-1958         Date: 01/01/90

Title: Draft Public Information Meeting Suimary, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Site, City
       of Beverly, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
Condition: DRAFT
   Author: Zanzalari, Gerry: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

            33
       APPENDIX IV
STATE LETTER OF CONCURRENCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY
COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS
  BEVERLY, NEW JERSEY
     SEPTEMBER 1992

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 2
                      RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY
            COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE
                       BEVERLY, NEW JERSEY

This Responsiveness Summary is organized into four sections and
three appendices as described below:
     I.    RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY OVERVIEW; This section briefly
           describes the objectives and the format of the
           Responsiveness Summary for the Site.
     II.   BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS; This
           section provides the history of community concerns and
           interests regarding the Site.
     III. SUMMARY OF MAJOR OUESTIONS. COMMENTS AND CONCERNS; This
          section summarizes oral comments received by EPA at
          public availability sessions and the August 6, 1992
          public meeting, and provides EPA's responses to these
          comments.
     IV. WRITTEN COMMENTS AND RESPONSES: This section contains
         all written comments received by EPA during the public
         comment period as well as EPA's written responses to
         those comments.

I.   RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY OVERVIEW
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) established a
public comment period from July 27, 1992 through August 26, 1992.
The public comment period provided interested parties with the
opportunity to comment on the remedial investigation and
feasibility study (RI/FS) reports and the Proposed Plan for the
Site, in the City of Beverly, Burlington County, New Jersey.
EPA held a Public Information Meeting on August 6, 1992 at 7:30
p.m. in the Beverly Municipal Building, to outline the remedial
alternatives described in the Proposed Plan (or in the FS) and to
present EPA's and NJDEPE's Preferred Alternatives for remediating
the contaminated soil, ground water, and building on the Site.
This Responsiveness Summary summarizes the oral and written
comments received by citizens during the public comment period
and EPA's responses to those comments. The EPA, in consultation
with the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and
Energy (NJDEPE), is selecting a final remedy for the Cosden
Chemical Coatings Site (the Site) only after reviewing and
considering all public comments received during the public
comment period.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The remedy to clean up the soil, ground water, and the building
at the Site is selected by the EPA Region II Administrator and is
documented in this Record of Decision (ROD). EPA will issue a
press release to notify interested citizens that a remedial
decision has been made. The ROD, including this Responsiveness
Summary, and the other site-related documents that EPA used to
select the remedy, will be placed in the information repositories
for public review.
II.   BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS
EPA community activities are designed to ensure that the local
public is provided with information about Site activities, has
input to decisions about Superfund actions, and is kept well-
informed about the progress of those actions. EPA initiated
community relations activities for the Site with community
interviews, conducted in July 1988, with residents and local
officials of the City of Beverly. These interviews were
conducted to aid EPA in developing a community relations plan
tailored to the needs of the community affected by the Site. In
order to update local residents and officials on Site activities,
public availability sessions were held on November 11, 1988, and
August 31, 1989. In addition, a public availability session was
held on February 20, 1991 to present the results of the Phase I
Remedial Investigation.

Several residents and local officials attended the recent public
meeting held by EPA on August 6, 1992. The meeting was held to
outline the remedial alternatives described in the Proposed Plan
(or in the FS) and to present EPA's Preferred Remedial
Alternative for cleanup of the Site. The community's major
questions and concerns, which were raised during the public
meeting and three public availabilities are summarized in
Sections III and IV of the Responsiveness Summary.

III. SUMMARY OF MAJOR OUESTIONS. COMMENTS AND CONCERNS:

•    Common issues raised during the three public availability
sessions held on November 11, 1988, August 31, 1989, and February
20, 1991.
COMMENT: A resident wanted to know the impact of soil
contamination at the Site on adjacent residential properties.
RESPONSE: During the field investigations at the Site,
approximately 50 surface soil samples and 40 soil borings were
taken to define the nature and extent of contamination in the
soils. Additionally, in Phase II of the field investigation,
soil samples were taken on the residential properties that are
adjacent to the Site. The results of the residential soil

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

samples confirmed that the contamination on the Site had not
migrated off site.
COMMENT: Several commenters demanded that access to the Site be
restricted.
RESPONSE: A fence was constructed around the area of primary
contamination in July 1989.
COMMENT: One resident wanted to know the impact of ground-water
contamination on the municipal water supply, as well as any
nearby wells that might exist.
RESPONSE: Nine monitoring wells were installed on and off the
Site, to define the nature and extent of ground-water
contamination caused by the Site. Because of a relatively level
water table, the ground-water plume has remained primarily
beneath the Site and has not migrated toward the municipal water
wells. Also, a well survey was conducted to determine whether
any drinking water wells existed within a one-mile radius of the
Site. No drinking water wells were found within this one-mile
distance.
COMMENT: Several residents expressed concern that there was an
increased rate of cancer as a result of contamination at the
Site.
RESPONSE: The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry
(ATSDR) requested that the New Jersey Department of Health
conduct a cancer cluster study. The cancer cluster study
reported that there was no evidence of an increased incidence of
cancer in the City of Beverly.
COMMENT: Commenters expressed concern that other facilities in
the area might be contributing contamination to the Site.
RESPONSE: Results from the Remedia*l Investigation indicate that
the contamination at the Site is directly related to the paint
manufacturing activities conducted at the Site.
COMMENT: Residents asked if, due to the limited hours of the
repository located in the Beverly Municipal Building, a second
repository could be established.
RESPONSE: A second repository was established in the Burlington
County Library.
COMMENT: Several residents requested that any information of a
serious nature discovered during the RI/FS be made available
through a public meeting as soon as possible.
RESPONSE: Although no immediate health threat existed, a public

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

availability session was held on February 20, 1991 to present the
results of the Phase I field investigation and discuss the scope
of work for the Phase II field investigation.
*    The following is a summary of comments and concerns
expressed during the public meeting held on August 6, 1992.
COMMENT: Will the stabilized soil be left on site?
RESPONSE: Yes. In-situ stabilization is a process that is
designed to be conducted in place; the soil will remain in place.
COMMENT: Are all of the areas of contaminated soil within the
fenced area?
RESPONSE: No. One small area to the northeast is contaminated
with metals and is outside the fenced area. This area is not an
immediate health risk to residents.
COMMENT: Will the area of contaminated soil outside the fence be
treated?
RESPONSE: Yes.
COMMENT: What will the solidified soil look like when completed?
Will it look like a concrete block?
RESPONSE: The solidified soil matrix will resemble concrete, but
mixed with soil instead of sand or stone.
COMMENT: Will .there be any restrictions placed on the land once
the remediation is completed?
RESPONSE: Yes. There will be deed restrictions placed on the
areas of stabilized soil to ensure that the material in those
areas is not disturbed. If the integrity of the solidified
material is disturbed, the protection against direct contact,
ingestion, and inhalation risks is compromised.
COMMENT: Can a structure be built on a slab over top of the
stabilized material?
RESPONSE: Yes. Based on the results of the treatability studies,
specific restrictions on building on or around the stabilized
material will be developed.
COMMENT: How long will the soil remain solidified?   Can it break
up?
RESPONSE: The stabilized material will theoretically remain fixed
for an indefinite period of time. Although the material is not
indestructible, and will be subject to weathering, any

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                6
deterioration should be insignificant.
COMMENT: What is the approximate surface area of soil to be
stabilized?
RESPONSE: The surface area of soil to be stabilized is
approximately 22,000 square feet.
COMMENT: Is there any other way to get rid of the hazardous
substances at the Site that would make it more attractive for
future development?
RESPONSE: All remedial alternatives must at least be protective
of human health and the environment, and attain Applicable and
Relevant and Appropriate Requirements (ARARs). Of the
technologies that could achieve these goals, stabilization was
evaluated in the Proposed Plan. For comparative analysis, both
on-site and off-site disposal were evaluated in detail. In
summary, off-site treatment and disposal of the stabilized soil
would increase risks to residents and on-site workers during
implementation compared to in-situ stabilization, and,
furthermore, would increase the present worth cost by 45 percent
over in-situ stabilization. Therefore, although off-site
disposal of the stabilized soil would be more suitable to future
development, the negative impacts related to the short-term
effectiveness, and the increased cost, favored in-situ
stabilization as the Preferred Alternative.

COMMENT: Is there a possibility that the ground-water plume could
contaminate the municipal water supply?
RESPONSE: Contamination of the municipal water supply is not an
immediate concern. However, the risk that, in the future, the
ground-water plume may migrate off site is unacceptable. Ground-
water remedial alternatives were developed based on the future
risk of ingestion of the ground-water plume.
COMMENT: What will the Site look like when the remediation is
complete? Will equipment be left there forever?
RESPONSE: The stabilized soil will be covered by a 12 inch soil
cover and regraded to match the Site topography. The building
will be removed from the Site. The ground-water pumping and
treatment system may remain on the Site up to thirty years.
COMMENT: What will the pumping and treatment system look like?
RESPONSE: The pumping and treatment system will be a series of
tanks and pumps similar to a small wastewater treatment facility.
A detailed drawing of the system is presented in the FS.
COMMENT: Will the ground-water remediation impact the farmers

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  7
field to the south of the Site?
RESPONSE: No. The ground-water plume is contained beneath the
Site. The extraction and recharge systems will be designed to
minimize any effects to the ground water off the Site.
COMMENT: How deep is the ground-water plume?
RESPONSE: The depth to the water table is approximately twenty
feet; the ground-water contamination extends down approximately
sixty feet.
COMMENT: Is the plume in the same aquifer as the municipal water
supply?
RESPONSE: Yes.
COMMENT: When EPA has completed the remedial action, will the
Site be given back to the City of Beverly?
RESPONSE: EPA does not own the Site; the Site is owned by Mr.
Oiler. Mr. Oiler would have to be contacted by the City of
Beverly regarding his intentions.
COMMENT: Does EPA have the money to remediate the Site?
RESPONSE: Yes. Although the funds are not yet obligated, EPA has
federal funds that are used when responsible parties cannot fund
the cleanup. In this case, it is likely that neither Cosden
Chemical Coatings Corporation nor Mr. Louis Oiler are financially
viable to fund the required cleanup.
COMMENT: Could the City of Beverly be held liable for funding the
cleanup?
RESPONSE: No, not unless the City assumes ownership of the
property. If the City of Beverly were to foreclose on the
property and assume ownership of the property, it could
theoretically become liable.
IV. WRITTEN COMMENTS AND RESPONSES;

A letter, dated August 10, 1992, (Appendix D) was submitted
during the public comment period. A summary of those written
comments and the responses follows:
COMMENT: The in-situ stabilization process is ineffective as a
result of the 40 percent increase in the volume of the
contaminated matrix that results.
RESPONSE: The primary objective of the soil remediation is to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  8
protect human health and the environment by reducing the risks
associated with direct contact, ingestion, and inhalation of the
contaminated soil. Although the volume of contaminated material
does increase, the primary objective, to protect human health, is
achieved. The metal and PCB contaminated soil will be
immobilized and therefore reduce the direct contact, ingestion,
and inhalation hazards to within the acceptable risk range.
Also, the 40 percent increase in volume is a worst case estimate;
the expected volume increase may only be about 10 percent.
COMMENT: Active ground-water remediation is unwarranted. Natural
biodegradation and attenuation should be sufficient to reduce the
levels of contaminants in the ground water to acceptable levels.
RESPONSE: The carcinogenic and noncarcinogenic risks to human
health from the ingestion of ground water were calculated to be
unacceptable. The following contaminants were found in the
ground water above promulgated Federal and/or State Maximum
Contaminant Levels: toluene, xylene, trichloroethene, chromium,
and lead. The nature of these contaminants, and our knowledge of
the hydrogeologic conditions at the Site, do not support
biodegradation and/or attenuation as sufficient to remediate the
ground water. The aquifer, which is contaminated above health-
based levels, is a major drinking water source for the area. If
the ground-water plume is not actively remediated, it could
migrate off site and contaminate the nearby municipal water
system. Remediation of the plume after it has migrated off the
Site would substantially increase the cost of remediation.
Therefore, active remediation through a pumping and treatment
system is prudent for reasons of human health as well as cost.

COMMENT: The selected remedy is not the most cost-effective
combination of alternatives. The total estimated present worth
of the Preferred Alternatives (S-6 ($3,318,000), GW-3
($16,348,800) and B-4 (3,104,900)) is $22,771,700. It would be
more cost effective to select Alternative S-4 ($7,187,850) for
the soil. No Action ($0) for the ground water, and B-4
($3,104,900) for the building; the total present worth of this
remedy would be $10,292,750.
RESPONSE: The total estimated present worth of the Preferred
Alternatives is:
          Alternative S-6     -       $3,268,000
          Alternative GW-3    -       $8,799,900
          Alternative B-4     -       $3.104.900
          Total Present Worth -       $15,172,800
The total present worth costs presented in the Proposed Plan
incorporate the original capital cost plus the operation and
maintenance costs over a thirty year period, then is discounted

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

at 5 percent.
The No Action alternative for the ground water (GW-l) was
eliminated from further evaluation in the Proposed Plan because
it would not be protective of human health or the environment,
and it would not attain ARARs. Alternative GW-3 was selected
because it is protective of human health and the environment and
it would attain ARARs.
Alternative S-6 was selected because it is protective of human
health and the environment, would attain ARARs, and compared to
Alternative S-4, is more cost effective. The total present worth
for Alternative S-6 is $3,268,000, and for Alternative S-4 is
$7,187,850. The increment in cost of Alternative S-4 over
Alternative S-6 ($3,919,850) could not be justified based on
additional benefits to the protection of human health and the
environment.



                                                                           )




                                                                           I




                                                                       n




                                                                   •   ^




                                                                   -Q
