LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: Report:  Record of Decision Amendment, South Jersey Clothing Company Site, Garden State Cleaners Site, Buena Borough, Atlantic County New Jersey, prepared by U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 2, September 2010
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/109642
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 661f9115839b02d49ca264c0ade5104a437fadf7f90529507582632d61886a3b
Source PDF pages: 90
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                             *109642*
                                               109642

RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT


    South Jersey Clothing Company Site

        Garden State Cleaners Site

Buena Borough, Atlantic County, New Jersey




   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

                Region II

             September 2010




                                                    500568

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            DECLARATION STATEMENT
                         RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT


SITE NAME AND LOCATION

South Jersey Clothing Company (EPA ID# NJD980766828)
Garden State Cleaners (EPA ID# NJD053280160)
Town of Minotola, Buena Borough, Atlantic County, New Jersey

STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE
This decision document presents the Amended Remedy for contaminated soil at the South Jersey
Clothing Company and Garden State Cleaners sites (the Sites) located in Buena Borough,
Atlantic County, New Jersey. The original Record of Decision (ROD) addressing contaminated
soil and groundwater at the Sites was signed on September 26, 1991.

The Amended Remedy was selected in accordance with the requirements of the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, as amended (CERCLA), 42
U.S.C. §9601 et seq., and to the extent practicable, the National Oil and Hazardous Substances
Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 CFR Part 300. This decision is based on the
Administrative Record file for the Sites, an index of which can be found in Appendix IV.

The State of New Jersey concurs with the ROD Amendment. A copy of the related concurrence
letter can be found in Appendix V.

ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE

The response action selected in this ROD Amendment is necessary to protect the public health,
welfare, or the environment from actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from the
Sites into the environment.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY

The Remedy described in this document addresses continuing sources of groundwater
contamination at the Sites which were not sufficiently addressed by Remedial Action activities
completed in 1995 at the Garden State Cleaners site and, in 2001, at the South Jersey Clothing
Company site.

The major components of the Amended Remedy include the following:

   •   Excavation of contaminated soil, where practicable;
   •   In-situ treatment of deeper soil and clay lenses with technologies such as chemical
       oxidation or enhanced soil vapor extraction, when excavation is impracticable;




                                                                                         500569

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   •   Treatment of any volatile organic compounds removed by the in-situ treatment process at
       the on-site groundwater treatment plant, where appropriate; and
   •   Acquisition and demolition of a building at the Garden State Cleaners site.

DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS
Part I: Statutory Requirements
The Amended Remedy is protective of human health and the environment, complies with federal
and state requirements that are applicable or relevant arid appropriate to the remedial actions to '
the extent practicable, and is cost-effective. EPA has determined that the Amended Remedy
represents the maximum extent to which permanent solutions and treatment technologies can be
utilized in a practicable manner at the Sites.

Part 2: Statutory Preference for Treatment
The Amended Remedy meets the statutory preference for the use of remedies that involve
treatment as a principal element.

Part 3: Five-Year Review Requirements
Because the remedy will not result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants
remaining above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, EPA anticipates
that a five-year review will not be required for the soil remedy. However, because it may take
more than five years to attain remedial action objectives and cleanup levels for the groundwater
at the Sites, policy reviews will be conducted until the remediation goals are achieved to ensure
that the groundwater remedy is, or will be, protective of human health and the environment.




                                                                                            500570

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ROD DATA CERTIFICATION CHECKLIST

The following information is included in the Decision Summary section of this ROD
Amendment. Additional information can be found in the Administrative Record file for these
Sites.

   •   Chemicals of concern and their respective concentrations may be found in the "Site
       Characteristics" section.
       A discussion of source materials constituting principal threats may be found in the
       "Principal Threat Waste" section.
       A discussion of the baseline risk represented by the chemicals of concern may be found
       in the "Summary of Site Risks" section. This discussion is based on the baseline risk
       assessment from the 1991 ROD. Cleanup goals for areas that are sources to groundwater
       contamination can be found in the "Remedial Action Objectives" section.
   •   Current and reasonably anticipated future land use assumptions and current and potential
       future uses of groundwater used in the baseline risk assessment and ROD can be found in
       the "Current and Potential Future Site and Resource Uses" section.
       Estimated capital, operation and maintenance (O&M), and total present worth costs,
       discount rate, and the number of years over which the remedy cost estimates are
       projected can be found in the "Description of Remedial Alternatives" section.

   •   Key factors that led to selecting the remedy may be found in the "Comparative Analysis
       of Alternatives" and "Statutory Determinations" sections.




      E. Mugdan, Director
Emergency & Remedial Response Division
EPA-Region 11




                                                                                         500571

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT

         DECISION SUMMARY



   South Jersey Clothing Company Site
       Garden State Cleaners Site

Buena Borough, Atlantic County, New Jersey




   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
                 Region II
          New York, New York
              September 2010


                                             500572

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             Table of Contents


SITE NAME, LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION                             1

SITE CHARACTERISTICS                                            1

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION                           4

CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES          ....4

BASIS FOR REMEDY MODIFICATION                                   4

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS                                           6

REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES                                    ...7

DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES                            8

COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES .......;         .'.   ....10

PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE..                                       14

SELECTED REMEDY        '                                       15

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS                                       16

DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES.....                      17


Appendices

APPENDIX     I     Figures
APPENDIX     II    Tables
APPENDIX     III   Responsiveness Summary
APPENDIX     IV    Administrative Record Index
APPENDIX     V     State Letter of Concurrence




                                     11
                                                             500573

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE NAME, LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION

The South Jersey Clothing Company (SJCC) site is located on the northwest comer of the
intersection of Central and Atlantic Avenues is Minotola, Buena Borough, New Jersey.
The Garden State Cleaners (GSC) site is located approximately 500 feet south of SJCC,
also west of Central Avenue and north of Summer Road (See Figure 1). The.SJCC and
GSC sites (collectively, the Sites) are located within Atlantic County less than two miles
from the intersection of Atlantic, Gloucester, and Cumberland Counties.

The area of the SJCC property is approximately 1.2 acres, while the GSC property
occupies an area of approximately 3,000 square feet (ft). The South Jersey Clothing
Company is bankrupt, out of business, and no longer exists. A Long-Term Remedial
Action (LTRA) groundwater extraction and treatment system for the Sites is located on
the former SJCC property. Garden State Cleaners currently operates a business on the
GSC property.


SITE CHARACTERISTICS

On April 3, 1981, a resident of the town of Minotola, in Buena Borough, called the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) and complained of a noxious
odor emanating from her drinking water. A subsequent investigation by NJDEP revealed
that water from the resident's well had levels of trichloroethene (TCE) as high as 12,000
parts per billion (ppb), along with a lesser amount of other volatile organic compounds
(VOCs). The investigation then focused on the adjacent SJCC manufacturing facility
where it was discovered that liquid and solid industrial waste had been discharged onto
the ground behind the facility.

According to one of the company owners, the disposal method from 1972 until early
1981 was to discharge the waste in areas around the building and railroad tracks.
Approximately 26,000 gallons of TCE were used at the facility from 1972 to 1982. In
addition to TCE, tetrachloroethene (PCE), chloroform, 1,1,1-trichloroethane, p-
dichlorobenzene, ethylbenzene, chlorobenzene, toluene, xylene, styrene, and 1,2-
dichloroethane were subsequently detected in soil behind the facility. The source of these
compounds was probably sludge or liquid waste containing TCE and mineral oil. In
addition, SJCC's owners reported that a fire at the facility in 1979 resulted in the release
of an estimated 275 gallons of TCE from an on-site storage tank.

In May 1984, during the investigation by NJDEP of off-site groundwater contamination
associated with SJCC, elevated levels of PCE from a well located east of GSC led'
NJDEP to suspect GSC as a possible source. During the ensuing inspection of GSC,
which is two blocks south of SJCC, the owners acknowledged discharging wastes onto
the ground without a New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES)
permit. Soil samples obtained from the immediate area of the discharge pipes contained
PCE. This discharge ended as of February 1985, and all effluents were then disposed of
in accordance with the guidelines established by NJDEP. Four soil samples were



                                                                                       500574

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

obtained from beneath two discharge pipes and a PCE recycle tank. The highest
concentration of PCE was 43,000 ppb and TCE was 16,500 ppb.
    j

Remedy Selection

On September 26, 1991, EPA issued a Record of Decision (ROD) which selected the
following remedial action objectives for the Sites:

   •    Restore the contaminated groundwater plume to levels below federal and state
        Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs).

        Restore the groundwater to its beneficial use, which is a drinking water aquifer.

   •    Achieve cleanup levels of 1 part per million (ppm) each for PCE and TCE in
        contaminated soils on the Sites.

These goals would be achieved by the following remedial action components:

   •    Extraction of contaminated groundwater above the cleanup standards;

   •    Treatment of the extracted groundwater via air stripping and carbon adsorption;

   •    Reinjection of the treated groundwater upgradient from the Sites; and

   •    Appropriate environmental monitoring to ensure the effectiveness of the remedy.

   •    In-situ vapor extraction (SVE) of soil contaminated with VOCs.

EPA and NJDEP determined that there were elevated health risks from direct contact
with the soil, given the predominance of TCE and PCE at the Sites. Based on NJDEP's
Interim Soil Action Levels at the time, EPA selected a cleanup goal for the contaminated
soils of 1 ppm each for these compounds. This EPA/NJDEP soil cleanup goal was
specified in the 1991 ROD, along with a drinking water cleanup standard of 1 part per
billion (ppb) for both TCE and PCE. The ROD stated that the goal of the groundwater
remedy was to restore the contaminated groundwater to levels below the more stringent
of the federal and state MCLs (1 ppb) established by the Safe Drinking Water Act to
prevent adverse health effects.

1991 ROD Remedy Implementation

The SVE soil remedy for the Sites represented the first cleanup phase and was designated
as operable unit one (OUl); the groundwater remedy was designated as operable unit two
(0U2). In August 1993, EPA completed the "in-house" design for a small-scale SVE
system for the GSC site. Under an Interagency Agreement (lA) with EPA, the
Philadelphia District of the United States Army Corp of Engineers (USAGE) managed
the remedial action (RA) activities for the Sites. Construction of the GSC SVE system, •



                                                                                       500575

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

by ETG Environmental, Inc., began in September 1993 and was completed in spring
1994. The system was operated from June 1994 through March 1995, when EPA
determined that the cleanup level goals for the site were met. Completion of this OUl at
the GSC site was documented with the approval of the Remedial Action Report on
September 13, 1995.

Due to the similarity in subsoil conditions between the Sites, USAGE used the data
obtained from the SVE system at GSC to design the SJCC system. Under a contract with
USAGE, Dames and Moore conducted a remedial design (RD) from March 1994 to
August 1995, for the building demolition and soil cleanup at SJCC, and the groundwater
extraction and treatment system for the Sites.

Under a USAGE contract, Sevenson Environmental Services constructed the SVE system
at the SJCC site and the groundwater extraction and treatment system for the Sites from
September 1996 to January 1999. With the exception of some minor modifications to the
groundwater system, RA activities were performed according to the design specifications
set forth in the RD package. The work included:

   •   Installation and operation of a groundwater extraction, treatment and discharge
       system to remediate the groundwater contamination at the Sites. As originally
       constructed, the system consisted of 15 extraction wells in the shallow and
       intermediate aquifer zones, 12 injection wells, and a 510 gallons per minute (gpm)
       treatment facility located on the SJCC property. To accommodate the
       construction of the treatment plant, the SJCC building ^yas demolished. As
       explained further in this document, the system currently consists of 20 extraction
       wells in the shallow, intermediate and deep aquifer zones, 24 injection wells, and
       an injection trench.

   •   Installation and operation of an SVE system to remediate the area of contaminated
       soil at the SJCC site. This system consisted of five soil vapor extraction wells, a
       surface cover, and a small treatment system surrounded by fencing. The highest
       levels of contaminants were detected in the 9- to 10-foot depth range. The SVE
       system at SJCC was operated from February 1999 through February 2001, when
       EPA determined that the soil cleanup goals had been achieved.

Institutional Controls

In 2005, NJDEP established a Classification Exemption Area for the Sites to restrict
groundwater use within the area of the plume until cleanup goals are achieved.




                                                                                       500576

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

The Post-Decision Proposed Plan and supporting documentation were released to the
public for comment on July 29, 2010. These documents were made available to the
public at the EPA Administrative Record File Room, 290 Broadway, 18"' Floor, New
York, New York and the Buena Borough Municipal Building, Minotola, New Jersey.

On Jvily 29, 2010, EPA issued a notice in the Atlantic City Press and the Daily Journal of
Vineland local newspapers which contained information relevant to the public comment
period for the Sites, including the duration of the comment period, the date of the public
meeting and availability of the administrative record. A Superfund flyer was mailed to
individuals on a mailing list maintained by EPA for the Sites. The public comment
period began on July 29, 2010 and ended on August 28, 2010.

 EPA held a public meeting on August 11, 2010 to explain EPA's preferred remedy,
 excavation and in situ treatment of residual soils. The purpose of the meeting was to
 inform local officials and interested citizens about the Superfund process, to discuss the
 Post-Decision Proposed Plan and receive comments on the Post-Decision Proposed Plan,
,and to respond to questions from area residents and other interested parties. Responses to
 the comments received at the public meeting and in writing during the public comment
 period are included in the Responsiveness Summary, attached as Appendix III to this
 ROD Amendment.


CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES

The Sites are located in a predominantly rural area, in one of New Jersey's prime
agricultural regions. There are numerous residential properties and small businesses
surrounding the Sites. The LTRA groundwater extraction and treatment system for the
Sites is located on the former SJCC property. EPA anticipates that the property will
continue to be used for this purpose until the groundwater cleanup goals are achieved.
GSC still operates a business on the property. However, the selected remedy includes the
acquisition of the GSC property and demolition of the building so EPA can remediate the
contaminated soils beneath the building. The property is zoned commercial, which
leaves open the possibility for redevelopment in the future, following remediation.

Residents in the vicinity of the Sites obtain their water from the municipal water system.
However, some residences just south of Wheat Road obtain water from private wells for
consumption and irrigation. As previously stated, in 2005, NJDEP established a
Classification Exemption Area for the Sites.


BASIS FOR REMEDY MODIFICATION

In accordance with EPA policy, EPA completed its first five-year review in March 2004,
to assure that the remedies for the Sites were protective of human health and the




                                                                                       500577

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

environment. EPA concluded that the remedies for the Sites were protective of human
health and the environment. However, the review recommended that EPA conduct
further investigation of a vapor intrusion pathway, install new extraction wells to capture
contamination in the deep aquifer zone, and continue monitoring of residential wells
beyond the outer extent of the contaminant plume.

Under an lA with EPA, USACE conducted a Remediation System Evaluation (RSE) in
2005, to assess the groundwater remediation system at the Sites. The study concluded
that:

   •   The capacity of the injection system was limiting the volume of water that could
       be extracted and treated;

   •   The groundwater extraction system was not capturing the leading edge of the
       contaminant plume;

   •   The leading edge of the plume was almost one mile downgradient of the Sites;

   •   The plume had migrated into the deeper aquifer zone; and

   •   TCE and PCE contaminant levels, in the monitoring wells adjacent to both Sites
       had not significantly decreased since the groundwater extraction and treatment
       system went into operation. This indicated that sources of groundwater
       contamination might still be present at both Sites.

Additional Investigations
                                                          V
OU-1 Soils                            '

In 2007 and 2008, based on the recommendations of the RSE, EPA's Environmental
Response Team (ERT) collected soil gas and soil samples at both SJCC and GSC to
determine if contamination above the soil cleanup goals was still piresent. In 2009, ERT
also collected soil samples from beneath the GSC building.

ERT's sampling at SJCC identified more than 1,100 cubic yards (yds^)of TCE-
contaminated soil, in both the vadose and saturated zones, with TCE concentrations as
high as 4,000 ppm (See Figures 2-6). Sampling at GSC indicated that approximately
 1,400 yds^ of PCE-contaminated soil remain above the soil cleanup criteria in the vadose
zone. ERT also identified PCE concentrations as high as 1,400 ppm approximately eight
to 12 feet beneath the GSC building (See Figures 7-10).

OU-2 Groundwater

In the 1991 RI/FS and ROD, EPA assumed that there was a relatively impermeable zone
separating the shallow and intermediate aquifer zones from the deeper aquifer zone. In
addition, a period of eight years elapsed between the time when EPA first characterized
the plume and the start of the groundwater extraction and treatment system. It was not



                                                                                       500578

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

until the March 2004 five-year review,that EPA first identified that the leading edge of
the plume was not being captured by the extraction wells and that the plume had migrated
into the deep aquifer zone.

At the time of the 2004 five-year review, EPA also noted that several injection wells were
failing from a buildup of slime, reducing reinjection capacity. The 2005 RSE study
found that the cause of the fouling was a naturally occurring hacterium, pseudomonas sp.
In 2005, USACE began adding a one-percent solution of chlorine which solved the
bacteria fouling problem. USACE also installed an additional 12 injection wells to
replace the wells lost from bacterial fouling. In 2007 and 2008, USACE increased the
reinjection capacity of the groundwater treatment system by nearly 100 gpm by installing
an injection trench and redeveloping three of the old injection wells. The capacity of the
injection well system is now more than 500 gpm.

Based on the RSE findings, EPA installed three additional wells in 2007 and 2008, to
capture the downgradient plume in the intermediate and deep aquifer zones. In 2009,
EPA installed two additional extraction wells, one at SJCC and one adjacent to GSC, to
help capture the residual contamination sources on these properties.

In September 2009, EPA completed a second fiye-year review for the Sites. The remedy
assessment summary noted that:

   •   The SVE systems at both Sites did not completely remove all of the sources of
       groundwater contamination on the SJCC and GSC properties. TCE and PCE
       concentrations above screening levels were still present in the vadose zone.

   •   Groundwater extraction and treatment was fully operating as intended by the
       decision documents; however, additional characterization of the capture of the
       downgradient plume was needed.

   •   Five properties had elevated subslab vapor readings. Indoor air concentrations
       at levels slightly above criteria were detected in the basement of one property
       adjacent to SJCC. Continued monitoring of the indoor air in these properties was
       recommended.


SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS

A baseline human health risk assessment for SJCC and GSC was conducted in 1989 and
subsequently used to develop the 1991 ROD. Primary contaminants of concern identified
were TCE and PCE. The risk assessment identified unacceptable excess lifetime cancer
risk for exposure to groundwater (primarily as drinking water) contaminated with TCE
and PCE under future-use scenarios for an adult worker/off-site resident, adult off-site
resident/trespasser and adult on-site resident at 1.1 x lO"'', 9.7 x 10'^, and 1.2 x 10"^
respectively.




                                            6
                                                                                       500579

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

A 2004 five-year review indicated that the groundwater remedy was not functioning as
intended by the decision document. Upon further investigation, additional source
material was discovered on both properties.

Groundwater samples were most recently collected in January 2009. Table 1 of
Appendix B presents the maximum TCE and PCE concentrations of 23,000 ug/1 and
4,900 ug/1, respectively. These concentrations were quantitatively evaluated under
similar exposure scenarios as developed for the baseline human health risk assessment in
1989, arid this is presented in Table 2 of Appendix B. Ingestion of groundwater as tap
water under a future-use scenario was considered, and the current toxicity values for
these two chemicals are provided in Table 3 of Appendix B. The maximum
concentrations of TCE and PCE equate to excess lifetime cancer risks of 1.6 x 10"^ and
3.1 x 10"^, respectively, for an on-site residential scenario, as shown in Table 4 of
Appendix B. Both are above EPA's acceptable risk range. As a result, the need to take
an action still exists at the Sites.

The 2004 five-year review identified a potential vapor intrusion pathway that was not
included in the original baseline human health risk assessment. Following the
recommendations in the 2004 five-year review, EPA conducted a soil vapor intrusion
(VI) investigation of properties that were located above the groundwater plume to
evaluate the VI exposure pathway. The health-based screening criteria provided in the
Draft Guidance for Evaluating the Vapor Intrusion to Indoor Air Pathway from
Groundwater and Soils were used to initially evaluate this exposure pathway. In 2006,
ERT collected sub-slab soil gas samples and indoor air samples from 19 properties. In
2008, ERT performed a second round of sub-slab soil gas and indoor air samples on
seven properties. The main areas of concern for vapor intrusion are the properties
adjacent to the SJCC.and GSC Sites, where groundwater is shallowest. Elevated readings
were detected in sub-slab samples from five properties in close proximity to the Sites.
Indoor air concentrations at levels slightly above criteria were detected in the basement of
one property adjacent to SJCC. EPA will continue to monitor the vapor intrusion
pathway at the properties of concern.

It is anticipated that the proposed remedy will reduce groundwater contaminant
concentrations, resulting in reduced VI impact to residences and businesses located above
the groundwater plume. Monitoring of VI will continue as a separate effort to ensure that
concentrations are decreasing and people are not exposed to contaminant vapors above
the acceptable risk range.


REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES

The following remedial action objectives (RAOs) established for the Sites include:

    •   Reduce or eliminate further contaminant migration to the groundwater;




                                                                                       500580

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    •   Restore the contaminated groundwater plume to levels below federal and state
        MCLs;

    •   Restore the groundwater to its beneficial use, which is a drinking water aquifer;
        and

    •   Achieve cleanup levels of Ippm each for PCE and TCE in contaminated soils on
        the Sites.

Soil Cleanup Standards

The 1991 ROD selected soil cleanup criteria for the Sites based on risks from direct
contact with soils. The ROD remedy, as implemented, was successful in removing the
pathway for direct contact with contaminated soil. However, the ROD also
acknowledged that the contaminated soil represented the source of groundwater
contamination at Sites. Since soil contamination on the Sites still remains a source of
groundwater contamination, EPA selected impact to groundwater soil remediation
standards as cleanup goals.

NJDEP requires that impact to groundwater soil remediation standards be developed on a
site-by-site basis, pursuant to NJDEP's authority under N.J.S.A. 58:10B-12a., and
NJDEP's Impact to Ground Water Soil Remediation Standard guidance. In July 2010, at
EPA's request, NJDEP performed modeling which determined a site-specific soil cleanup
goal of 1 ppm for PCE and TCE.                                         '


DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980,
as amended (CERCLA), 42 U.S.C. §9601 et seq., requires that each remedial alternative
be protective of human health and the environment, be cost effective, comply with other
statutory laws, and utilize permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies to
the maximum extent practicable. In addition, CERCLA includes a preference for the use
of treatment as a principal element for the reduction of toxicity, mobility or volume of
hazardous substances.

CERCLA requires that if a remedial action is selected that results in hazardous
substances, pollutants, or contaminants remaining at the site above levels that allow for
unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, EPA must review the action no less than every
five years after initiation of the action.' In addition, institutional controls (e.g., a deed
notice, an easement or a covenant) to limit the use of portions of the property may be
required. These use restrictions are discussed in each alternative as appropriate.
Consistent with expectations set out in the National Oil and Hazardous Substances
Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), none of the remedies rely exclusively on institutional
controls to achieve protectiveness. The time frames below for construction do not
include the time for remedial design or the time to procure contracts.



                                                                                         500581

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

As required by CERCLA, a "No Action" alternative was evaluated in the 1991 ROD to
establish a baseline for comparison to the other alternatives. Since the No Action
alternative was already evaluated in the 1991 ROD, it will not be discussed further.

EPA believes that the groundwater remedy selected in the 1991 ROD is now functioning
as intended; therefore, no change is necessary to the groundwater remedy.

Although it was not included in the 1991 ROD, vapor intrusion monitoring will be
performed in homes potentially affected by shallow groundwater contamination. The
results will be compared to NJDEP's and EPA's health-based screening criteria. If
necessary, soil vapor mitigation systems will be installed in potentially impacted homes
as an interim measure until the shallow groundwater contamination has been remediated.


Alternative 1: Soil Vapor Extraction (1991 ROD Remedy)
Estimated Capital Cost: $1,130,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $305,000
Estimated Present Worth Cost: $1,731,000
Estimated Construction Time Frame: 1 year
Estimated Time to Achieve RAOs: 2 to 3 years

Alternative 1 is the same remedy EPA selected in the 1991 ROD. Under this alternative,
an SVE system consisting of vapor extraction wells screened in the unsaturated zone
would be located in the source areas at both Sites. Blowers or vacuum pumps would be
used to induce soil vapor flow toward the wells to remove VOCs from the soil. The .
VOCs removed by the SVE system would be treated by the Sites' groundwater treatment
plant.

At the SJCC property, the SVE system would be designed to treat approximately 1,200
yds'' of contaminated soil. A majority of the VOC mass is believed to be concentrated in
soil and clay lenses located at about 20 to 25 feet below ground surface, and therefore, a
pulsed approach to soil vapor extraction might be necessary to enable the VOCs to
diffuse from the clay lenses.

At GSC, an SVE system would be designed to address VOC contamination on the entire
property. The total volume of contaminated soil in this area is approximately 1,400 yds .
EPA believes that a majority of the VOC mass is concentrated within discrete zones at
depths ranging from six to 18 feet below ground surface. It is possible that a significant
amount of VOC contaminant mass is beneath the GSC building. This could require the
installation of horizontal SVE extraction wells in order to create sufficient air flow below
the building. As explained above, a pulsed approach to soil vapor extraction may be
necessary to enable the VOCs to diffuse from any of the clay lenses that may be present.
This ahemative may achieve RAOs within two to three years if conditions are favorable.




                                                                                        500582

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 2: Soil Excavation, Off-Site Treatment and/or Disposal, BackHll, In-situ
Treatment of Residual Soil Contamination, Acquisition and Demolition of GSC
Building
Estimated Capital Cost: $ 2,198,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $30,000
Estimated Present Worth Cost: $2,255,000
Estimated Construction Time Frame: I year
Estimated Time to Achieve RAOs: 1 to 2 years

 Under this alternative, contaminated soil at both SJCC and GSC Sites would be
 excavated where practicable and transported off-site for treatment and/or disposal. The
 remaining contamination in the deeper soil and clay lenses where excavation would be
 impracticable would be treated with an in-situ treatment technology, such as enhanced
 SVE or chemical oxidation. The additional treatment would be expected to significantly
 decrease the concentrations of VOCs in the saturated soils and shallow groundwater.
 Any VOCs removed by the in-situ treatment technology could be treated by the Sites'
'groundwater treatment plant, where appropriate.

At SJCC, contaminated soil in the northern and southern portions of the property would
be excavated where technically practicable. The estimated volume of contaminated soil
is approximately 200 yds^ in the northern portion of the property and 1,000 yds^ in the
southern portion. However, since the majority of the VOC mass is believed to be
concentrated within the deeper soil and clay lenses, in-situ treatment would be necessary
to meet the cleanup goals.

At GSC, the VOC source areas are estimated to be approximately 1,400 yds^ in volume.
Contaminated soil on the property would be excavated where technically practicable. In-
situ treatment of any residual contamination might be necessary if contamination extends
down to, or, below the water table. Any VOCs removed by the in-situ treatment
technology could be treated by the Sites' groundwater treatment plant, where appropriate.
The remedy also includes acquisition of the Garden State Cleaners property and
demolition of the building in order to remediate contaminated soils beneath the structure.

This alternative is expected to achieve RAOs within one to two years.


COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES

In selecting a remedy, EPA considered the factors set out in CERCLA §121', 42 U.S.C.
§9621, by conducting a detailed analysis of the viable remedial response measures
pursuant to the NCP, 40 CFR §300.430(e)(9) and OSWER Directive 9355.3-01. The
detailed analysis consisted of an assessment of the individual response measure against
each of nine evaluation criteria and a comparative analysis focusing upon the relative
performance of each response measure against the criteria.




                                            10
                                                                                      500583

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Threshold Criteria - The first two criteria are known as "threshold criteria "because they
are the minimum requirements that each response measure must meet in order to be
eligible for selection as a remedy.

1.      Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment
Overall protection of human health and the environment addresses whether each
alternative provides adequate protection of human health and the environment and
describes how risks posed through each exposure pathway are eliminated, reduced, or
controlled, through treatment, engineering controls, and/or institutional controls.

. . Both Alternatives 1 and 2 are protective of human health and the environment.
    However, Alternative 1 may not remove all of the source material present in the
    deeper soil zones saturated with VOCs. Alternative 2 should remove all of the
    sources of contamination at both Sites.

2.      Compliance with applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements
        (ARARs)
Section 121(d) of CERCLA and NCP §300.430(f)(l)(ii)(B) require that remedial actions
at CERCLA sites at least attain legally applicable or relevant and appropriate Federal
and State requirements, standards, criteria, and limitations which are collectively
referred to as "ARARs, " unless such ARARs are waived under CERCLA section
121(d)(4).

Applicable requirements are those cleanup standards, standards of control, and other
substantive requirements, criteria, or limitations promulgated under Federal
environmental or State environmental or facility siting laws that specifically address a
hazardous substance, pollutant, contaminant, remedial action, location, or other
circumstance found at a CERCLA site. Only those State standards that are identified by
a state in a timely manner and that are more stringent than Federal requirements may be
applicable. Relevant and appropriate requirements are those cleanup standards,
standards of control, and other substantive requirements, criteria, or limitations
promulgated under Federal environmental or State environmental or facility siting laws
that, while not "applicable " to a hazardous substance, pollutant, contaminant, remedial
action, location, or other circumstance at a CERCLA site address problems or situations
sufficiently similar to those encountered at the CERCLA site that their use is well-suited
to the particular site. Only those State standards that are identified in a timely manner
and that are more stringent than Federal requirements may be relevant and appropriate.

Compliance with ARARs addresses whether a remedy will meet all of the applicable or
relevant and appropriate requirements of other Federal and State environmental statutes
or provides a basis for invoking a waiver.

     There are no chemical-specific ARARs for the contaminated soils. There is no
     change in the location-specific or action-specific ARARs since the 1991 ROD. EPA
     considers the NJDEP impact to groundwater soil remediation standards as To-Be-




                                            11                                        500584

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Considered (TBC) requirements, and the site-specific standards of 1.0 ppm for TCE
     and PCE as cleanup goals for the Sites.

     Alternative 1 may not achieve the soil cleanup goals in the lower permeability soil
     and clay zones saturated with VOCs. EPA expects that the cleanup goals would be
     met by Alternative 2.

Primary Balancing Criteria - The next five criteria, criteria 3 through 7, are known as
"primary balancing criteria". These criteria are factors with which tradeoffs between
response measures are assessed so that the best option will be chosen, given site-specif c
data and conditions.

3.      Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence
A similar degree of long-term effectiveness and permanence refers to expected residual
risk and the ability of a remedy to maintain reliable protection of human health and the
environment over time, once clean-up levels have been met. This criterion includes the
consideration of residual risk that will remain on-site following remediation and the
adequacy and reliability of controls.

     Both alternatives address the VOC soil contamination, thereby reducing the migration
     of VOC contaminants from the soil into groundwater at both SJCC and GSC.
     Alternative 1 may not totally remove the VOC soil contamination in the deeper soil
     zones saturated with VOCs. Contaminants in lower permeability zones may not be
     totally removed by SVE because soil vapors will preferentially flow through the
     higher permeability soils. Therefore, institutional controls may be necessary.

      Alternative 2 should achieve the cleanup goals and is the most effective alternative in
     , long-term effectiveness and permanence.


4.     Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume of contaminants through
       Treatment
Reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment refers to the anticipated
performance of the treatment technologies that may be included as part of a remedy.

     Both alternatives would achieve a reduction in volume of VOC soil contamination in
     the source areas. SVE and/or in-situ treatment of residual source areas in Alternatives
     1 and 2 would reduce the concentration of contaminants in the source areas.
     Although Alternative 1 would reduce the toxicity, mobility, and volume of the source
     areas through treatment, it may not totally remove the VOC soil contamination in the
     deeper soil and clay zones. Under Alternative 2, some of the contamination would be
     removed by excavation, followed by in-situ treatment of any residual contamination.




                                              12
                                                                                         500585

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

5.      Short-term Effectiveness
Short-term effectiveness addresses the period of time needed to implement the rernedy
and any adverse impacts that may be posed to workers, the community and the '
environment during construction and operation of the remedy until cleanup levels are
achieved.

   Both alternatives involve construction. Alternative 2 would cause more disruption
   than Alternative 1 because the demolition of the GSC building, and the excavation
   and transportation of contaminated soils could potentially resuh in the generation of
   dust and vapors. Any potential environmental impacts associated with dust and
   vapors would be minimized with implementation of dust and vapor control measures,
   and by performing the excavation with appropriate health and safety measures to limit
   the amount of material that could impact the community and workers.

   Both Alternatives 1 and 2 would require the installation of wells and surface
   equipment for the in-situ treatment of the contamination. Alternative 1 may achieve
   RAOs within two to three years if conditions are favorable. Alternative 2 is expected
   to achieve RAOs within one to two years.

6.      Implementability
Implementability addresses the technical and administrative feasibility of a remedy from
design through construction and operation. Factors such as availability of services and
materials, administrative feasibility, and coordination with other governmental entities
are also considered.

   Alternative 1 has been sufficientiy demonstrated to be implementable at both Sites for
   remediation of contaminated soil. Equipment and vendors for implementation of
   SVE are readily available. Alternative 2 is highly implementable but may require
   treatability studies and design of the in-situ technology to address the contamination
   in the deep soil and clay zones.

   Subsurface conditions at both Sites should result in efficient removal of contaminants
   in the permeable layers under Alternative 1. However, contamination in the less
   permeable layers would need extended time for remediation, and all of the
   contamination may not be removed. The soil contamination located under the GSC
   building would also require the installation of horizontal SVE wells in order to create
   sufficient air flow to allow treatment. This could present some technical challenges.

   Under Alternative 2, EPA does not expect any problems with the acquisition of the
   GSC property and demolition of the building. Demolition of the GSC building will
   allow EPA to excavate and remove the contaminated soils without any impediments.
   However, excavation of materials at depth may require shoring for protection.




                                           13                                         500586

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

7.      Cost
Includes estimated capital and operation and maintenance costs, and net present-worth
values.

   The estimated present worth cost of Alternative 1 is $1,731,000. The cost could vary
   based on the possible installation of horizontal SVE extraction wells to treat soil
   under the GSC building. The estimated present worth cost of Alternative 2 is
   $2,255,000. The cost of Alternative 2 depends on the type of in-situ treatment
   technology selected during Remedial Design; chemical oxidation was used to develop
   the cost estimate.


Modifying Criteria - The final two evaluation criteria, criteria 8 and 9, are called
"modifying criteria " because new information or comments from the state or the
community on the Proposed Plan may modify the preferred response measure or cause
another response measure to be considered.

8.      State Acceptance
Indicates whether based on its review of the RI/FS reports and the Proposed Plan, the
state supports, opposes, and/or has identified any reservations with the selected response
measure.

The State of New Jersey concurs with EPA's Selected Remedy.

9.     Community Acceptance
Summarizes the public's general response to the response measures described in the
Proposed Plan and the RI/FS reports. This assessment includes determining which of the
response measures the community supports, opposes, and/or has reservations about.

EPA solicited input from the community on the remedial alternatives proposed for SJGS.
The community was generally supportive of EPA's Post-Decision Proposed Plan.
Appendix III, The Responsiveness Summary, addresses the comments received at the
public meeting and written comments received during the public comment period.'


PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE

Principal threat wastes are considered source materials, i.e., materials that include or
contain hazardous substances, pollutants or contaminants that act as a reservoir for
migration of contamination to groundwater, surface water, or as a source for direct
exposure. Contaminated groundwater is generally not considered to be source material;
however, Non-Aqueous Phase Liquids (NAPLs) in groundwater may be viewed as source
material. At these Sites, principal threat waste consists of source material which is
defined as material that includes or contains hazardous substances, pollutants or
contaminants that act as a reservoir for migration of contamination to groundwater. The
waste material to be addressed by the response action contains elevated levels of VOCs



                                            14
                                                                                      500587

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

which, if not remediated, would continue to serve as a source of groundwater
contamination. Therefore, all identified principal threat wastes at the Sites will be
addressed by the Selected Remedy.

SELECTED REMEDY

Based upon consideration of the resuhs of EPA's investigations at the Sites, the
requirements of CERCLA, the detailed analysis of the remedial alternatives and public
comments, EPA has determined that Alternative 2 is the appropriate remedy for the
treatment of the principal threat wastes, also referred to as areas that are sources to
groundwater contamination, at the Sites. This remedy best satisfies the requirements of
CERCLA Section 121 and the NCP's nine evaluation criteria for remedial alternatives,
40 CFR §300.430 (e) (9). This remedy includes the following components:
   •   Excavationof contaminated soil, where practicable;
   •   In-situ treatment of deeper soil and clay lenses with technologies such as chemical
       oxidation or enhanced soil vapor extraction, when excavation is impracticable;
  ••   Treatment of any VOCs removed by the in-situ treatment process at the on-site
       groundwater treatment plant, where appropriate; and
   •   Acquisition and demolition of a building at the GSC site.
If necessary, soil vapor mitigation systems will be installed in potentially impacted
homes as an interim measure until the shallow groundwater contamination has been
remediated.

As part of the Selected Remedy, any VOCs collected during the in-situ treatment of
remaining contamination could be treated at the groundwater treatment plant, where
appropriate. Additionally, any water recovered during excavation and in-situ treatment
will be treated at the treatment plant. The current groundwater treatment system may
need to be reevaluated during the design to determine if significant design or operational
modifications are necessary to adequately handle any increased flow and treatment
requirements. However, EPA believes this is unlikely since the contaminants are the
same and the treatment plant was designed with sufficient capacity to handle additional
groundwater fiow.

Based on all available information, EPA and the State of New Jersey believe the Selected
Remedy provides the best balance of trade-offs among the response measures with
respect to the nine evaluation criteria. EPA believes that the Selected Remedy will be
protective of human health and the environment, will comply with ARARs, will be cost
effective, and will utilize permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies to
the maximum extent practicable.

Consistent with EPA Region 2's Clean and Green policy, EPA will evaluate the use of
sustainable technologies and practices with respect to any remedial alternative selected
for the Sites.




                                             15                                         500588

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

As previously noted, CERCLA Section 121(b)(1) mandates that a remedial action must
be protective of human health and the environment, cost-effective, and utilize permanent
solutions and alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery technologies to the
maximum extent practicable. CERCLA Section 121(b)(1) also establishes a preference
for remedial actions that employ treatment to permanently and significantly reduce the
volume, toxicity, or mobility of the hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants at a
site. CERCLA Section 121(d) further specifies that a remedial action must attain a
degree of cleanup that satisfies ARARs under federal and state laws, unless a waiver can
be justified pursuant to CERCLA Section 121(d)(4). For the reasons discussed below,
EPA has determined that the Selected Remedy meets the requirements of CERCLA
Section 121.

Protection of Human Health and the Environment

The Selected Remedy will adequately protect human health and the environment through
excavation of the contaminated soils where practicable, and in-situ treatment of deeper
soil contamination where excavation is impracticable. The Selected Remedy will remove
soils that act as the source of contamination to groundwater at the Sites. This action will
result in the reduction of exposure levels in groundwater to acceptable risk levels within
EPA's generally acceptable risk range of lO"'* to 10"^. Implementation of the Selected
Remedy will not pose unacceptable short-term risks or adverse cross-media impacts.

Compliance with ARARs

There are no chemical-specific ARARs for the contaminated soils. There is no change in
the location-specific or action-specific ARARs since the 1991 ROD. EPA considers the
NJDEP impact to groundwater soil remediation standards as To-Be-Considered (TBC)
requirements, and the site-specific standards of 1.0 ppm for TCE and PCE as cleanup
goals for the Sites. At the completion of the response action, the Selected Remedy will
meet the identified ARARs and TBCs.

Cost-Effectiveness

In EPA's judgment, the Selected Remedy is cost-effective and represents reasonable
value for the money to be spent. Overall effectiveness was evaluated by assessing three
of the five balancing criteria in combination (long-term effectiveness and permanence;
reduction in toxicity, mobility and volume through treatment; and short-term
effectiveness). Overall effectiveness was then compared to costs to determine cost-
effectiveness. The overall effectiveness of the Selected Remedy has been determined to
be proportional to the costs, and the Selected Remedy, therefore, represents reasonable
value for the money to be spent. The estimated present worth cost of the Selected
Remedy depends on the type of in-situ treatment chosen. The median cost, using in-situ
chemical oxidation as a surrogate is $2,255 million.



                                            16
                                                                                       500589

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment Technologies to the
Maximum Extent Practicable

EPA has determined that the Selected Remedy represents the maximum extent to which
permanent solutions and treatment technologies can be utilized in a practicable manner at
the Sites. EPA has determined that the Selected Remedy provides the better balance of
trade-offs with respect to the five balancing criteria. The Selected Remedy satisfies the ~
criteria for long-term effectiveness and permanence by removing contaminated soil.
Demolition of the GSC building will allow EPA to excavate and remove the
contaminated soils, and allow for in-situ treatment of soil where excavation is
impracticable, if necessary.'

The Selected Remedy presents a short-term risk because of the potential for exposure
associated with the demolition of the GSC building, and the excavation and
transportation of contaminated soils. However, short-term risk will be mitigated through
implementation of measures such as engineering controls, use of personal protective
equipment, safe work practices and perimeter air monitoring.

The Selected Remedy is implementable since it employs standard technologies that are
readily available.

Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element

Through the use of an in-situ technology to treat the deep soil contamination, the Selected
Remedy meets the statutory preference for the use of remedies that employ treatment that
reduces toxicity, mobility or volume as a principal element to address the principal
threats at the Sites.

Five-Year Review Requirements

Because the remedy will not result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants
remaining above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, EPA
anticipates that a five-year review will not be required for the soil remedy. However,
because it may take more than five years to attain remedial action objectives and cleanup
levels for the groundwater at the Sites, policy reviews will be conducted until the
remediation goals are achieved to ensure that the groundwater remedy is, or will be,
protective of human health and the environment.


DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES

The Post-Decision Proposed Plan for the Sites was released for public comment on July
29, 2010. The comment period closed on August 28, 2010. All verbal and written
comments submitted during the public comment period were reviewed by EPA. Upon
review of the comments, it was determined that no significant changes to the remedy, as
was originally identified in the Post-Decision Proposed Plan, were necessary.



                                            17                                         500590

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX I

  Figures




             500591

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          South Jersey C l o t h i n g C o m p a n y
       E n v i r o n m r n t a l Response T e a m                                                                      Figure 1. Overview M a p
                                                           & G a r d e n State Cleaners Site
       V S . EoviroDmental Protection Agency
ens;   L a i Vegas, N V                                                                                 DATE:               DRAWN BY;
                                                    0   50 1D0      200       300        400      500
                                                                                                           12 M a r 2008                b.J. Gilbert




                                                                                                                                              500592

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Maximum ECD Values (uV)
June 2007       June 2008
 O        <- 350.000             <- 2.000,000

      •   350.001 -6oaooo        2.000,001 -4,000,000

  J       600.001-850,000        4,000,001 -8,000,000

 A        850.001 - 1.100.000    8,000,001 -12,000,000
                                 12,000,001 - 16,000,000




                                                                                               •^•i.:"   .J




                                                                                                f         i-
                                  5-



                                                                                    M

                                                                                          D

                                                                                          D




           Source Area I
           Source Area 2P
           Source Area 2S


                       Environmental Response Team            South Jersey Clothing Company
                       U.S. Environmental Protection Agency    & Garden State Clothing Sites
                       Las Vegas, NV                                   Minotola, NJ
                                                                                                                       16 July 2009

                                                                                                                  DRAWNBy;R. J, Gilbert
                                                                                                              500593

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Maximum ECD Values (uV)                                                                                                   '"§!»
June 2007       June 2008
   O        <-350.000           B   <« 2,000.000
        '   350,001-600.000         2,000,001-4,000.000
    J       600,001-850.000         4.000,001 - S.000.000
   0        850,001-1.100.000       8.00O.0O1 -12.000.000
                                H   12,000.001-16.000,000




                                                                                        SJCC-43|




                                                            &


            MIPLog X-Sccnon


              Source Area I
^^^,,^''^     Source Area 2P
              Source Area 2S




       m                 Environmental Response Team
                         U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
                         Las Vegas, NV
                                                                South Jersey Clothing Company
                                                                 & Garden State Clothing Sites
                                                                         Minotola, NJ
                                                                                                   Figure 3. SJCC Source Areas &
                                                                                                       MIP Transect Locations



                                                                                                                           DRAWN BY: F.. J. Gilbert

                                                                                                              500594

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                SJCC?5DAT((iV<10)                     SJCC24DAT{|iV,10')        SJCC29DAT<MV.I0')              SJCCSSOATftiVvlo'l       SJCC36 DAT (uV . 10')
                            0                '            ^   7   3             -          r   0          1 1 7               0         1         17   !            1         17
                                —J        i_-j—1—.—1—ui                                           • •   r   .     .1                                     1   1   1   .       . , .

                       ? -fL,


                       4
                            -
                       6

                       3


                      10
                            *
                      12                                                                        J
                      1-!                     '   •




                      16                                                                              (sample: B0086
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      It
                                                                                                      JTCE: 4.000,000 uglkg
                                                                                                     /pce:u
                      13
                                                                                               ' ^ / ^ [sample: B0087
                                                                                                 f J T C E 2,400.000 ug/kfl
                                              t
                                                                                                ^PCE:U
                      20

                                      .                                                                1                                                     .       ,
                 <5                                   _
                      24                                                                        1

                      26
                                                                                                '     Sample: B0088
                                                                                                , ^ T C E 1,800 uglkg
                                                                                                i^PCE:66ug/kg                                          L,„.
                      28
                                                                                                    Sample: B0090
                                                                                                   |TCEU                                                                             ,
                      30                                                                       ^^^PCE:U

                                                  "
                      32


                      34                                                                                 Sample: B0091                                                     - _ —
                                                                                                     1 TCE 10
                                                                                               •^CII^PCEU
                      36

                      38                      1

                                              i
                      40                      j                                                                                                              -           —' _„-.^—

                      42
                      43




m   Environmental Response Team
    L'.S. Environmental Protection Agency
    Las Vegas, NV
                                                                                                    South Jersey Clothing Company
                                                                                                     & Garden State Clothing Sites
                                                                                                             Minotola. NJ
                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 4. MlP Log Transect
                                                                                                                                                                     SJCC-25, SJCC-24, SJCC-29, SJCC-35, SJCC-36

                                                                                                                                                                 Mil' Logs I'roni June 2008 Investigation
                                                                                                                                                                                                            DATE:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                OiUWN BY: EJ. a t b r r t
                                                                                                                                                                                                   500595

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  SJCC41DAT(^V.l0l       S.CC40aAT(|iV,10)                                     SJCC3D DAT (|iV . 10)     SJCC38 DAT (nV . 10 )                    SJCC37 DAT (nV , 10 )     SJCC42DATinV                    "C i
              0            1       ' 7 0          1 1 7                                    0               1         17 C            1         '7                )        '   1         170           1                            17
                   -J   1   1   i. I   1   ,   L       jL...,.,t ....J    I   1   I   l_        I ->   i   I   I _i   1   L   L. .J   I   I   L   I   L—1   LJ   ,   1   1 1   1 1 i   1 L        1   .1..!....>       1   1—J     1-




              ;i
                                                   C                                                                                                                                          1



        10




        15 -


                                                                         Sample: 80081
                                                                         TCE: 140 ug/kg
        20                                         ^                     PCE: 4 ug/kg




     5-"-^
                                                   U                     Sample: B0083
                                                                         TCE: 72
                                                                         PCE:U




        3Q<
                                                                                                                      L                                                                       )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .



        3S




        «•
                                                                                                       R
        45 -                                                                                           JL.



Environmental Response Team                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 5. MIP Log Transect
                                                                                                           South Jersey Clothing Company
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency                                                                        & Garden State Clothing Sites                                       SJCC-41, SJCC-40. SJCC-39, SJCC-38, SJCC-37, SJCC-42
Las Vegas, NV                                                                                                       Minotola. NJ                                                  MIP Logs from June 2008 Investigation


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 500596
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DnAWN BY: E J , CilMrl

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         SJCC34 DAT (KV . 10 )      SJCC4&DAT{^V.10)   SJCC44DAT(tiV , to 1   SJCC430AT (;iV .10 )
                                       00      05         10 1 2 0 0     OB      101200      05        101200       05         1012
                                           ,.i . i , i , , l   I I I i„ I I       I   I   I    I   I   i.L,                         ll I    I   I   1   I   I   I    i   I




                                  2 -
                                              " Sample: BO078
                                              I TCE: 620 ug/kg
                                              I PCE: 13 ug/kg                                                 }                     ]
                                                                                                              i
                                               I Sample: B0079
                                               ITCE:U
                                              ,PCE:U




                                       :



                                                                                                                     1        .i    J        Sample: B0076
                                                                                                                                             TCE:U
                                                                                                                                             PCE:U




                                                 Sample: B0080
                                                 TCE: 15 ug/kg
                                                 PCE:U


                                                                                                                                           ISampte: B0077
                                                                                                                                           JTCE: 1.700 ug/kg
                                                                                                                                           W E . 33 ug/kg




                                                                                                                                                                T
                                                                                                                      -,..-,-....




                                                                              i                               r
                                                                                                              1                !


Environmental Response Team
                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 6. MIP Log Transect
                                                                                              South Jersey Clothing Company
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency                                                                                                                                         SJCC-34, SJCC-15, SJCC-44, SJCC-13
                                                                                               & Garden Sute Clothing Sites
L a s N'cgas, N V                                                                                      Minotola. NJ                                                 MIP Logs from June 2008 Investigation

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DRAWN BY: E J . Gn>en
                                                                                                                                                                                                     500597

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                  -#




                                                                                                                                  »




 9       Inside Soil Borings
\ / / A GSC Source Area

                  Environmental Response Team            South Jersey Clothing Company    Figure 7 GSC Source Area
     <   ^        U.S. Environmental Protection Agency    & Garden State Clothing Sites
                  Las Vegas, NV                                   Minotola, NJ
                                                                                                                     24July200q

                                                                                                                D R A W N BY T-J-Gilbert


                                                                                                   500598

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         DRAWNBY:F„J <:itbcri

500599

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         asc2iD (MV.IO)                   csciao (nv-io)             GSC'/i;         :.,V       ID;.         GSC08D JtiV.10)                         QSCIOD     [MV-IHI
                       C              1   1     7     0              1         1TO                    1                17C                     1         I 7 i                  1              !7
                           -J   1 1 1—I   1 I   I i   ^.l—J    I   1 1—I   I   1     —1    1   1 1    1     1    1     1.        J i l l           . 1   .1      ,    1 1 1 1       1 1 i—L.




                   4

                   6
                                                      n       Sample: 80105
                                                              TCE 450 ug/kg
                                                              PCE: 300 ug/kg




                   e

                  10
                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                  12                                          Sample: B0106
                                                              TCE: 7.2 ug/kg
                                                              PCE: 380 ug/kg
                  14                                  ^

                  16


                  18


             f    20 -

             a.                                                                                                              J                                                   1

                                                                                     L
                                                                                      1
                  24                                                                                                         1 - . -—
                  26
                                                              Sample: 80107
                                                              TCE: 750 ug/kg
                  28                                          PCE: 270 ug/kg
                                                                                                                                                                                 j •
                  30                                                                                   —

                  32                                                                                                                           ,,_^
                                                              Sample: 80109

                  34
                                                              TCE: 7.1 ug/kg                                                               •
                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                              PCE: 200 ugJkg
                                                                                                                                                                                •t
                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                  36                                                                                                                       ,                             •-—    t
                                                                                                                                                                                    1

                  38
                                                                                                                                                                                           •




                  40

                  42

                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 9. MIP Log Transect
Environmental Response Team                                                               South Jersey Clothing Company
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency                                                                                                                                                 GSC-21, GSC-18, GSC-17, GSC-08, GSC-10
                                                                                           & Garden State Clothing Sites
Las Vegas, NV                                                                                        Minotola. NJ
                                                                                                                                                                           MIP Logs from June 2008 Investigation

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DRAWN BY: CJ.(.-|lbrrl
                                                                                                                                                                                                             500600

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    GSC16D m v . 1 0 )                GSC17D ( M V V I O )              GSOia D fuV . 10 )                    aSC04 D ipV . 10 >
                                                0                   i           ?7C                    1          17C                           1       17C                           1              17
                                                    _l   1__J   I   I   I   I   L     —1       1 1   1—L_j    1 i_                      (           , . .1            .   .   .   1       .    i    1




                                          4                                                                             *

                                          e



                                         10'




                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                            ^
                                         12                                                                                            Sample: B0098
                                                                                                                        f              TCE: 860 ug/kg
                                                                                                                        r              PCE: 58 ug/kg
                                         14
                                                                                                                        L
                                         16 .


                                         18                                                                                     /

                                     f   20                                                                                               v^
                                                                                                                                                              1


                                         22 -                                         L                                                                           r
                                                                                        L_ ..-,1...                                                               L
                                         24 -

                                         26 -                                                                                         'sample: B0100
                                                                                                                                       TCEU
                                                                                                                                       PCE: 55 ug/kg

                                         28 -                                              ^     -      _-—                                                                           •            - ^




                                         30 -

                                                                                                                                      'sample: 80101
                                         ^ -                                                                                           TCEU
                                                                                                                                       PCE: 17 ug/kg

                                         34

                                         se-                                                                                          — i , —




                                         as -

                                         40 4 '                                            ...               ..                     „ _ , „     --•—
                                         41



                                                                                                      South Jersey Clothing Company                                                                         Figure 10. MIP Log Transect
       Environmental Response Team
•m..   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
       Las Vegas, NV
                                                                                                       & Garden State Clothing Sites
                                                                                                               Minotola, NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                          GSC-I6, GSC-17, GSC-05, GSC-04

                                                                                                                                                                                              MIP Logs from June 2008 Investigation

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DIUW'N BY: EJ, (3t>tn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               500601

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX II

   Tables




              500602

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  TABLE 1
                                     Summary of Chemicals of Concern and
                                 Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
Scenario Timeframe: Current/Future
Medium:             Groundwater
Exposure Medium:    Groundwater                                                                                       .

Exposure Point          Chemical of            Concentration          Concentration Units        Exposure Point           EPC         Statistical
                         Concern                 Detected                                        Concentration            Units       Measure
                                                                                                     (EPC)
                                              Min         Max

Tap Water           Trichloroethene          0.11 J      23,000               Hg/I                   23,000               Mg/1           Max

                    Tetrachloroethene        0.31 J      4,900                Mg/1                    4,900               Hg/I           Max
Max. - Maximum Detected Concentration

* Note that the concentrations detected exceed the State drinking water standard of 1 ug/1 and the Federal drinking water standard of 5 ug/1.


                         Summary of Chemicals of Concern and Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
This table presents the primary chemicals of concern (COCs) and exposure point concentrations (EPCs) for each of the COCs detected in
groundwater (i.e., the concentration that will be used to estimate the exposure and risk from each COC). The table includes the range of
concentrations detected for each COC, as well as the frequency of detection (i.e., the number of times the chemical was detected in the samples
collected at the site), the EPC and how it was derived.




                                                                                                                                    500603

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                    TABLE 2
                                                                        SELECTION OF EXPOSURE PATHWAYS

 Scenario        Medium           Exposure          Exposure        Receptor        Receptor           Exposure         On-Site/     Type of                      Rationale for Selection or Exclusion
Timeframe                         Medium             Point         Population         Age               Route           Off-Site     Analysis                            of Exposure Pathway

  Future      Groundwater       Groundwater        Tap Water        Resident          Adult            Ingestion        On-Site       Quant       Future residents may use groundwater as a potable supply of water.
                                                                                                           1


Quant = Quantitative risk analysis performed.
                                                                               Summary of Selection of Exposure Pathways

The table describes the exposure pathways associated with the groundwater that were evaluated for the risk assessment, and the rationale for the inclusion of each pathway. Exposure media, exposure points, and
characteristics of receptor populations are included.




                                                                                                                                                                                                    500604

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              TABLE 3

                                             Cancer Toxicity Data Summary
P a t h w a y : Oral/Dermal

   Chemical of Concern           Oral            Units          Adjusted         Slope Factor        Weight of         Source        Date
                                Cancer                        Cancer Slope           Units            Evidence/
                                 Slope                            Factor                               Cancer
                                Factor                        (for Dermal)                            Guideline
                                                                                                     Description

Trichloroethene                 5.9E-03      (mg/kg/day)"'        5.9E-03        (mg/kg/day)-'           2A           CalEPA         2008

Tetrachloroethene               5.4E-0I      (mg/kg/day)"'        5.4E-01         (mg/kg/day)-'          2A           CalEPA         2009

Key:                                                                        EPA Weight of Evidence:
CalEPA - California Environmental Protection Agency                         A - Human carcinogen
EPA-U.S. Environmental Protection Agency                                '   Bl - Probable Human Carcinogen-Indicates that limited human
IRIS: Integrated Risk Information System. U.S. EPA                              data are available
na: No information available                                                B2 - Probable Human Carcinogen-Indicates sufficient evidence in
                                                                                animals associated with the site and inadequate or no
                                                                                 evidence in humans
                                                                            C - Possible human carcinogen
                                                                            D - Not classifiable as a human carcinogen
                                                                            E- Evidence of noncarcinogenicity
                                                                                2A - Probable human carcinogen
                                                                                2B - Possible human carcinogen


                                                   S u m m a r y of Toxicity Assessment

This table provides carcinogenic risk information which is relevant to the contaminants of concern in groundwater. Toxicity data are provided
for the oral route of exposure.




                                                                                                                                   500605

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               TABLE 4
                                  Risk Characterization Summary - Carcinogens
Scenario Timeframe:               Future
Receptor Population:              Resident
Receptor Age:                     Adult

   Medium              Exposure        Exposure Point          Chemical of                               Carcinogenic Risk
                       Medium                                   Concern
                                                                                     Ingestion      Dermal       Inhalation      Exposure
                                                                                                                                Routes Total

Groundwater        Groundwater         Tap Water           Trichloroethene            1.6E-03
                                                                                                     '                            .1.6E-03

                                                           Tetrachloroethene          3.1E-02                                      3.1E-02

                                                                                                               Total Risk =        3.3E-02

                                         S u m m a r y of Risk Characterization - Carcinogens
        1
The table presents cancer risks for groundwater exposure for the oral route of exposure. As stated in the National Contingency Plan, the point
of departure is I0-* and the acceptable risk range for site-related exposure is 10"'' to lO"*.




                                                                                                                                 500606

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    APPENDIX III

Responsiveness Summiary




                          500607

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      APPENDIX III

                             RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

                           South Jersey Clothing Company and
                          Garden State Cleaners Superfund Sites


INTRODUCTION

As required by Superfund policy, this Responsiveness Summary provides a summary of
the citizens' comments and concerns regarding the Proposed Plan for the South Jersey
Clothing Company and Garden State Cleaners (SJGS) Superfund Sites, and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA's) responses to those comments and concerns.
At the time of the public comment period, EPA proposed a response action to address
areas that are sources to groundwater contamination. All comments summarized in this
document have been considered in EPA's final decision for selection of a remedial
alternative.

This Responsiveness Summary is divided into the following sections:

 I.        BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS:
           This section provides the history of community involvement and concerns
           regarding the SJGS Sites.

 II.       COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY OF MAJOR QUESTIONS, COMMENTS,
           CONCERNS AND RESPONSES:
           This section includes summaries of oral comments received by EPA at the
           August 11, 2010 public meeting, EPA's responses to these comments, as well as
           responses to written comments received during the public comment period.

The Responsiveness Summary includes attachments which document public participation
in the remedy selection process for the SJGS Sites. The attachments are as follows:

      •   Attachment A - July 2010 Post-Decision Proposed Plan for the SJGS Superfund
          Sites;

      •   Attachment B - Public Notice published in the Atlantic City Press and the Daily
          Journal of Vineland;

      •   Attachment C - Transcript of the August 11, 2010, Public Meeting; and

      •   Attachment D -Written comment submitted during Public Comment Period.




                                                                                      500608

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

I.     BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS

EPA's Proposed Plan for the remedial action was released to the public on July 29, 2010.
A copy of the Proposed Plan and other documents which comprise the administrative
record file were made available to the public in the information repository located at the
Buena Borough Municipal Building. A public notice was published in the Atlantic City
Press and the Daily Journal of Vineland newspapers on July 29, 2010, advising the public
of the availability of the Proposed Plan. This notice also announced the opening of a 30-
day public comment period, from July 29 to August 28, 2010, and invited interested
parties to attend an upcoming public rheeting. This public meeting, during which EPA
presented the preferred alternative, answered questions regarding the Site, and accepted
verbal comments regarding the Proposed Plan, was held on August 11, 2010 at the Buena
Borough Municipal Building located at Central Avenue, Minotola, New Jersey.


II.    COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY OF MAJOR QUESTIONS, COMMENTS,
       CONCERNS AND RESPONSES

Part 1: Verbal Comments

Comment #1: A citizen asked the volume in gallons of product that has been recovered.

EPA Response: Due to the nature of the treatment process, contaminants recovered are
measured in pounds, not gallons. At the public meeting, EPA stated that the amount of
product removed is calculated by weighing the carbon before and after treatment. The
correct response is that EPA uses the following equation to calculate the amount of
product removed:

       Pounds Removed = (I x V) x 8.34

       I=    Average influent concentration (in parts per million)
       V = Volume water treated (in million gallons)
       8.34= Specific weight of water (in pounds per gallon)

While EPA stated at the public meeting that approximately 1,000 pounds of contaminants
have been removed, the correct amount of contaminants removed is more than 2,000
pounds. This includes about 1,800 pounds of trichloroethylene (TCE) and about 250
pounds of perchloroethylene (PCE).

Comment #2: A citizen commented on the slow pace of the groundwater cleanup and
asked if her irrigation well might be useful to the groundwater extraction system.

EPA Response: With the installation of new extraction wells on Wheat Road and Louis
Drive, TCE and PCE concentrations in the plume were reduced by an order of magnitude
between 2006 and 2009. In addition, in 2009, EPA installed additional extraction wells
at both the SJGS source areas to contain the contaminant plume on these properties. In




                                                                                      500609

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

2008, EPA evaluated using the citizen's irrigation well as an extraction well and
determined that the well was not screened at the proper depth.

Comment #3: A citizen asked for clarification that the contamination on the Sites is still
contributing to the groundwater contamination and that once the contaminated soil is
removed, the groundwater contamination will decrease in concentration.

EPA Response: EPA believes that the residually contaminated soil is a continuing
source of groundwater contamination. Once these sources have been eliminated, the
concentrations of contaminants in the groundwater should decrease with the continued
operation of the groundwater extraction system.

Comment #4: A citizen asked where the excavated soil will be disposed of and if the
disposal will pose a risk to the groundwater at the disposal location.

EPA Response: Treatment and/or disposal of the excavated soil will likely occur at an
approved Subtitle C landfill, designed to accept such waste. The landfill will have a
containment system in place that will prevent contamination from leaving the landfill.

Comment #5: A citizen commented on the poor design of the groundwater extraction
system that did not factor in the downgradient vertical migration of the groundwater
plume into the deeper aquifer zone.

EPA Response: EPA agreed that the original wells were not screened at the proper
depths to best capture the leading edge of the groundwater plume as it migrated into the
deeper aquifer. With the subsequent installation of extraction wells at the correct depths,
the contamination in the deeper aquifer zone is now being cleaned up. In addition, due to
the elapsed time between the design of the groundwater treatment system and the
installation and operation of the extraction wells, the vertical and horizontal extent of the
plume changed. EPA believes that the current well configuration will be an effective
extraction and treatment system.


Part 2: Written Comments (via email)

Comment #1: Two citizens with a property in the vicinity of the SJGS Sites expressed
concerns pertaining to their proximity to the project, loss of use, possible injury liability,
their costs and the time frame of the project.

EPA Response: EPA will address these issues with the property owners during the
Remedial Design in an effort to minimize their inconvenience during the remedial action.




                                                                                           500610

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    ATTACHMENT A

Post-Decision Proposed Plan




                              500611

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     Superfund Program                     U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
                     Proposed Plan                                                      Region II


                     South Jersey Clothing Company and
                                                                                                      July 2010
                     Garden State Cleaners Superfund Sites


EPA ANNOUNCES PROPOSED PLAN                                MARK YOUR CALENDAR

This Proposed Plan identifies the U.S. Environmental       PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD:
Protection Agency's (EPA's) proposed change to the
soil remedy selected in the September 26, 1991, Record     July 29,2010 - August 28, 2010
of Decision (ROD) for the South Jersey Clothing
                                                           U.S. EPA will accept written comments on the
Company (SJCC) and the Garden State Cleaners (GSC)
                                                           Proposed Plan during the public comment period.
Superfund Sites (the Sites), located in Buena Borough,
New Jersey.
                                                           PUBLIC MEETING:
                                                           August 11, 2010
In the 1991 ROD, EPA selected in-situ soil vapor
extraction (SVE) as the remedy for volatile organic
                                                           U.S. EPA will hold a public meeting to explain the
compound (VOC) contamination in soil at the Sites.         preferred remedy in the Proposed Plan. Oral and
The SVE systems were largely successful in removing        written comments will also be accepted at the meeting.
the VOC contamination, thus meeting the remedial           The meeting will be held at the Buena Borough
action objectives identified in the 1991 ROD.              Municipal Building, located at Central Avenue,
However, as described below, EPA has identified            Minotola, New Jersey at 7:00 p.m.
additional VOC contamination in the sub-surface soils
at both Sites. These VOCs are continuing sources of        For more information, see the Administrative
groundwater contamination and are preventing the           Record at tlie following locations:
groundwater extraction and treatment system from
restoring the aquifer.                                     U.S. EPA Records Center, Region II
                                                           290 Broadway, 18* Floor
The 1991 ROD groundwater remedy included
                                                           New York, New York 10007-1866
extraction and treatment of contaminated groundwater,
                                                           (212)637-3261
and reinjection of the treated groundwater upgradient
                                                           Hours: Monday - Friday 9:00 am to 5:00 pm
from the Sites. In 2004, EPA found that the
groundwater contamination had migrated into the
                                                           Buena Borough Municipal Building
deeper aquifer zone and traveled almost a half-mile
                                                           Centra! Avenue
farther downgradient than at the time of the 1991 ROD.
                                                           Minotola, NJ 08341
                                                           (856)697-9393
EPA's preferred remedy to address the additional           Hours: Monday - Friday 9:00 am to 4:00 pm
contamination is removal of these source areas by
excavation of the contaminated soil where practicable,
and in-situ treatment of the deeper soil and clay lenses
saturated with VOCs with technologies such as
enhanced SVE or chemical oxidation. EPA believes            activities, in conjunction with the New Jersey
that it will take several years to remediate the sources    Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP), the
of groundwater contamination, and confirm the               support agency for this project.
effective capture and remediation of the plume.
                                                            EPA is issuing this document as part of its public
This Proposed Plan includes summaries of the cleanup        participation responsibilities under Section 117(a) of
alternatives evaluated for use at the Sites. This           the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
document is issued by EPA, the lead agency for Site         Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, as amended




                                                                                                       500612

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

(CERCLA), and Section 300.435 (c)(2)(ii) of the NCP.        August 11 at 7:00 pm at the Buena Borough Municipal
This document summarizes information that can be            Building.
found in detail in the Administrative Record file for '
these Sites. This Proposed Plan is being provided to,
inforrn the public of EPA's preferred remedy, and to        SITE HISTORY
solicit public comments pertaining to the preferred
alternative. The remedy described in this Proposed          Background/Site Characteristics
Plan is the preferred remedy for the Site. Changes to       The SJCC and GSC Sites are located in a
the preferred remedy, or a change from the preferred        predominantly rural residential area and one of New
remedy to another remedy, may be made if public             Jersey's prime agricultural areas in Buena Borough,
comments or additional data indicate that such a change     Atlantic County, New Jersey. The SJCC Site is a 1.2-
will result in a more appropriate remedial action. The      acre property located on the northwest corner of
final decision regarding the selected remedy will be        Central and Atlantic Avenues in Minotola, Buena
made after EPA has taken all public comments into           Borough, NJ, approximately 30 miles southeast of
consideration. The State of New Jersey is currently         Philadelphia, PA. The South Jersey Clothing Company
evaluating EPA's Preferred Alternative in this Proposed     is bankrupt and out of business. In 1997, EPA
Plan. The public is encouraged to review and comment        demolished the building, and, in 1999, constructed the
on the preferred alternative considered by EPA in this      groundwater treatment system plant for the Sites on the
Proposed Plan.                                              property.

                                                            The GSC Site is located on Summer Road,
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION                                     approximately 500 feet south of SJCC. Garden State
                                                            Cleaners, under new management since the 1991 ROD,
EPA and NJDEP provide information regarding the             still operates a dry cleaning business on the property.
remediation of the SJCC and GSC Sites to the public
through public meetings and the Administrative Record       In April 1981, a resident of the town of Minotola^ in
file for the Site. EPA and the State of New Jersey rely     Buena Borough, called the NJDEP and complained of a
on.public input to ensure that the public will have a       noxious odor emanating from her drinking water. A
more comprehensive understanding of the Site and the        subsequent investigation by NJDEP revealed that water
Superfund activities that have been conducted.              from the resident's well had levels of trichloroethene
                                                            (TCE) as high as 12,000 parts per billion (ppb), along
The dates for the public comment period, the date,          with a lesser amount of other VOCs. The investigation
locafion and time of the public meeting, and the            then focused on the adjacent SJCC manufacturing
locations of the Administrafive Record files, are           facility where it was discovered that liquid and solid
provided on the front page of this Proposed Plan. This      industrial waste had been discharged onto the ground
Proposed Plan and the supporting documents are being        behind the facility.
made available to the public during the public comment
period. Written comments on the Proposed Plan will          In May 1984, NJDEP identified elevated levels of
be welcomed through August 28, and, if received by          perchloroethylene (PCE) in a well located east of GSC.
that date, will be considered by EPA before it issues the   This led NJDEP to suspect GSC as a possible source of
ROD Amendment, which will formally document the             groundwater contamination in the area. During the
selected remedy. All written comments should be             ensuing inspection of GSC, the owners acknowledged
addressed to:                                               discharging wastes onto the ground without a New
                                                            Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
              Mr. Richard J. Robinson                       (NJPDES) permit. Soil samples obtained from the
             Remedial Project Manager                       immediate area of the discharge pipes contained PCE..
  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency - Region 2
             290 Broadway-19* Floor                         In March 1989 and October 1989, the GSC Site and the
            New York, N.Y. 10007-1866                       SJCC Site were placed on the National Priorities List
                                                            (NPL) of Superfund Sites. Due to the proximity of
The selected remedy will be documented in the ROD           SJCC and GSC to one another, EPA conducted a
Amendment only after consideration of all comments          combined remedial investigation/feasibility study
received. A public meeting has been scheduled for           (RI/FS) for both Sites in November 1989. EPA
                                                            completed the RI/FS in August 1991. The




                                                                                                       500613

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

investigation identified soil contamination on both the    Remedial Design/Remedial Action
SJCC and GSC properties. AplumeofVOC-
contaminated groundwater (primarily TCE at SJCC and        The soil and groundwater components of the project
PCE at GSC) had also migrated approximately 3,500          were divided into operable units. The SVE soil remedy
feet from the Sites. A total of seven VOCs detected in     for the Sites was designated as operable unit one (OUl)
the groundwater samples exceeded the state and federal     and the grouridwater remedy as operable unit two
maximum contaminant levels (MCLs) for drinking             (0U2). In August 1995, EPA completed the design for
water.                                                     the soil and groundwater systems.

On September 26, 1991, EPA issued a ROD which              OU-I Soils
established the following remedial action objectives       Construction of the GSC SVE system was completed in
(RAOs) for the Sites:                                      the spring of 1994. EPA operated the system from
                                                           June 1994 through March 1995. Due to the similarity
    •   Restore the contaminated groundwater plume         in subsoil conditions at the Sites, EPA used the data
        to levels below federal and state MCLs.            obtained from the SVE system at GSC as the basis for
                                                           the design for the system at the SJCC Site. In January
    •   Restore the groundwater to its beneficial use,     1999, EPA completed construction of the SVE system
        which is a drinking water aquifer.                 at the SJCC Site. The SVE system at SJCC operated
                                                           from February 1999 through February 2001. EPA
    •   Achieve cleanup levels of 1 part per million       operated these SVE systems unfil the cleanup goals for
        (ppm) each for PCE and TCE in contaminated         the Sites appeared to have been met.
        soils at the Sites.
                                                           OU-2 Groundwater
These goals would be achieved by the following             In August 1995, EPA completed the design of the
remedial action components:                                groundwater extraction and treatment system for both
                                                           Sites and completed construction of the system in
    •   SVEof soil contaminated with VOCs;                 January 1999. As originally constructed, the system
                                                           consisted of 15 extraction wells in the shallow and
    •   Extracfion of contaminated groundwater             intermediate aquifer zones, 12 injection wells, and a
        exceeding the cleanup goals;                       510 gallons per minute (gpm) treatment facility located
                                                           on the SJCC property. The groundwater system
    •   Treatment of the extracted groundwater via air     became operational and functional in September 2000,
        stripping and carbon adsorption;                   and is currently in its tenth year of operation.

                                                           2004 Five-Year Review and Remedial Site Evaluation
    •   Reinjection of the treated groundwater
                                                           In N4arch 2004, in accordance with EPA policy, EPA
        upgradient from the Sites; and
                                                           completed its first five-year review to assure that the
                                                           remedies for the Sites were protective of human health
    •   Appropriate environmental monitoring to
                                                           and the environment. EPA concluded that the remedies
        ensure the effectiveness of the remedy.
                                                           for the Sites were protecfive of human health and the
                                                           environment. However, the review recommended that
EPA and NJDEP determined that there were elevated
                                                           EPA conduct further investigafion of a vapor intrusion
health risks through direct contact with the TCE and
                                                           pathway, install new extraction wells to capture
PCE in the soils at the Sites. Therefore, EPA used
                                                           contamination in the deep aquifer zone, and continue
NJDEP's Interim Soil Acfion Level of 1 ppm for total
                                                           monitoring of residential wells beyond the outer extent
VOCs in soil, and I ppm each for TCE and PCE as the
                                                           of the contaminant plume.
cleanup goals for contaminated soils at the Sites. These
EPA/NJDEP soil cleanup goals were specified in the ,
ROD, along with a groundwater cleanup standard of          In 2005, under an Interagency Agreement with EPA,
I ppb for both TCE and PCE.                                the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (COE) conducted a
                                                           Remediation System Evaluation (RSE) to assess the
                                                           groundwater treatment system at the Sites. The study
                                                           concluded that:




                                                                                                      500614

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    •   r/je capacity of the injection system was         aquifer zone. In addition, a period of eight years
        limiting the volume of water that could be        elapsed between the time when EPA first characterized
        extracted and treated;                            the plume and the start of the groundwater extraction
                                                          and treatment system. It was not until the March 2004
    •   The groundwater extraction system was not         five-year review that EPA first identified that the
        capturing the leading edge of the contaminant     leading edge of the plume was not being captured by
        plume                                             the extraction wells and that the plume had migrated
                                                          into the deep aquifer zone.
    •   The leading edge of the plume was now almost
        one mile downgradient of the Sites;                At the time of the 2004 five-year review, EPA also
                                                           noted that several injection wells were failing from a
    •   The plume had migrated into the deeper             buildup of slime, reducing reinjection capacity. The
        aquifer zone; and                                  2005 RSE study found that the cause of the fouling was
                                                           a naturally occurring hacterium,pseudomonas sp. In
    •   TCE and PCE contaminant levels in the              2005, the COE began adding a one-percent solution of
        monitoring wells adjacent to both Sites had not   - chlorine which solved the bacteria fouling problem.
        significantly decreased since the groundwater      The COE also installed 12 injecfion wells to replace the
        extraction and treatment system went.into          wells lost from bacteria fouling. In 2007 and 2008, the
        operation. This indicated that source areas        COE also increased the reinjection capacity of the
        may still be present at both Sites.                groundwater treatment system by nearly 100 gallons
                                                           per minute by installing an injection trench and
                                                           redeveloping three of the old injection wells. The
Additional Investigations                                  capacity of the injection well system is now more than
                                                           500 gpm.
OU-1 Soils ' •
In 2007 and 2008, based on the recommendations of         In 2007 and 2008, based on the RSE findings, EPA
the RSE, EPA's Environmental Response Team (ERT)          installed three additional wells to capture the
collected soilgas and soil samples to determine if        downgradient plume in the intermediate and deep
contamination above the soil cleanup goals was still      aquifer zones. In 2009, EPA installed two additional
present at both SJCC and GSC. In 2009, ERT also           extraction wells. One at SJCC and one adjacent to GSC,
collected soil samples from beneath the GSC building.     to help capture the residual contaminafion sources on
                                                          these properties.
ERT's sampling at GSC indicated that approximately
1,400 cubic yards (yds') of PCE-contaminated soil         2009 Five-Year Review
remain above the soil cleanup criteria in the vadose      In September 2009, EPA completed a second five-year
zone. ERT also identified PCE concentrations as high      review for the Sites. The remedy assessment summary
as 1,400 ppm approximately eight to 12 feet beneath       noted that:
the GSC building. Sampling at SJCC identified more
than 1,100 yds'of TCE-contaminated soil, in both the           •   The SVE systems at both Sites did not
vadose and saturated zones, with TCE concentrations                completely remove all of the sources of
as high as 4,000 ppm.,                                             groundwater contamination on the SJCC and
                                                                   GSC properties. TCE and PCE concentrations
OU-2 Groundwater                                                   above screening levels were still present in the
In the 1991 RI/FS and ROD, EPA assumed that there                  vadose zone.
was a relatively impermeable zone separating the
shallow and intermediate aquifer zones from the deeper




                                                                                                       500615

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        Groundwater extraction and treatment was            What is Risk and How is it Calculated?
        fully operating as intended by the decision
        documents; however, additional
        characterization of the capture of the              A Superfund human health risk assessment is an analysis of the
        downgradient plume was needed.                      potential adverse health effects caused by hazardous substances
                                                            released from a site in the absence of any actions to control or
                                                            mitigate these releases; it estimates the "baseline risk" in the
        Five properties had elevated subslab vapor          absence of any remedial actions at the site under current and future
        readings; however, all but one property had         land uses. To estimate this baseline risk at a Superfund site, a four-
        indoor air levels within acceptable levels.         step process utilized for assessing site-related human health risk for
                                                            reasonable maximum exposure (RME) scenarios.
        Continued monitoring of the indoor air in these
        properties was recommended.                         Hazard Identification: The hazard identification step identifies the
                                                            contaminants of potential concern (COPC) in groundwater for this
                                                            specific Site. Factors considered include: toxicity, frequency of
                                                            occurrence, fate and transport of the contaminants in the
SCOPE AND ROLE OF THIS ACTION
                                                            environment, concentrations of the contaminants in specific media,
                                                            mobility, persistence, and bioaccumulation.
This is a proposed amendment to the September 1991
ROD for the SJCC and the GSC Sites. The 1991 ROD            Exposure Assessment: In this step, the different exposure pathways
selected SVE of VOC-contaminated soil and extraction        through which people might be exposed to the contaminants
and treatment of the contaminated groundwater to            identified in the previous step are evaluated. Examples of exposure
                                                            pathways for a groundwater site include ingestion of groundwater
address the threats posed by the contaminated soil and      and inhalation of volatiles while showering. Factors relating to the
groundwater at the Sites. However, recent                   exposure assessment include but are not limited to the
investigations have identified that elevated levels of      concentrations that people might be exposed to and the potential
VOCs are still present in the subsurface soils at both      frequency and duration of exposure. Using these factors, a RME
SJCC and GSC and are contributing to the groundwater        scenario, which portrays the highest level of human exposure that
                                                            could reasonably be expected to occur, is calculated.
contamination.
                                                            Toxicity Assessment: The toxicity step determines the types of
EPA's preferred remedy to address the additional            adverse health effects associated with exposures to chemicals or
contamination is removal of these source areas by           radionuclides, and the relationship between the magnitude of
                                                            exposure (dose) and severity of adverse effects (response).
excavation of the contaminated soil where practicable,      Potential health effects are chemical or radionuclide-specific and
and in-situ treatment of the deeper soil and clay lenses    may include the risk of developing cancer over a lifetime or other
saturated with VOCs with technologies such as               non-cancer health effects such as changes in the normal functions
enhanced SVE or chemical oxidation. In addition, to         of organs within the body (e.g., changes in the effectiveness of the
                                                            immune system). Some chemicals are capable of causing both
facilitate the removal and treatment of the
                                                            cancer and non-cancer health effects.
contamination beneath the GSC building, the remedy
includes acquisifion of the GSC property and                Risk Characterization: This step summarizes and combines outputs
demolifion of the GSC building.                             of the exposure and toxicity assessments to provide a quantitative
                                                            assessment of site risks. Exposures are evaluated based on the
                                                            potential risk for developing cancer and the potential for non-cancer
                                                            health hazards. The likelihood of an individual developing cancer
SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS                                       is expressed as a probability. For example, a 10'' cancer risk means
                                                            a "one in ten thousand excess cancer risk"; or one additional cancer
In 1989, EPA prepared a baseline risk assessment for        may be seen in a population of 10,000 people as a result of
the SJCC and GSC Sites to estimate the risks                exposure to site contaminants under the conditions explained in the
                                                            exposure assessment. Current federal Superfund guidelines for
associated with current and future Site conditions.         acceptable exposures are an individual lifetime excess cancer risk
Information from the baseline risk assessment was used      in the range of lO"** to lO"*" (corresponding to a one-in-ten-thousand
to develop the 1991 ROD. A baseline risk assessment         to a one-in-a-million excess cancer risk). For non-cancer health
is an analysis of the potential adverse human health and    effects, a "Hazard Index" (HI) is calculated. An HI represents the
                                                            sum of the individual exposure levels compared to their
ecological effects caused by hazardous substance
                                                            corresponding Reference Doses (RfDs). The key concept for a
releases from a site in the absence of any actions to       non-cancer Hazard Index is that a "threshold level" (measured as an
control or mitigate the releases under current and future   HI of 1) exists below which non-cancer health effects are not
land uses.                                                  expected to occur.




                                                                                                                 500616

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The following exposure pathways were considered to
be of potenfial significance in the 1989 baseline risk     Soil Cleanup Standards
assessment:                                                Since the fime the 1991 ROD was issued, NJDEP has
                                                           revised its policy regarding the Impact to Ground
    •   Exposure to groundwater via ingestion              Water Soil Remediation Standards. NJDEP now
                                                           requires that these standards be developed on a site-by-
    »   Exposure to surface soil                           site basis,.pursuant to NJDEP's authority under
                                                           N.J.S.A. 58:I0B-I2a., and NJDEP's/wj^jac//o GrowwJ
    o   Exposure to ambient air                            Water Soil Remediation Standard (IGW SRS)
                                                           guidance.
Following the recommendations in the 2004 Five-Year
Review, EPA conducted a soil vapor intrusion (SVI)         In July 2010, at EPA's request, NJDEP conducted site-
investigation jof properties that were located above the   specific modeling that determined that the soil cleanup
groundwater plume to evaluate the SVI exposure             goal of 1 ppm for PCE and TCE established in the 1991
pathway. The health-based screening criteria provided      ROD continues to be acceptable.
in the Draft Guidance for Evaluating the Vapor •
Intrusion to Indoor Air Pathway from Groundwater
and Soils were used to initially evaluate this exposure    BASIS FOR REMEDY MODIFICATION
pathway.
                                                           OU-I Soils
In 2006, ERT collected sub-slab soil gas samples and       In the April 2005 RSE Report, the COE recommended
indoor air samples from 19 properties. In 2008, ERT        that soil gas verification sampling be conducted at both
performed a second round of sub-slab soil gas and          Sites to make sure adequate mass had been removed
indoor air samples on seven properties. The main areas     from the vadose zone. In 2007 and 2008, EPA
of concern for vapor intrusion are the properties          collected soil gas and soil samples at both SJCC and
adjacent to the SJCC and GSC Sites, where                  GSC. In 2009, EPA collected soil samples beneath the
groundwater is shallowest. Elevated readings were          GSC building. These investigations confirmed that
detected in sub-slab samples from five properties in       elevated levels of PCE remain in the subsurface soils at
close proximity to the Sites. Indoor air concentrations    the GSC property, and elevated TCE levels remain in
at levels slightly above criteria were detected in the     the subsurface soils on the SJCC property.
basement of one property adjacent to SJCC. EPA will
continue to monitor the vapor intrusion pathway for the    The soils remedy, as described in the 1991 ROD, called
properties of concern.                                     for treatment of the VOCs in the subsurface soils by
                                                           SVE. The ROD did not anticipate that high levels of
                                                           VOCs were present in clay lenses or that contamination
REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES                                 was present beneath the GSC building. In 2009, ERT
                                                           prepared a memorandum called Source Area Remedial
The following remedial action objectives (RAOs)            Alternatives which summarized potential options for
established for the Sites include:                         remediating the source areas at both the SJCC and GSC
                                                           Sites. ERT's Source Area Remedial Alternatives
    •   Reduce or eliminate further contaminant            memorandum and other supporting documents
        migration to the groundwater;                      contained in the Administrative Record form the basis
                                                           of this proposed modification to the existing remedy.
    •   Restore the contaminated groundwater plume
        to levels below federal and state MCLs;
                                                           SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES
    •   Restore the groundwater to its beneficial use,
        which is a drinking water aquifer;                 Ba,sed on the results of EPA's recent investigations at
                                                           the Sites, EPA evaluated the existing ROD soil remedy,
                                                           SVE of the VOC-contaminated subsurface soils, versus
    » .Mass removal of the contaminant of concern;
                                                           excavafion of the contaminated soil where practicable,
       and
                                                           and in-situ treatment of the deeper soil and clay lenses.
                                                            As required by CERCLA, a "No Action" alternative
    »   Achieve cleanup levels of Ippm each for PCE
                                                           was evaluated in the 1991 ROD to establish a baseline
        and TCE in contaminated soils on the site.




                                                                                                       500617

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

for comparison to the other alternatives. Since the No        Alternative 2: Soil Excavation, Off-Site Treatment
Action alternative was already evaluated in the 1991          and/or Disposal, Backfill, In-situ Treatment of
ROD, it will not be discussed further in this Proposed        Residual Soil Contamination, Acquisition and
Plan.                                                         Demolition of GSC Building
                                                           Estimated Capital Cost:
EPA believes that the groundwater remedy selected in
                                                                   Excavation and In-Situ Treatment
the 1991 ROD is now functioning as intended;
                                                                   with Demolition of GSC Building: $ 2J 98,000
therefore, no change is necessary to the groundwater
                                                           Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $30,000
remedy.
                                                           Estimated Present Worth Cost: $2,255,000
                                                           Estimated Construction Time Frame: I year
  Alternative 1: Soil Vapor Extraction (1991 ROD
                                                           Estimated Time to Achieve RAOs: 1 to 2 years
  Remedy)
Estimated Capital Cost: $1,130,000                         Under this alternative, contaminated soil at both SJCC '
Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $305,000                        and GSC Sites would be excavated where practicable
Estimated Present Worth Cost: $1,731,000                   and transported off-site for treatment and/or disposal.
Estimated Construction Time Frame: 1 year                  The remaining contamination in the deeper soil and
Estimated Time to Achieve RAOs: 2 to 3 years               clay lenses would be treated with an in-situ treatment
                                                           technology, such as enhanced SVE or chemical
Alternative 1 is the remedy as described in the 1991       oxidation. The additional treatment would be expected
ROD. Under this alternative, an SVE system,                to significantly decrease the concentrations of VOCs in
consisting of vapor extraction wells screened in the       the saturated soils and shallow groundwater. Any
unsaturated zone, would be located in the source areas     VOCs removed by the in-situ treatment technology
at both Sites. Blowers or vacuum pumps would be            would be treated by the Sites' groundwater treatment
used to induce soil vapor flow toward the wells to         plant.
remove volatile contaminants from the soil. The VOCs
removed by the SVE system would be treated by the          At SJCC, shallow contaminated soil in the northern and
Sites' groundwater treatment plant.                        southern areas of the property would be excavated
                                                           where technically practicable. The estimated volume
At the SJCC property, the SVE system would be              of contaminated soil is approximately 200 yds'' in the
designed to treat approximately 1,200 yds' of              northern area and 1,000 yds' in the southern area.
contaminated soil. A majority of the TCE mass is           However, since the majority of the TCE mass is
believed to be concentrated in soil and clay lenses        believed to be concentrated within the deeper soil and
located at about 20 to 25 feet below ground surface,       clay lenses, in-situ treatment would be necessary to •
and therefore, a pulsed approach to soil vapor             reduce the TCE to acceptable levels.
extraction might be necessary to enable the TCE to
diffuse from the clay lenses.                              At GSC, the PCE source areas are estimated to be
                                                           approximately 1,400 yds' in volume. Shallow
At GSC, an SVE system would be designed to address         contaminated soil on the property would be excavated
PCE contamination on the entire property. • The total      where technically practicable. In-situ treatment of any
volume of contaminated soil in this area is                residual contamination might be necessary if
approximately 1,400 yds^ EPA believes that a               contamination extends to the water table. Any VOCs
majority of the VOC mass is concentrated within            removed by the in-situ treatment technology would be
discrete zones at depths ranging from six to 18 feet       treated by the Sites' groundwater treatment plant. The
below ground surface. It is possible that a significant    remedy also includes acquisition of the Garden State
amount of VOC contaminant mass is beneath the GSC          Cleaners prpperty and demolition of the building, if
building. This could require the installation of           necessary, in order to remediate contaminated soils
horizontal SVE extraction wells in order to create         beneath the structure.
sufficient air flow below the building. As explained
above, a pulsed approach to soil vapor extraction may      This alternative is expected to jbe complete within one
be necessary to enable the V O C s to diffuse from any     to two years.
of the clay lenses that may be present. This alternative
is expected to be completed within two to three years.




                                                                                                      500618

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                    and in-situ treatment of residual source areas)
 EVALUATION CRITERIA FOR SUPERFUND REMEDIAL
 ALTERNATIVES                                                                       should remove all of the source areas at both Sites.
 Overall Protectiveness of Human Health and the Environment detemiines
 whether an alternative eliminates, reduces, or controls threats to public          2. Compliance with the ARARs
 health and the environment through institutional controls, engineering
 controls, or treatment.                                                            Actions taken at any Superfund site must meet all
     • .         i                                                                  applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements
 Compliance with ARARs evaluates whether the alternative meets Federal
 and State environmental statutes, regulations, and other requirements that         (ARARs) for federal and state law or provide
 pertain to the site, or whether a waiver is justified.                             grounds for invoking a waiver of these
 Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence considers the ability of an                 requirements. These include chemical-specific,
 alternative to maintain protection of human health and the environment over        location-specific, and action-specific ARARs.
 time.           j                                                                  There are no chemical-specific ARARs for the
 Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume of Contaminants through                 contaminated soils. There is no change in the
 Treatment evaluates an alternative's use of treatment to reduce the harmful        location-specific or chemical-specific ARARs since
 effects of principal contaminants, their ability to move in the environment,       the 1991 ROD. However, as previously discussed,
 and the amount of contamination present.
                                                                                    NJDEP revised its policy regarding the Impact to
 Short-term Effectiveness considers the length of time needed to implement          Ground Water Soil Remediation Standards. EPA
 an alternative and the risks the alternative poses to workers, residents, and      considers the IGW SRS of 1.0 ppm for TCE and
 the environment during implementation.
                                                                                    PCE as To-Be-Considered requirements.
 Implementability considers the technical and administrative feasibility of -
 implementing the alternative, including factors such as the relative
 availability of goods and services.                                                Alternative 1 (SVE) may not achieve the soil
                                                                                    cleanup goals in the lower permeability soil and
 Cost includes estimated capital and annual operations and maintenance              clay zones saturated with VOCs. EPA expects that
 costs, as well as present worth cost. Present worth cost is the total cost of an
 alternative over time in terms of today's dollar value. Cost estimates are .       the cleanup goals should be met by Alternative 2
 expected to be.accurate within a range of+50 to -30 percent.                       (excavation and in-situ treatment of residual source
                                                                                    areas).
 State/Support Agency Acceptance considers whether the State agrees with
 the EPA's analyses and recommendations, as described in the RI/FS and
 Proposed Plan.                                                                     3.   Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence
 Community Acceptance considers whether the local community agrees with
 EPA's analyses and preferred altemative. Comments received on the                  Both alternatives address the VOC soil
 Proposed Plan are an important indicator of community acceptance.                  contamination, thereby reducing the migration of
                                                                                    VOC contaminants from the soil into groundwater
                                                                                    at both SJCC and GSC. Alternative I may not
EVALUATING REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES                                                    totally remove the VOC soil contamination in the
                                                                                    deeper soil zones saturated with VOCs.
Nine criteria are used to evaluate the different                                    Contaminants in lower permeability zones may not
remediation alternatives individually and against each                              be totally removed by SVE because soil vapors will
other in order to select the best alternative. This                                 preferentially flow through the higher permeability
section of the Proposed Plan profiles the relative                                  soils. Therefore, institutional controls may be
performance of each alternative against the nine                                    necessary.              •
criteria, noting how it compares to the other options
under consideration. The nine evaluation criteria are                               Alternafive 2 should achieve the cleanup goals and
discussed below.                                                                    is the most effective alternative in long-term
                                                                                    effectiveness and permanence.
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS
                                                                                    4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume
     1. Overall Protectiveness of Human Health                                      of Contaminants through Treatment
        and the Environment
                                                                                    Both alternatives would achieve a reduction in
    Both Alternatives I and 2 are protecfive of human                               volume of VOC soil contamination in the source
    health and the environment. However, ,                                          areas. SVE and in-situ treatment of residual source
    Alternative I (SVE) may not remove all of the                                   areas in Alternatives 1 and 2 would reduce the
    source material trapped in the deeper soil zones -                              concentration of contaminants in the source areas.
    saturated with VOCs. Alternative 2 (excavation                                  Although Alternative 1 would reduce the toxicity,




                                                                                                                            500619

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

mobility, and volume of the source areas through
treatment, it may not totally remove the VOC soil           7. Cost
contamination in the deeper soil and clay zones.
Under Alternative 2, some of the contamination              The estimated present worth cost of Alternafive 1 is
would be removed by excavation followed by                  $1,731,000. The cost could vary based on the
treatment.                                                  possible installafion of horizontal SVE extracfion
                                                            wells to treat soil under the GSC building. The
5. Short-Term Effectiveness                                 estimated present worth cost of Alternafive 2 is
                                                            $2,255,000. The cost of Alternafive 2 depends on
Both alternatives involve construction.                     the type of in-situ treatment technology selected
Alternafive 2 would cause more disruption than              during Remedial Design; chemical oxidation was
Alternative 1 because excavation and transportation         used to develop the cost estimate.
of contaminated soils could potentially result in the
generation of dust and vapors. Any potential                 8. State/Support Agency Acceptance
environmental impacts associated with dust and
vapors would be minimized with implementation               The State of New Jersey is currently evaluating
of dust and vapor control measures, and by                  EPA's Preferred Alternative in this Proposed Plan.
performing the excavation with appropriate health
and safety measures to limit the amount of material         9. Community Acceptance
that could impact the community and workers.
                                                            EPA will evaluate community acceptance of the
Both Alternatives I and 2 would require the                 Preferred Alternatives after the public comment
installafion of wells and surface equipment for the         period ends. EPA will discuss community
in-situ treatment of the contamination.                     acceptance in the Amended Record of Decision,
Alternative 1. is expected to take two to three years       the document that formalizes the selection of the
to complete. Alternative 2 is expected to be                remedy for the site.
completed within one to two years.

6.   Implementability                                    SUMMARY OF THE PREFERRED
                                                         ALTERNATIVE
Alternative 1 (SVE) has been sufficiently
demonstrated at both Sites for remediation of.           The proposed remedy for the cleanup of the addifional
contaminated soil and is relatively straightforward      source area contaminated soils at the SJCC and GSC
to implement. Equipment and vendors for                  Sites is Altemative 2 (excavation and in-situ treatment
implementation of SVE are readily available.             of residual source areas). The Preferred Alternafive
Alternative 2 is highly implementable but may            includes excavafion of contaminated soil at both the
require treatability studies and design of the in-situ   SJCC and GSC Sites where practicable and
technology to address the contamination in the           transportation off-site for treatment and/or disposal.
deep soil and clay zones.                                The remaining contamination in the deeper soil and
                                                         clay lenses and saturated soils would be treated with an
Subsurface conditions at both Sites should result in     in-situ treatment technology, such as enhanced SVE or
efficient removal of contaminants in the permeable       chemical oxidation, which will be evaluated during
layers under Altemative 1 (SVE). However,                remedial design. Any VOCs removed by the in-situ
contamination in the less permeable layers would         treatment technology would be treated by the Sites'
need extended time for remediafion, and all of the       groundwater treatment plant. The Preferred Alternative
contamination may not be removed. The soil               also includes acquisition of the GSC property and
contamination located under the GSC building             demolifion of the GSC building.
would also require the installation of horizontal
SVE wells in order to create sufficient air flow to      EPA believes the Preferred Alternative will be
allow treatment. This could present some technical       protective of human health and the environment, will
challenges.                                              comply with ARARs, will be cost effective, and will
                                                         utilize permanent solutions and alternative treatment
Under Alternative 2, excavation of materials at          technologies to the maximum extent practicable.
depth may require shoring for protection.                Through the use of an in-situ treatment technology to




                                                                                                    500620

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

treat the deeper clay lenses and saturated soils, the               For Further Information on the SJCC and GSC Sites, please
Selected Remedy meets the statutory preference for the                                       contact:
use of retnedies that employ treatment that reduces
                                                                         Rick Robinson                     Natalie Loney
toxicity, mobility or volume as a principal element to                                             Community Relations Coordinator
                                                                   Remedial Project Manager
address the principal threats at the Site. The Preferred                 212-637-4371                      212-637-3639
Alternative can change in response to public comment                robinson.rick@epa.gov              loney.natalie@epa.gov
or new information.                                                             or
              I                                                        Kristin Giacalone
                                                                   Remedial Project Manager
Consistent with EPA Region 2's Clean and Green policy,                   212-637-4407
EPA will evaluate the use of sustainable technologies and          Giacalone.kristin(?/),epa.gov
practices with respect to any remedial alternative selected
for the Site.                                   ,
                                                                                              U.S. EPA
As is EPA's policy, Five-Year Reviews will be                                          290 Broadway, 19th Floor.
                                                                                    New York, New York 10007-1866
conducted until remediation goals are achieved and the
Site is available for unrestricted use and unlimited               The Regional Public Liaison Manager for EPA's Region 2 office is:
exposure.
                                                                                             George H. Zachos
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION                                                                  Toll-free (888) 283-7626
                                                                                              (732)321-6621

EPA provides information regarding the cleanup of the                                     U.S. EPA Region 2
SJCC and GSC Superfund Sites to the public through                                 2890 Woodbridge Avenue, MS-211
public meetings, the Administrative Record file for the                                Edison, New Jersey 08837
site, and announcements published in the Atlantic City
Press and the Daily Journal of Vineland. EPA and the
State encourage the public to gain a more
comprehensive understanding of the site and the
Superfund activities that have been conducted there.
The dates for the public comment period, the.date,
location and time of the public meeting, and the
locations of the Administrative Record files, are
provided on the front page of this Proposed Plan.

EPA Region 2 has designated a Regional Public
Liaison Manager as a point-of-contact for community
concerns and questions about the federal Superfund
program in New York, New Jersey, Puerto Rico and
the U.S. Virgin Islands. To support this effort, the
Agency has established a 24-hour, toll-free number that
the public can call to request information, express their
concerns or register complaints about Superfund.




                                                              10



                                                                                                                     500621

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ATTACHMENT B

 Public Notices




                  500622

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 IV/VA   j.j.v^*^xui

 e bar break, the some-                  licensed to sell alcebsik-i^v-
 hectic hour after the                   erages."                                                                                                                                       =H^sfnplete Kitchens starting at $4595.
 , closing when bar-                        "I don't like the idea of let-                                                         KM,.--.   •••• l i ^ '
                                                                                                                                              ,,*<?                                                                                Your iVIobile
 empty out into city                     ting the. bars decide vvhat's
                                         good for this town," he said.                                                                                                                                       mi^xmH^\          Carpet Showroom
                                                                                                          EPA Invites you to a Public Meeting for.the
                                                                                                  South Jersey Clothing Company and Garden State Cleaners                                                                      Locally Owned and
                                                                                                                       Superfund sites                                                                                         Operated Serving
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NJ,PAandDEfor
                                                                                               The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency invites you to attend a public
                                                                                               meeting to discuss the Proposed Plan to amend the 1991 Record of                       *Up to 40 Sq. Yds                          Over 22 Years.
                                                                                               Decision to address the soil contamination at the South Jersey Clothing
                                                                                               Company .and Garden State Cleaners Superfund sites in Buena                            10% Senior Citizens Discount                Call Anytime
                                                                                               Borough, New Jersey.
                                                                                               The meeting will be held on:
                         Lire Happens,       ";:*i:*
                                                                                                                                 Wednesday, August 11,2010
                         Especially on Carpet.                                                                                                at
                              • Kool-Ald, Coffee, Mustard and Wine r                           ....,..,,,. ..... ._. J,,^^,,,,.,,;„___;-—;J:00 PM.^.!,
                                                                                                                       f^'"""               at the
                                Lift Out with Water                                                                            Buena Boro Municipal Center
                              • Resists Discoloration from Bleach                                                                      616 Central Ave
                                 and Acne Medication                                                                                 Minotola, NJ 08341
                               • Permanent Stain Protection                                    To request acopy of the Proposed Plan you can,
                                                                                               e-mail Natalie Loney, Community In vol vement Coordinator:
                               • Incredible Softness                                                                   loney.natalie@epa.gov
                                            B,T>i;S(.<»M*A«iS"4>»viwi»il!(Mi«»;i'*iX"«t»~:
                                                                                               or call Natalie: (212) 637-3639 or toll-fiee at 1-800-346-5009
                                                                                               or visit EPA's website: '

                                                                       Payments                      http://www.epa.gov/region02/superfund/npl/sjcc/
                                                                                                     http://www.epa.gov/region02/superfund/npiygsc/index.html
 tection                                                               No Interest             The public comment period for this Proposed Plan runs from Thursday,                   Free Shop at Home Save Up To 1/2 OFF Retail;
n on ALL                                                                  For 6                July 29, 2010 to Saturday, August 28, 2010. All written comments                      Store Pricing Sale on Wood, Laminate and Vin>
                                                                                               should be mailed to:
                                                                        Months**                                                                                                          Flooring, Next Day Installation Available
                                                                                                            Rick Robinson, Remedial Project Manager
                                                                                                              U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
                                                                                                                                                                                                             FREE ESTIMATES
14 Shore Road                             (609) 390-3876                                                             290 Broadway, 19'" Floor
                                                                                                                    New York, NY 10007-1866 ^
                                                                                                                                                                                         Bill's
 Marmora                                        FogliosAbbey.com                                                                                                                      1.866.369.RUGSl'FV .
                                                                                               Or you can e-mail your comments to:
                                                                                                                       robinson.rick@epa.gov
   13 VHO1370600                           • SEE STORE FOR DETAILS. ** QUALIFICATIONS EXIST.
                               wu!ii.| I jjyu
                    I      "sdojjajunoa Sutisixa
                                                                                                                                                             Ae^4di ^cN ui 3in»9q sjjoas jamajur             jaujgjui auios azTiEBgi^pmoM jBrn uoq
EA01B3J puE '>fu!s |Moq 3|3ujs p3]s sssiurejis                                                         .'3Tl6u)japouiajj,|G)|/q.                             SupBinSaipuB§UTZT|B39Isapnpmyem                 -E|SI§9J SAoiddB oj A n 'UOISUTUSBM
IT 'aSps 3S0U||nii :/, 'uoiiBiimsui 'uoiicouqcj                                    --^i,^              6u!|3pouiaj}uaui35Dgy-                                . S ^ ^ x n ' ^ ™ ' ' ' ^ •! puouiABH 'uas      m ABpsaupayw ZE-I^ paWA s a o L ^
:m .'iu3ui3JnsE3ui : s 3 p n p a i         siij^
 oxfasoocjD o! sjojoo liiduaffip oz oi (Jn                                                                                                                   3ms Aq uopnios9J ^ 'Aasjaf M9M iq               iBtDUEuia uo aawraiiuon 9snoH ^^ T
bs J3d S 6 ' 6 f $ :33Wd 38B>l3Ed
                                                                                                                                                                                •AJESS939U p9UTUII9a9p                '        •     -^    n IX
                                                                                                                                                             SB AiiApoE 9q, UO SU0IPUJS9I j9qjo                         sao,A.osa.Mpue„e,sssa.du.oy

    OXHSXMflOD HXIMtHO i UIUIBS 9ui[uo joj S910A pu^d 9snojj
/U.IO oiiNvnivdO ssaad 3Hi
                                                                                                                             NOIIVN                                                                                 01.02'62 Ainr'AvasanHi


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             500623

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                   Affidavit of Publication
                                                                   Publisher's Fee $38.22                                     Affidavit $21.00


  State of New Jersey
 Cumberland County
 Personally appeared

 Of the The Daily Journal, a newspaper p/inted in Freehold, New Jersey and published in Vineland,
 in said County and State, and of general circulation in said county, who being duly sworn, deposeth and saith
 that the advertisement of which the annexed is a true copy, has been published in the said newspaper
 1 times, once in each issue as follows:


              7/29/10

                                                                                                                                       A.D. 2010



                                                                                                                                                                Sworn and subscribed before me, this
                                                                                                                                                                      29 day of July, 2010
 Notary Public of New Jersey

                  EPA Invites y o u to a Public Meeting for tiie
               South Jersey Clotiting Company and Garden State
                            Cleaners Superfund sites
                                                                                                            EPA invites you t b a PublicMeetingfor.the                                          " -
The U.S. E n v i r o n m e n t a i Protection A s e n c y invites you to a t t e n d o                 . South Jersey Clothing Company and Garden State
pubiic m e e t i n g to discuss the Proposed Pion to a m e n d the 1991 Record                                        Cleaners Superfund sites ; , ;
of Decision to address the soil c o n t a m i n a t i o n of the South Jersey
Ciothing Company and Garden State Cleaners Superfund sites in                             The U S Environmental Protection Agency Thvltes you to attend a
Buena B o r o u g h , New Jersey.                                                         public meeting to discuss the Proposed Plan to qmend^the 1991 Record
                                                                                          of Decision to address the soli contdmination. at the,South,, Jersey
The m e e t i n g w i l l be held o n :                                                   Clothing Company: and GardciV;, StdfejCleancrs Superfund sites Jn
                                                                                          Buena Borough, NewJersey.!-; " . | S i i : ; j , * ' . ' ' ' ' • : ; ' • ' ^''ij'JV 'J-tW':
                                 Wednesday, August 1 1 , 2 G l b
                                              at                                          The meeting wilibe:heid o n : - ; .                    ;';?;;^j;5:' •'.•:'>•! . ' u ' V ^   ,     -.v-Sv:-'
                                          7:00 Pi«
                                            atthe                                                 •,..•,'.       . sS,v,;'wednes(Joy,Augustl1,2piO^! , ' v t . : ' ,                      ,';.fV('i!'::
                                Buena Boro.Munlclpal'Center
                                      616 Central Ave
                                     Minotola, NJ 08341                                                                  ' . .' ; ;        ..,atthe,";.-.
                                                                                                   . - '>^ • •              B u e n a ' B o r o MuniCEPal C e n t e r
To request a copy of the Proposed Plan you con e-mdil N a t a l i e Loney;                                                            ,616 C e n t r a l A v e *
Community involvement Coordinator:
                                                                                                                        '     \     Mjnofpla, NJ 08341

                                    toney.natalie^epa.gov
                                                                                         '.To request a copy of the.Rrop.osed Plan you can e moil Natalie Loney,
                                                                                           ,Commun|tyJnyolvernent.Cpprdlnator
or coll N a t a l i e :
                                                                                                  ':Vv^ ;f ;':':;• T.'-'V,'iMoney^natalie®epa gov
                          (212) 637^639 or tali.rree at 1.800^346-5009
                                                                                         • or call-Natalie :•'',>•'••£•.',^,;:;^V^;";
or visit E PA'S wet)slte:                                                                                          (212) 637-3639 o r t o l l f r e e a t 1-800 346-5009

             http://www,opa:gov/reglon02/superfund/npi/s|cc/                             ..or'.visit EPA's.website:               . ' . ,•• .'
      http://www.opa.gov/rsgion02/superfund/npl/gsc/lndex.html             '
                                                                                                      http://wvw:epd.g6v/reglon02/si)perfund/npl/slcc/
The pubiic comment period for this Proposed Plan runs from Thurs-                               http://www.epa.gov/region02/superf uhd/npl/gsc/lndex.html
day, July 29,201Qto Saturday, August 28,2010, AlLwrltten comments
should be mailed to:                                                                       The pubiic comment period for this .Pf-oposed Plan runs from Thurs-
                                                                                           day, July 29, 2010 to Saturday, August 28, 2010. All vKritten comments j
                     Rlcl< Robinson, Ftemedlal Pro|ect Manager                             should be moiled to;. .-:; •.•.         ;••.•• > • • • ' • ; ,'•:••-:•• • i-. • ~ .
                       U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
                               290 Broadway, 19lh Floor                                                           Rick fJobiiison, Remedial Prelect Manager
                              NewYork, NY 10007-1866                                                                u;s. Environmental Protection Agency'
                                                                                                                           290 Broadway, 19th Floor ,
Or you can e-moil your comments to:                                                                                   '    NevyY6rl<; NY 10007-1866;'

                                    roblnson.rick@ep8.gov                                  Or you can ermaii,your comments to:- , :
July 29,2010                                                                                                       '              robinson.rickaepa.gov                 . . ;, >
Ptr. Fee:S59.22                                                            #1468007
                                                                                           July 29, 2010 .
                                                                                           Ptr. Fee: $59.22                                                                                   #1468007




                                                                                                                                                                                                          500624

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   ATTACHMENT C

Public Meeting Transcript




                            500625

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   I n T h e M a t t e r Of:

      SOUTHJERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY
   GARDEN STATE CLEANER - SUPERFUND SITES




                        Hearing
                     August I I , 2 0 1 0




EINK & CARNEY REPORTING AND VIDEO SERVICES
           3 9 WEST 3 7TH STREET
         NEWYORK, NY USA 10018
        (212) 869-1500 or                (800) 692-3465


                  Original File LAM0811. TXT, 42 Pages
                   Min-U-Script® File 10:3033554226




W o r d I n d e x i n c l u d e d ^with t h i s Min-U-Script(E




                                                          500626

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY                                                                                       Hearing
GARDEN STATE CLEANER - SUPERFLIND SITES                                                                      August 11, 2010

                                                      Page 1                                                           Page 3
 [1] UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
                                                                      And who is on the agenda,
       REGION 2
                                                               12] Rick Robinson, he's the remedial
 121
 [3]      SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY                          [3] project manager along with Kristin
 [4]              AND                                            14] Giacalone.
 [5]          GARDEN STATE CLEANERS                              15]    And we also have with us
 [6]      SUPERFUND SITES PUBLIC MEETING                         16] Laura Smith. She's a risk
 [7]
                                                                17] assessor in the EPA office in New
 18)
                                                                IB] York. And we have Mark
 [9]            Buena Borough Municipal Center
                                                                [9] Chamberlain. He's with the U.S.
                   616 Central Avenue
                                                               [10] Army Corps of Engineers, in the
[10]               Minotola, New Jersey
[11]                                                           111] back.
                   August 11, 2010                             [12]     We would like that you hold
[12]               7:00 p.m.                                   [13] all questions until the end of the
[13]                                                           [14] presentation.
[14]                                                           [15]     This area right here in
[15] APPEARANCES:
                                                               [16] green, the ROD amendment, that's
[16]
[17]      CECILIA ECHOLS,                                      117] the area we'll be discussing

           Community Involvement Coordinator                   [18] tonight.

[18]                                                           [19]     And I'll let Rick have the
          RICHARD ROBINSON,                                    [20] mic next.
[19]       Remedial Project Manager                            [21]    MR. ROBINSON: Thanks,
[20]      KRISTIN GIACALONE,
                                                               [22] Cecelia.
           Remedial Project Manager
                                                               [23]     Again, I'm Rick Robinson.
121!
                                                               [24] I'm the project manager for the
[22]
[23]                                                           [26] South Jersey Clothing and Garden

[24]
                                                                                                                       Page 4
[25]
                                                               ni State Cleaners sites.
                                                      Page 2 12]      I don't know that you're
  [1] MS. ECHOLS: Hello. I'm                                  [3] aware that there are two Superfund
 [2] Cecelia Echols, and I am a                               [4] sites here — they're just five
 [3] Community Involvement Coordinator                        [5] hundred feet apart — but we treat
 [4] for the U.S. Environmental                               [6] them as one site for our clean-up
 [5] Protection Agency. We're here                            [7] purposes.
 [6] today to discuss the cleanup for
                                                              [8]     In 1991, we signed the first
 [7] the South Jersey Clothing Company
                                                              [9] Record of Decision for the site
 [8] and the Garden State Cleaners.
                                                             [10] and, basically — the ROD, the
 [9]     This proposed plan — I hope
                                                             [11] Record of Decision. In the mid
[10] everyone received it — has all of
                                                             [12] nineties, we started doing the
[11] the information that we'll be
[12] discussingtonight, and we'll                            [13] designs for the cleanup, and in
[13] discuss the cleanup for the ROD                         [14] 2000 we completed the groundwater
[14] amended to address the soil                             [15] pump and treat system, so that
[15] contamination.                                          [16] we're now in the long-term

[16]     The public comment period                           M7] operation and maintenance of that.
[17] began on July 29 and it ends on                         [18]     During our investigation, in
[18] August 28.                                              [19] our work at the groundwater

[19]     We have a stenographer here.                        [20] portion of the remedy, we realized
[20] She's here for public record for                        [21] that the groundwater levels
[21] us.There's an information                               [22] weren't dropping. As a result, we
[22] repository here in this building                        [23] did some additional studies which
[23] if you want to review any of the                        [24] found that there is still source
[24] documents related to those two
                                                             [25] material present on both
[25] sites.

FINK & CARNEY ( 8 0 0 ) NYC-FINK                     Min-U-Script®                                        (3) Page 1 - Page 4
                                                                                                            500627

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Hearing                                                           SOLTTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY
August 11, 2010                                             GARDEN STATE CLEANER - SUPERFUND SITES

                                            Pages                                                    Page?
  [1] properties. And that's what we're                [1] concentrations in the soil to
  [2] going to be talking about tonight.               [2] 25 feet deep at levels up to 1300
  [3]    Basically, South Jersey,                      [3] parts per million, and at South
  [4] which is located just south of us                [4] Jersey we had again contamination
  [5] here, across the railroad tracks.                [5] of the 25 feet depth with
  [G] they were a clothing manufacturer                [6] concentrations as high as 68 parts
  [7] that started in the 1940s.                       [7] per million.The soil cleanup
  [8] They're bankrupt and out of                      [8] number was one part per inillion.
  [9j business now.                                    [9]     The groundwater
[10]     In 1997, the EPA demolished                 [10] contamination was also identified.
[11] the building, and in 1999 we                    [11] and there was a plume of
[12] constructed the groundwater                     [12] contaminated groundwater emanating
[13] treatment plant.                                [13] from the sites; basically, one
[14]     The Garden State Cleaners is                [14] plume from both sites, and there
[15] a small dry cleaning on Summer                  [15] was a little over a half a mile
(16) Road. They started in 1969 and                  [16] downgradient at that time.
[17] they've been under new ownership                [17]      Kristin?
[18] since 2003.                                     [18] MS. GIACALONE: We'll switch
[19]     We're located right here in                 (19) back and forth a little bit to
[20] Borough Hall, and here's South                  [20] keep things interesting.
[21] Jersey and Garden State.                        [21]      When EPA selects a remedy to
[22]     So, back to the site                        [22] clean up a site, we have to
(23) history Back in 1981, EPA or the                (23) document it in what's called a
[24] State first identified that there               [24] record of decision or ROD.
[25] was contamination in the area, and              [25]      The ROD for these two sites
                                            Page 6                                                   Pages
  [1] they found a residential well with               [1] was signed in 1991, and the major
  [2] high levels of TCE in the                        [2] components of the remedy included
  [3] groundwater, in the water. And in                [3] for the soil contamination and in
  [4] 1984, they found PCE, or                         [4] situ soil vapor extraction system.
  [5] perchloroethylene, in the                        [5] which basically means treating the
  [6] groundwater near the Garden State                [6] soil contamination in place by
  [7] Cleaners and also in the soil                    [7] inserting some wells that would
  [8] around the building.                             [8] use vacuum pumps to remove the
  [9]    TCE is trichlorethylene and                   [9] contamination from the soil.
[10] PCE is perchloroethylene.TCE is                 [10]      For the groundwater remedy,
[11] mainly used for degreasers and in               [11] we issued in the ROD that we were
[12] dry cleaning, whereas PCE is                    [12] going to extract the contaminated
[13] mostly for dry cleaning.                        [13] groundwater by putting extraction
[14]     In March '89 and October                    [14] wells throughout the plume, we
[15] '89, the sites were listed on the               [15] would treat the extracted
[16] NPL, National Priorities List, or               [16] groundwater, and then re-inject
(17] Superfund list, which is the                    [17] the water back into the aquifer as
[18] nation's list of the most                       [18] clean water upgradient of the
[19] hazardous waste sites and, thus.                [19] pluming.
[20] eligible for federal funds for                  [20]      this would also entail
[21] cleanup.                                        [21] long-term groundwater monitoring
[22]     InAugust 1991, EPA                          [22] to ensure that the system was
[23] completed the investigation.                    [23] functioning properly.
[24]     The results of the RI/FS at                 [24]      After the ROD design, then
(25] Garden State, we had PCE                        [25] we move into what's called the

Page 5 - P a g e 8   (4)                   Min-U-Script®                   FINK & CARNEY ( 8 0 0 ) NYC-FINK
                                                                                                500628

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY                                                                           Hearing
GARDEN STATE CLEANER - SUPERFUND SITES                                                           August 11, 2010

                                            Page 9                                                       Page 11
  [1] design and construction phase,                   [1] these two studies included a
  [2] where we design systems and then                 [2] couple things.The first one is
  [3] build them.                                      [3] they discovered that the

  [4]     For the soil vapor                           [4] groundwater extraction system was
  [5] extraction for the soil, we                      (51 not capturing the leading edge of
 [6] completed the design at Garden                   [6] the plume and that the plume had
 [7] State Cleaners in August 1993, and                [7] migrated into a deeper aquifer
 [8] the SVE system operated from June                18] zone.
 [9] '94 to March '95.                                [9]     So, they recommended that
[10]     At the South Jersey site.                   [10] additional extraction wells be put
[11] the design was completed in 1995,               [11] in to capture the leading edge of
[12] and then the vapor extraction                   [12] the plume and to capture what was
[13] system was operated from February               (13] deeper, and that TCE and PCE
[14] '99 to February 2001.                           [14] levels had not significantly
[15]     For the groundwater remedy,                 (15] decreased, which led them to
[16] we built the groundwater                        [16] recommend that perhaps there are
[17] extraction and treatment plant at               [17] more source areas present at both
[18] the South Jersey site, we                       [18] the sites.
[19] installed fifteen extraction wells              [19]    MR. ROBINSON: Based on the
[20] throughout the plume, and we had                [20] results of those two studies, EPA
[21] twelve injection wells upgradient.              [21] came out in 2007 through 2009, and
[22]     Once the systems are all                    [22] we did a pretty extensive soil
[23] built and in place and tested to                [23] study on both properties. We put

[24] ensure that they are operating                  [24] in a number of soil gas probes,
[25] properly and that they're                       [25] and we also collected a number of

                                           Page 10                                                       Page 12
  [1] functioning, we enter what's                     Ml soil samples. We also got access
  [2] called a long-term response action               121 to the Garden State Cleaners and
  [3] phase, which is basically the                    13] were able to put in some borings
  [4] operation of the groundwater                     14] beneath the dry cleaner building.
  [5] treatment system. Throughout that                [5]     At the Garden State site, we
  [6] phase, there have been a few                     [6] found that there's still about
  [7] studies done to ensure that                      [7] 1400 cubic yards of contaminated
  [8] everything is working the way it                 [81 soil still present on the
  [9] should be.                                       [9] property. The contamination is
[10]      In March of 2004, we                       [10] about eight to twelve feet beneath

[11] conducted a five-year review, and               [111 the building, and we had
[12] that's basically done to assure                 [12] contaminant concentrations of PCE
[13] that the remedy for the site is                 [13] up to 1400 parts per million.
[14] protective of human health and the              [14]      The area outlined in green
[15] environment.                                    [15] on the figure shows the SVE system

[16]      In 2005, the Army Corps of                 [161 that was operated in the mid
[17] Engineers conducted a remediation               [17] nineties. Again, it operated for
[18] system evaluation, or RSE, which                [18] about a year, and at the time we
[19] basically looks at the groundwater              [19] thought it removed all the
[20] treatment system to ensure that                 [20] contamination.
[21] it's working properly and to see                [21]      At the South Jersey site.
[22] if there's anything that can be                 [22] there's about 1200 cubic yards of
[23] done to optimize the system, that               [23] contamination still remaining, and
[24] kind of thing.                                  [24] it's mostly in two areas; there's
[25]      The final recommendation of                [25] a shallow area and a deeper area



FINK & CARNEY (800) NYC-FINK               Min-U-Script®                                   (5) Page 9 - Page 12
                                                                                               500629

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Hearing                                                           SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY
August 11, 2010                                             GARDEN STATE CLEANER - SUPERFUND SITES

                                           Page 13                                                   Page 15
  [1] that's with clay lenses.                         [11 order to address these conditions.
  [2]     And in the clay lenses, we                   12] we have to do a ROD amendment.
  [3] had TCE concentrations up to four                [3] which is why we're here today.
  [4] thousand parts per million, and.                 [4]     In order to do a ROD
  [5] again, our cleanup level is one                  [5] amendment, we have to look at if
  [6] part per million.                                [6] we were to use the original remedy
  [7]     This is the map of the EPA                   17] that was in the ROD, which in this
  [8] investigation, our soil boring                   [8] case is soil vapor extraction, and
  [9] data, on the property, showing the               [9] compare that to what we think
[10] two areas; area one, the shallow                [10] could be the best way to address
[11] contamination, and area two, the                [111 this contamination. And we have
[12] deeper contamination.                           [121 that here as Alternative 2.
[13]      This next overlay is the                   [13]     For Alternative l,the
[14] outline of the former South Jersey              1141 original SVE system, what we would
[15] Clothing building.                              [15] do is use blowers or vacuum pumps
[16]      And in the area between —                  [16] to remove the contamination from
[17] in the middle on the west side.                 [17] the soil.The contaminants that
[18] there was a tank that in 1979 they              (18) were removed would be treated at
[19] had a fire there, and the tank                  [19] the groundwater treatment plant.
[20] ruptured and spilled 275 gallons                [20]     On the South Jersey site.
[21] ofTCE in the ground.They did                    [211 we'd be treating approximately
[22] some cleanup, but they didn't get               [22] 1200 cubic yards of contaminated

[23] it all.                                         [23] soil. Most of the TCE at the
[24]      The next overlay shows the                 [24] property is located 20 to 25 feet
[25] source areas originally identified              [25] below ground surface and in clay

                                           Page 14                                                   Page 16
  [1] in the remedial investigation                  [1]   lenses.
  [2] feasibility study. So, that's                  [2]       So, this could require doing
  [3] what we thought, the area along                  [3] a pulsed approach, which is
  [4] the railroad tracks — this is the                [4] basically a turning on and off of
  [5] railroad tracks — the area right                 [5] the extraction system in order to
  [6] in here is where we thought most                 [61 best remove all contamination.
  [7] of the contamination was at the                  [7]     At the Garden State Cleaner
  [8] time, and here's where we put the                [8] site, we've been trying to treat
  [9] soil vapor extraction system on                  191 1400 yards of contaminated soil
[10] the property.                                   [10] with the SVE.The PCE at the site
[11]      It did not — as you can                    [111 is approximately six to eighteen
[12] see, most of this contamination                 [12] feet below the ground surface and

[13] that's over in the deeper zone                  [13] beneath the Garden State Cleaners
[14] there is where the building used                [14] building.
[15] to be, and that building wasn't                 [15]      Because we'd be treating
[16] knocked down until 1979 — sorry,                [16] soil underneath the building, we'd




                                                                                                               I
[17] 1997.                                           [171 have to install possibly
[18]      Kristin?                                   [18] horizontal wells in order to
[19]   MS. GIACALONE: So, as I                       [19] access the contamination below the
[20] mentioned before, when a cleanup

                                                                                                               I
                                                     [20] building. And, again, some of the
[21] method for a site is documented —               [21] contamination will be in clay
[22] is determined, it's documented in               [22] lenses, requiring a propulsed
[23] the ROD. When site conditions                   [23] approach.
[24] change and it's determined that
[25] the remedy needs to be changed in
                                                     [24]      For Alternative 2, we'd be
                                                     [25] looking at excavating as much soil
                                                                                                               I
Page 13 - Page 16 (6)                      Min-U-Script®                   FINK & CARNEY ( 8 0 0 ) NYC-FINK
                                                                                                500630
                                                                                                               I

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY                                                                            Hearing
GARDEN STATE CLEANER - SUPERFUND SITES                                                            August 11, 2010

                                           Page 17                                                         Page 19
  [1] as we can get.That soil would be                 [11 during the public comment period.
  [2] transported offsite for treatment                12]    And then what we do is we
  [3] and disposal.                                    [3] then compare the two alternatives
  [4]     Because the contamination is                 [4] versus the main set of criteria.
  [5] quite deep, there would probably                 [5] Again, the two overall that have
  [6] be locations where we would not be               [6] to be met are the overall
  [7] able to excavate the contamination               [7] protection of human health and the
  [8] so we'd be looking to treat that                 [8] environment and the compliance
  [9] contamination in place, in situ.                 [9] with the state and federal
[10] with some treatment technology                  [10] regulations; basically, the
[11] that we would determine during the              [11] cleanup criteria.
[12] design phase once we have a                     [12]      EPA has determined that
[13] clearer picture of what's left and              [13] Alternative 2 provides the best
[14] what that might look like.                      [14] balance of all the nine criteria.
[15]      We would treat any VOCs, any               [15]      It's able to reduce the
[16] contaminants, that were removed by              [16] toxicity, mobility, and volume of
[17] the in situ treatment at the                    [17] contaminants to a greater degree
[18] groundwater treatment plant. And                [18] than Alternative l.With
[19] in order to facilitate the                      [19] Alternative 1, the contamination
(20) treatment and the removal of the                [20] being in the clay layers, it would
[21] contamination, we would acquire                 [21] be difficult to remove all the
[22] and demolish the Garden State                   [22] volatiles out of that, so it may
[23] Clothing building.                              [23] not achieve the soil cleanup
[24] MR. ROBINSON: EPA's process                     [24] standards.
[25] to evaluate the alternatives. We                [25]      It's also more effective to
                                           Page 18                                                        Page 20
 [1] go through a process where we                     [1] meet the soil cleanup standards
  [2] evaluate nine criteria for the                   [2] and it's also the shortest time
  [3] remedy evaluation.                               [3] frame for the implementation of
  [4]     And there are three main                     [4] remedy.
  [5] sections of the nine criteria, and               [5]     It also provides the
  [6] they are threshold criteria, which               [6] greatest   degree of the long-term
  [7] basically means those two                        [7] effectiveness and permanence.
  [8] alternatives, those two criteria,                [8] Once we get it out, it's out.
  [9] must be achieved in order for EPA                [9]     So, in summary, EPA's
[10] to select that as a remedy.                     [10] preferred remedy is Alternative 2,
[11]      Then we have balancing                     [11] the excavation of the soils where
[12] criteria: Long-term effectiveness               [12] practicable, the in situ treatment
(13] and permanence; reduction of                    [13] of the remaining soil
[14] toxicity, mobility, and volume;                 [14] contamination.
[15] short-term effectiveness;                       [15]      The treatment of any of the
[16] implementability; and cost.                     [16]  volatile  organic compounds that we
[17]      Then we have the modifying                 [17] remove by the in situ treatment
[18] criteria, which are the State of                [18] technology would then be treated
[19] New Jersey's — any concerns that                [19] at the site's groundwater plant.
[20] the State of New Jersey may have.               [20] and then we'd acquire and demolish
[21]      And then we're here today to               [21] the Garden State Cleaners building
[22] discuss the community concerns.                 [22] so that we could access the
[23] So, we'll take your questions                   [23] contamination beneath it.
[24] later, and, also, you can submit                [24]      So, again, you can send
[25] written comments at any time                    [25] comments to me in writing, either



FINK & CARNEY (800) NYC-FINK               Min-U-Script®                                   (7) Page 17 - Page 20
                                                                                                 500631

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Hearing                                                                SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY
August 11, 2010                                                  GARDEN STATE CLEANER - SUPERFUND SITES

                                               Page 21                                                     Page 23
 [1] through mail or through e-mail.                      [1] including the t w o vacuum systems
 [2] during the public c o m m e n t period.              [2] they had in place for the soil
 [3] And, also, if you have any o t h e r                 [3] they excavated, I believe the
 [4] questions, you can reach Natalie                     [4] plant's approaching a thousand
 [5] Loney, w h o is the Community                        IS] pounds.
 [6] Involvement Coordinator for the                      [6]    Mostly TCE, because that's
  [7] site. Cecelia is just filling in                    [7] mostly the groundwater, and lesser
  [8] for her right novv.                                 [8] amounts of PCE. T h e total, I
  [9]     So,on that note, w e ' d like                   [9] believe, is close to a thousand
[10] to o p e n u p for questions. And if                [10] p o u n d s over ten years.
[11] you could, since w e do have a                      [111     MR. FIOCCI: This basically
[12] court reporter here, if you could.                  [12] was a liquid or started out as a
[13] first state your name.                              [13] liquid.
[14]      And if you have a problem                      [14]     MR. CHAMBERLAIN: Right.
[15] with the spelling, please speak                     [15]     MR. FIOCCI: Why wouldn't it
[16] u p .                                               [16] still be a liquid?
[17]     THE COURT REPORTER:Thank                        [17]      It turned into a solid.
[18] y o u .                                             [18]     MR. CHAMBERLAIN: It is a
[19]    MR. ROBINSON: And that w a y                     [19] liquid w h e n it's mixed with the
[20] w e can have your comments noted in                 [20] groundwater.
[21] the meeting minutes.                                [21]     MR. FIOCCI: And w h e n you
[22]     Any questions?                                  [22] take it out, it's still a liquid.
[23] MR. FIOCCI: My name is                              [23]      Isn't it?
[24] Donald Fiocci.                                      [24]     MR. CHAMBERLAIN: No.
[25]     One question, basically.                        [25] W h e n w e take it out, it goes

                                               Page 22                                                     Page 24
  [1] How many gallons have you                           [11 through    carbon and is absorbed
  [2] actually recovered, gallons?                        [21 through    the carbon.
  [3]     Everything is — are you                          [3]    MR. FIOCCI: Wouldn't it
  [4] just blowing it in the air?                          [4] Stop and stay still?
  [5] MR. ROBINSON: The                                    [5]     What makes this plume move?
  [6] groundwater treatment plant has                      [6] Because it's still a liquid.
  [7] actually removed —                                   [7]    MR. ROBINSON: It's
  [8]     Mark, it's what, a couple                        [8] dissolved in the groundwater.
  [9] million?                                             [9]    MR. FIOCCI: That's what I
[10]     MR. FIOCCI: I didn't say                        [10] said, it's basically a liquid, so
[11] h o w many they passed through the                  [111 it stays in the liquid form.
[12] machine.                                            [12]      Because w h e n it first
[13]      H o w many gallons of actual                   [13] happened, there was a gallonage
[14] product have you recovered?                         [14] that they recovered of the basic
[15] MR. ROBINSON: Generally,                            [15] product. It probably was 500
[16] it's measured in p o u n d s .                      [16] gallons from the spill of the
[17] MR. FIOCCI: H o w many                              [17] tank, but 275 gallons was
[18] pounds?                                             [18] recovered.They had it in gallons
[19]     MR. ROBINSON: Off the t o p                     [19] then.
[20] of my head — I don't have that                      [20]     MR. ROBINSON: Back then.
[21] number in front of me. We can get                   [21] that was a k n o w n quantity of pure
[22] that for you.                                       [22] product.
[23]     MR. CHAMBERLAIN: I don't                        [23]    MR. FIOCCI: Because it is a
[24] have it off the top of my head.                     [24] liquid.
[25] but I believe the plan itself, not                  [25]    MR. ROBINSON: O k a y


Page 21 - P ^ e 24 (8)                         Min-U-Script®                     FINK & CARNEY ( 8 0 0 ) NYC-FINK
                                                                                                      500632

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY                                                                           Hearing
GARDEN STATE CLEANER - SUPERFUND SITES                                                           August 11, 2010

                                           Page 25                                                         Page 27
  [1] MR. FIOCCI: I just wondered                      [1] It can create a groundwater plume
  [2] how it turned into a solid.                      [2] that would be there for a long,
  [3] MR. ROBINSON: There's no                         [3] long time. So, the stuff is very.
  [4] way for us to separate out the TCE               [4] very concentrated, and once it's
  [5] from the water. It's dissolved in                [5] in the groundwater, it's very hard
  [6] the water.                                       [6] to get out.
  [7]    So, what we have to do, we                    [7]    MR. FIOCCI: Well, at
  [8] have to run it through the plant.                [8] 25 feet deep, dig it up, air it
  [9] and then the plant separates it                  [9] out, and it will disappear real
[10] out. And then it goes from there                [10] fast.
[11] into more of a phase that then                  [111     MR. ROBINSON: Any other
[12] gets stripped out through carbon.               [12] questions?
[13]     So, we measured — we know                   [13]     MS. MAROLDA: Sharon
[14] the weight of the carbon and we                 [14] Marolda.
[15] know how much is removed from the               [15]      So, you're going to take all
[16] carbon.That's the only way we                   [16] this dirt out now.
[17] can do it.There's no meter in                   [17]      What about the contamination
[18] there saying that we're moving                  [18] that's already down there?
[19] this amount of TCE or PCE.                      [19]      I know what all the
[20] MR. FIOCCI: If you got a                        [20] technicalities are, what your
[21] pound, it's eight gallons or seven              [21] doing, pumping it out, but I feel
[22] gallons. So, you're collecting —                [22] like it's not going anywhere and
[23] if you have a thousand pounds.                  [23] we'll spend all this money on top.
[24] boy, you got eight thousand                     [24]     MR. ROBINSON: I have a
[25] gallons of product.                             [25] couple slides in here, let me just

                                           Page 26                                                         Page 28
  [1]    That's a lot of product.                      [1] get to them.
  [2] MR. ROBINSON: Basically                          [2]     Let's start with this one
  [3] we're still seeing a lot of                      [3] here.This is a map from about
  [4] material still in the ground on                  [4] 2005 or so, and it shows all our
  [5] both properties that was missed by               [5] extraction wells. Our plume —
  [6] the previous cleanup experts.                    [6] here's South Jersey, here's Garden
  [7] MR. CHAMBERLAIN: Maybe your                      [7] State, and this is Wheat Road
  [8] point was Rick had mentioned it                  [8] right here.
  [9] was a 275-gallon tank. You said                  [9]     In 2005, when we first went
[10] there were 275 gallons recovered                [10] out there and we realized that the
[11) immediately. But, obviously.                    [111 plume had gone beyond Wheat Road
[12] we've removed a lot more liquid or              [12] and it went deeper.
[13] pounds, gallons, than that.                     [13]      The next slide here shows
[14]     There was discharge going on                [14] our current extraction well
(15) throughout the history of both                  [15] system. We're down here on Lewis
[16] facilities, either by accident or               [16] Drive now. The leading edge is
[17] just sloppy housekeeping practice.              [17] past Lewis Drive. But we now have
[18] whatever. But it was being                      [18] Well 18 in, we have 12-A pumping;
[19] discharged into the ground for                  [19] 12-A and 18, which are in the
[20] many years prior to the fire and                [20] deeper zone.
[21] the spill there.                                [21]     And let me just show you,
[22] MR. ROBINSON: The Other                         [22] this is the map from 2006, the
[23] thing is one little drop of TCE                 [23] plume map.
[24] can contaminate the entire                      [24]     Can we turn the lights off?
[25] groundwater plume for a long time.              [25]     MS. MAROLDA: What's the

FINK & CARNEY (800) NYC-FINK               Min-U-Script®                                    (9) Page 25 - P ^ e 28
                                                                                                500633

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Hearing                                                                SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY
August 11, 2010                                                  GARDEN STATE CLEANER - SUPERFUND SITES

                                              Page 29                                                        Page 31
 [1] first road across o n the bottom?                    [1] order of magnitude. So, in the
 [2] MR. ROBINSON: This is W h e a t                      [2] one year since this well has b e e n
 [3] Road, this is Lewis Drive, and                       [3] in operation, the levels in the
 [4] this is the TCE plume from 2006.                     [4] groundwater over there o n Lewis
 [5]      Right here o n Lewis Drive,                     [5] Drive have d r o p p e d by an order of
 [6] right on Lewis Drive here, the                       [6] magnitude. I think it's n o w less
 [7] well in there had a couple                           [7] than five hundred parts p e r
 [8] thousand parts p e r billion —                       [8] billion.
 [9] MS. MAROLDA: H o w d e e p is                        [9]    MS. MAROLDA: H o w about the
[10] that?                                              [10] wells on the outside edge?
[11] MR. ROBINSON: Contamination                        [11]       You test people's wells.
[12] is around 180 to 200 feet.                         [12]     MR. ROBINSON: We test the
[13]     Is that about right, Mark?                     [13] wells in here.
[14]    MR. CHAMBERLAIN: 160 to                         [14]       We're seeing that the levels
[15] 180.                                               [15] are pretty m u c h staying the same
[16] MR. ROBINSON: 160 to 180                           [16] or dropping, but we're not seeing
[17] feet d e e p right in this area.                   [17] t h e m increase. As long as this
[18] MS. MAROLDA: H o w d e e p is                      [18] well continues — this Well 18
[19] the Louis Drive well?                              [19] here is continually capturing the
[20]    MR. ROBINSON: The Louis                         [20] plume — it should cut off the
[21] Drive well —                                       [21] source for the downgradient
[22] MR. CHAMBERLAIN: 160 to                            [22] contamination.That's the key
[23] 180.                                               [23] thing, is to k e e p the wells
[24] MR. FIOCCI: And the Wheat                          [24] pumping in there.
[25] Road wells?                                        [25]       We're also evaluating o n —
                                              Page 30                                                       Page 32
  [1] MR. CHAMBERLAIN: T h e                              [1] w e do sample the wells twice a
  [2] original W h e a t Road wells w e r e               [2] year to check on trends. If we're
  [3] only about 110 or 115 feet d e e p .                [3] seeing that the trends are showing
  [4]      The n e w well put in in 2007,                 [4] that the contamination is
  [5] I think that's about 165 feet                       [5] increasing, w e do have plans on
  [6] d e e p .                                           [6] the shelf to put another well in
 [7] MS. MAROLDA: You think the                           (7) this leading edge here to capture
 [8] wells on Lewis Drive have the                        [8] anything here if the levels start
 [9] capability of pulling the plume                      (9) going up.
[10] back?                                              [10]      But right now, the levels
[11]   MR. ROBINSON: Yes.                               (11] have not gone u p in the last t w o
[12]   MS. MAROLDA: Really?                             [12] years, and to some degree they're
[13] It's like a stream, isn't                          [13] starting to go d o w n a little bit.
[14] it?                                                [14]     MS. MAROLDA: Why don't you
[15]      I haven't seen anybody                        [15] use my closed-down well?
[16] change the course of a stream with                 [16]     MR. ROBINSON: We looked at
[17] a well.                                            [17] the well.The farm well you're
[18]     MR. ROBINSON: Let me s h o w                   [18] talking about is located about
[19] you what happened.This is 2006.                    [19] right in here.
[20] I'll go to the next map.                           (20)     MS. MAROLDA: Right.
[21]    This is May 2009. So,                           [21]     MR. ROBINSON: It's screened
[22] before we had the well in here                     [22] in a different portion of the
[23] that was in a couple thousand                      [23] aquifer than w h e r e the
[24] parts per billion levels of TCE in                 [24] contamination is. It's actually
[25] the plume, it's n o w d o w n on an                [25] higher u p in the zone.


P a g e 29 - P a g e 32    (10)               Min-U-ScriptcS)                    FINK & CARNEY ( 8 0 0 ) NYC-FINK
                                                                                                        500634

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY                                                                       Hearing
GARDEN STATE CLEANER - SUPERFUND SITES                                                       August 11, 2010

                                            Page 33                                                  Page 35
 [1        So, we did look at it to see               description was some of the soil
  [2] if there's something we could do                will be treated here at the plant,
  [3] about that well, but the                        but I believe you mentioned that
  [4] contamination is — there at that                there would be some soil that
  [5] leading edge is about 180 feet,                 would not be.
  [6] and your well I think is screened                   MR. ROBINSON: We'll be
  [7] at 130 feet, something like that.               excavating the soil out where we
  la;     MS. MAROLDA: So, if the                     can get it.
  19] contamination is there, why not?                    MR. DEMMY: And where is
[10]      MR. ROBINSON: We'd have to                  that soil going to go?
111 put another well in deeper to get                     MR. ROBINSON: It will
[12] at it if it needs it.                            probably go to a landfill,
[13]       Right now we think that                    probably an approved Subtitle C
[14; given time —                                     landfill somewhere either in
[15]      MR. CHAMBERLAIN: The area                   Pennsylvania, NewYork, New
[16] of high concentration is deeper                  Jersey, wherever we can find a
[1    than your well, unfortunately.                  suitable landfill for the waste.
[1        MR. ROBINSON: Given time,                       MR. DEMMY: Wouldn't that
[19] Well 18 should cut off that, and                 contaminate that groundwater then?
[2o: the area should naturally                            MR. ROBINSON: Generally
[21 attenuate. But it's one of the                    those facilities are permitted to
[22] things that we're going to be                    accept that waste. A lot of times
[23] monitoring to make sure that the                 they'll treat it at those
[24; levels are still not going up.                   facilities before they landfill
[25]       If they go up, then we'll                  it.
                                            Page 34                                                  Page 36
       look at putting another well in in                 It depends on the levels of
       that area.                                     soil we pull out, whether it
         MS. MAROLDA: Okay.                           requires treatment before
        MR. ROBINSON: Yes, sir?                       disposal.
        MR. DEMMY: Richard Demmy is                      MR. CHAMBERLAIN: Those
     my name.                                         landfills are always lined with
         In reference to your plume                   liners and leaching collection
     here, I'm assuming that because                  systems and everything too.
     we're talking about excavating                      MR. DEMMY: Thank you.
[io: dirt further north around the                       MR. ROBINSON: I just wanted
[11 sites that these sites are                        to point out one other thing.
[12] continually still contaminating                      Originally, the plume —
[13] that plume.                                      these are the two source areas up
[14]     MR. ROBINSON: Correct.                       in here.
[15]    MR. DEMMY: And you're going                       Originally, the plume was
[16] to try to cut it off there so that               one plume that went down like
[17] these levels can then begin to                   this. And as you can see, there's
[18 drop because that contaminated                    a gap in this area here.That's
[19 soil will be gone.                                what happens when we're able to
[20;     MR. ROBINSON: Right.                         cut the source off. And where we
[21    MR. DEMMY: I understand                        can put an extraction well on it
[22  that. And I certainly understand                 when there's no source, the area
[23; their concerns.                                  does clean up.
[24;    The only thing I didn't                           So, the area in between — I
[25; quite understand in your                         guess from Pacific Avenue there

FINK & CARNEY ( 8 0 0 ) NYC-FINK            Min-U-Script®                            (11) Page 33 - Page 36
                                                                                           500635

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Hearing                                                            SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY
August 11, 2010                                              GARDEN STATE CLEANER - SUPERFUND SITES

                                           Page 37                                                   Page 39
  [1] to — I can't remember the name of               [11     MR. ROBINSON: Let me show
  [2] that street.                                     [2] you this little figure —
  [3] MAYOR BARUFFI: Artie.                            [3]    MR. FIOCCI: The water is
  [4] MR. ROBINSON: — Artie, all                       [4] traveling and dropping.
  [5] those monitoring wells are now                   [51    MR. CHAMBERLAIN: It's
  [6] clean, and we're actually seeing                 [6] traveling horizontally, but it's
  [7] that we got — in'this area here.                 [7] also moving vertically as it
  [8] we're now actually starting to see               [8] travels.
  [9] the levels starting to drop here                 [9]    MR. FIOCCI: That's dropping
[10] on Wheat Road. :                                [10] a whole hell of a lot.
[11]      So, wherever we can get a                  [11]     MR. ROBINSON: It drops
[12] well and cut the source off, we                 [12] really quick.
[13] can actually clean this                         [13]      Let me just show you this
[14] groundwater up.;                                [14] little cross-section here.This
[15]      What was happening, as you                 [15] is South Jersey Clothing, Garden
[16] notice in here, there's still a                 [161 State Cleaners, we have Wheat Road
[17] plume of contamination here that                [17] here.
[18] wasn't going away, and that's what              [18]      On the figure below it.
[19] led us to believe that there could              [19] basically right here is Wheat
[20] still be sources up here. And if                [20] Road, and this is basically Lewis
[21] you had a really good rain event                [21] Drive right here.
(22] and it flushes the stuff out, you               [22]      So, at the site, the
[23] can get a slug of contamination                 [23] contamination here in the
[24] coming out and re-contaminating                 [24] groundwater is maybe down sixty.
[25] this area. That's why we have to                [25] seventy feet. But as you start
                                           Page 38                                                   Page 40
  [1] get the source out.                              [11 going to the south, you can see
  [2] MR. FIOCCI: Who designed                         121 where our wells are screened —
  [3] the Wheat Road wells at 100 feet.                [3] this is where our wells are
  [4] and now all of a sudden the plume                [4] screened here, then over here —
  [5] is now 180 feet, some rocket                     [5] so as you go away from the site.
  [6] scientist.                                       [6] the contamination is heading
  (7] MR. CHAMBERLAIN: Yeah, some                      [7] downward.
  [8] rocket scientist from the                        [8]     And originally, as you said.
  [9] government, exactly.                             [9] EPA missed the stuff that was down
[10] MR. ROBINSON: That was                          [10] in this area, and that's part of
[11] before Kristin and I got on the                 [111 the problem that we have
[12] project.                                        [12] addressed. We have put the wells
[13] MR. FIOCCI: It almost                           [131 in the right place, the wells are
[14] becomes a joke after, when they're              [14] now pumping, we are cleaning up

[15] spending my money. That's the                   [15] that waste, that contamination.
[16] problem I have with it.There's                  [16]      Any other questions?
[17] nothing else worse than that.                   [17] If you'd like to stick
[18]      Because they don't know                    [18] around after the meeting, we can
[19] where it's at. I mean, they                     [19] go over some of the stuff in more
[20] should know where the                           [20] detail with you on an individual
[21] contamination is, and that's what               [21] basis.
[22] got me puzzled. It's only 25 feet               [22]      On behalf of Cecelia and
[23] deep at the source and it's                     [23] Kristin and myself, we thank you
[24] dropping down to 180.                           [24] for coming. And if you have any
[25]      Boy, that's something.                     [25] comments, please send it to us in



P a g e 37 - P a g e 4 0   (12)            Min-U-Script®                   FINK & CARNEY ( 8 0 0 ) NYC-FINK
                                                                                                500636

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY                                                       Hearing
GARDEN STATE CLEANER - SUPERFUND SITES                                       August 11, 2010

                                                       Page 41
 [1] writing and we're more than
 [21 willing to respond to them.

 [31     All right.Thank you.
 [4]

 (5]   (Time noted: 7:40 p.m.)
 [6]

 [7]

 [B]

 [9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]


                                                       Page 42
 [1]      CERTIFICATE
 [2] STATE OF NEW JERSEY)

 [3]                                            )ss.
 [4] COUNTY OF HUDSON                           )
 [51          1, LINDA A. MARINO, RPR,
 [6]     CCR, a Shonhand (Stenotype)
 [7]     Reporter and Notary Public of the
 [8]     State of New Jersey, do hereby
 [3]     certify that the foregoing
[10]     transcription of the hearing, taken
[11]     at the time and place aforesaid, is
[12]     a true and correct transcription of
[13]     my shorthand notes.
[14]          1 further certify that 1 am
[15]     neither counsel lor nor related to
[16]     any party to said action, nor in any
[17]     way interested In the result or
[18]     outcome thereof.
[19]          IN WITNESS WHEREOF, 1 have
[20]     hereunto set my hand this 16th day
[21]     of August, 2010..
[22]

[23]

             LINDA A. MARINO, RPR, CCR
[24]

[25]




FINK & CARNEY (800) NYC-FINK                           Min-U-Script®   (13) Page 41 - Page 42
                                                                           500637

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Lawyer's Notes




                 500638

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY                                                                                                    Hearing
GARDEN STATE CLEANER - SUPERFUND SITES                                                                                    August 11, 2010

                                                         20; 34:2; 36:18, 22,24;                                      concentrated 27:4
                                                         37:7, 25; 40:10                                              concentration 3316
                                                         a r e a s 11:17; 12:24;                                      concentrations 7:1,6;
                           7:40 41:5                     13:10, 25; 36:13             C 35:13                         12:12; 13:3
1 15:13; 19:18,19
                                                         Army 3:10; 10:16             called 7:23; 8:25; 10:2         c o n c e r n s 18:19,22;
100 3 8 3
                                                                                                                      34:23
110 30:3                                8                around 6:8; 29:12; 34:10;
                                                         40:18
                                                                                      c a m e 11:21
                                                                                      can 10:22; 14:11; 17:1;         conditions 14:23; 15:1
115 30:3                                                                                                              conducted 10:11,17
                                                         Artie 37:3,4                 18:24; 20:24; 21:4, 20;
12-A 28:18,19              89 6:14,15                                                                                 constructed 5:12
                                                         assessor 3:7                 22:21; 25:17; 26:24; 27:1;
1200 12:22; 15:22                                                                     28:24; 34:17; 35:8,16;          construction 9:1
                                                         assuming 34:8                36:17,21;37:11,13,23;
130 33:7                                                                                                              contaminant 12:12
                                                         assure 10:12                 40:1,18                         contaminants 15:17;
1300 7:2
                                                         attenuate 33:21              capability 30:9                 17:16; 19:17
1400 12:7,13; 16:9         94 9:9
                                                         August 2:18; 6:22; 9:7       capture 11:11, 12; 32:7         contaminate 26:24;
160 29:14,16,22            95 9:9
                           99 9:14                       Avenue 36:25                 capturing 11:5;31:19            35:19
165 30:3                                                                              carbon 24:1, 2; 25:12,14,
                                                         aware 4:3                                                    contaminated 7:12;
18 28:18,19;31:18; 33:19                                                              16
                                                         away 37:18; 40:5                                             8:12; 12:7; 13:22; 16:9;
180 29:12,15,16,23;                                                                   c a s e 15:8
                                                                         i                                            34:18
33:5; 38:5, 24                                                                        Cecelia 2:2; 3:22; 21:7;        contaminating 34:12
1940s 5:7                  able 12:3; 17:7; 19:15;                  B                 40:22                           contamination 2:15;
1969 5:16                  36:19                                                      certainly 34:22                 5:25; 7:4,10; 8:3,6,9;
                           a b s o r b e d 24:1          back 3:11; 5:22,23; 7:19;    Chamberlain 39; 22:23;
1979 13:18; 14:16                                                                                                     12:9, 20, 23; 13:11, 12;
                           accept 35:22                                               23:14,18, 24; 26:7; 29:14,
1981 5:23                                                8:17; 24:20; 30:10                                           14:7,12; 15:11,16; 16:6,
                           a c c e s s 12:1; 16:19;                                   22; 30:1; 33:15; 36:5; 38:7;    19,21; 17:4,7,9,21;
1984 6:4                                                 balance 1914
                           20:22                                                      39:3                            19:19; 20:14, 23; 27:17;
1991 4:8; 6:22; 8:1                                      balancing 18:11
                           accident 26:16                                             c h a n g e 14:24; 30:16        29:11;31:22;32:4,24;
1993 9:7                                                 bankrupt 5:8
                           achieve 19:23                                              c h a n g e d 14:25             33:4,9; 37:17, 23; 38:21;
                           achieved 18:9                 BARUFFI 37:3
1995 9 1 1                                                                            c h e c k 32:2                  39:23; 40:6,15
                           acquire 17:21; 20:20          Based 11:19                  clay 13:1, 2; 15:23; 16:21;
1997 5:10; 14:17                                                                                                      continually 31:19; 34:12
                           a c r o s s 5:5; 29:1         basic 24:14                  19:20                           continues 31:18
1999 5:11
                           action 10:2                   basically 4:10; 5:3; 7:13;   clean 7:22; 8:18; 36:23;        Coordinator 2:3; 21:6
                           actual 22:13                  8:5;10:3,12,19;16:4;         37:6,13                         Corps 3:10; 10:16
                           actually 22:2,7; 32:24;       18:7; 19:10;21:25; 23:11;    clean-up 4.6                    cost 18:16
                           37:6,8,13                                                  cleaner 12:4; 16:7
                                                         24:10; 26:2; 39:19, 20                                       couple 11:2; 22:8; 27:25;
                                                                                      Cleaners 2:8; 4:1; 5:14;
2 15:12; 16:24; 19:13;     additional 4:23; 11:10        basis 40:21                                                  29:7; 30:23
                                                                                      6:7; 9:7; 12:2; 16:13;
20:10                      a d d r e s s 2:14; 15:1,10   b e c o m e s 38:14          20:21; 39:16                    c o u r s e 30:16
20 15:24                   a d d r e s s e d 40:12       began 2:17                                                   court 21:12,17
                                                                                      cleaning 5:15;6:12,13;
200 29:12                  Again 3:23; 7:4; 12:17;       begin 34:17                  40:14                           create 27:1
2000 4:14                  13:5; 16:20; 19:5; 20:24      behalf 40:22                 cleanup 2:6,13; 4:13;           criterial8:2,5,6,8,12,
                           Agency 2:5                                                 6:21;7:7; 13:3,22; 14:20;       18; 19:4,11,14
2001 9:14                                                below 15:25; 16:12,19;
                           a g e n d a 3:1                                            19:11, 23; 20:1; 26:6           cross-section 39:14
2003 5:18                                                39:18
                           air 22:4; 27:8                                             clearer 17:13                   cubic 12:7,22; 15:22
2004 10:10                                               beneath 12:4,10; 16:13;                                      current 28:14
                           almost 38:13                                               close 23:9
                                                         20:23                                                        cut 31:20; 33:19; 34:16;
2005 10:16; 28:4,9         along 3:3; 14:3                                            closed-down 32:15
                           Alternative 15:12,13;         best 15:10; 16:6; 19:13                                      36:20; 37:12
2006 28:22; 29:4; 30:19                                                               Clothing 2:7; 3:25; 5:6;
2007 11:21; 30:4           16:24;19:13, 18,19;20:10      beyond 28:11
                                                                                      13:15; 17:23; 39:15
2009 11:21; 30:21          alternatives 17:25; 18:8;     billion 29:8; 30:24; 31:8    collected 11:25                            D
25 7:2, 5; 15:24; 27:8;    19:3                          bit 7:19; 32:13              collecting 25:22
38:22                      always 36:6                   blowers 15:15                collection 36:7                 data 13:9
                           amended 2:14                  blowing 22:4                 coming 37:24; 40:24             Decision 4:9,11; 7:24
275 13:20; 24:17; 26:10
                           amendment 3:16; 15:2,5        boring 13:8                  comment 2:16; 191;
275-gallon 26:9                                                                                                       d e c r e a s e d 11:15
                           amount 25:19                  borings 12:3                 21:2
28 2:18                                                                                                               d e e p 7:2; 17:3; 27:8;
                           amounts 23:8                  Borough 5:20                 c o m m e n t s 18:25; 20:25;
29 2:17                                                                                                               29:9,17,18; 30:3,6; 38:23
                           apart 4:5                     both 4:25;7:14; 11:17,       21:20; 40:23                    d e e p e r 11:7,13; 12:25;
                           approach 16:3,23              23; 26:3,15                  Community 2:3; 18:22;           13:12; 14:13; 28:12, 20;
                           approaching 23:4              bottom 29:1                  21:5                            33:11,16
                           approved 35:13                boy 25:24; 38:25             Company 2:7                     d e g r e a s e r s 6:11
                           approximately 15:21;          build 9:3                    c o m p a r e 15:9; 19:3        d e g r e e 19:17; 20:6;
500 24:15
                           16:11                         building 2:22; 5:11;6:8;     completed 4:14; 6:23;           32:12
                           aquifer 8:17; 11:7; 32:23     12:4,11; 13:15; 14:14,15;    9:6,11                          DEMMY 34:5, 5,15,21;
                           area 3:15,17; 5:25;           16:14,16, 20; 17:23; 20:21   compliance 19:8                 35:9,18:36:9
                           12:14, 25, 25; 13:10,11,      built 9:16, 23               c o m p o n e n t s 8:2         demolish 17:22; 20:20
68 7:6                     16; 14:3, 5; 29:17; 33:15,    b u s i n e s s 5:9          c o m p o u n d s 20:16         demolished 5:10

FINK & CARNEY ( 8 0 0 ) NYC-FINK                           Min-U-Script®                                              (1) 1 - demolished
                                                                                                                       500639

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Hearing                                                                                           SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY
August 11, 2010                                                                        G A R D E N STATE C L E A N E R - S U P E R F U N D S I T E S

d e p e n d s 36:1             Engineers 3:10; 10:17           former 13:14                   hold 3:12                        Laura 3:6
depth 7:5                      e n s u r e 8:22; 9:24; 10:7,   forth 7:19                     hope 2:9                         layers 19:20
description 35:1               20                              found 4:24; 6:1,4; 12:6        horizontal 16:18                 leaching 36:7
design 8:24; 9:1, 2,6,11;      entail 8:20                     four 13:3                      horizontally 3 9 6               leading 11:5,11; 28:16;
17:12                      I   enter 10:1                      frame 20:3                     housekeeping 26:17               32:7; 33:5
designed 38:2                  entire 26:24                    front 22:21                    human 10:14; 19:7                iedll;15;37:19
d e s i g n s 4:13             environment 10:15; 19:8         functioning 8:23; 10:1         hundred 4:5; 31:7                left 17:13
detail 40:20                   Environmental 2:4               funds 6:20                                                      l e n s e s 13:1,2; 16:1,22
determine 17:11                EPA 3:7; 5:10, 23; 6:22;        further 34:10                                                   less 31:6
determined 14:22,24;           7:21; 11:20; 13:7; 18:9;                                                                        lesser 23:7
19:12                      i   19:12; 40:9
                                                                                              identified 5:24; 7:10;           level 13:5
different 32:22                EPA's 17:24; 20:9
                                                                                              13:25                            levels 4:21; 6:2; 7:2;
difficult 19:21                evaluate 17:25; 18:2
                                                               gallonage 24:13                immediately 26:11                11:14; 30:24;31:3,14;
dig 27:8                       evaluating 31:25
                                                               gallons 13:20; 22:1, 2,                                         32:8,10; 33:24; 34:17;
dirt 27:16; 34:10              evaluation 10:18; 18:3                                         implementability 18:16
                                                                                                                               36:1; 37:9
disappear 27:9                                                 13;24:16,17,18;25:21,          implementation 20:3
                               event 37:21                                                                                     Lewis28:15,17;29:3, 5,
discharge 26:14                                                22, 25; 26:10,13               included 8:2; 11:1
                               everyone 2:10                                                                                   6; 30:8; 31:4; 39:20
                                                               gap 36:18                      including 23:1
discharged 26:19               exactly 38:9                                                                                    lights 28:24
discovered 11:3                                                Garden 2:8; 3:25; 5:14,        increase 31:17
                               excavate 17:7                   21;6:6,25;9:6; 12:2,5;                                          lined 36:6
d i s c u s s 2:6, 13; 18:22   excavated 23:3                                                 increasing 32:5                  liners 36:7
                                                               16:7, 13; 17:22; 20:21;
discussing 2:12; 3:17          excavating 16:25; 34:9;         28:6; 39:15                    individual 40:20
                                                                                                                               Iiquid23:12,13,16,19,
disposal 17:3; 36:4            35:7                            g a s 11:24                    information 2:11,21              22;24:6,10,11,24;26:12
dissolved 24:8; 25:5                                           Generally 22:15; 35:20         injection 9:21                   List6:l6,17,18
                               excavation 20:11
document 7:23                                                  gets 25:12                     inserting 8:7                    listed 6:13
                               experts 26:6
documented 14:21,22                                            Giacalone 3:4; 7:18;           install 16:17
                               extensive 11:22                                                                                 little 7:13,19; 26:23;
d o c u m e n t s 2:24                                         14:19                          installed 9:19                   32:13; 39:2,14
                               extract 8:12
Donald 21:24                                                   given 33:14,18                 interesting 7:20                 located 3:4,19; 15:24;
                               extracted 8:15
donel0:7,12,23                                                 g o e s 23:25; 25:10           into 8:17, 25; 11:7; 23:17;      32:18
                               extraction 8:4,13; 9:5,
down 14:16; 27:18;                                             good 37:21                     25:2,11; 26:19                   locations 17:6
                               12,17,19; 11:4,10; 14:9;
28:15; 30:25; 32:13;                                           government 38:9                investigation 4:18; 6:23;        Loney 21:5
                               15:8; 16:5; 28:5,14; 36:21
36:16; 38:24; 39:24; 40:9                                      greater 19:17                  13:8; 14:1                       long 26:25; 27:2, 3; 31:17
downgradient 7; 16;                                            greatest 20:6                  Involvement 2:3; 21:6            long-term 4:16; 8:21;
31:21                                                          green 3:16; 12:14                                               10:2; 18:12; 20:6
                                                                                              issued 8:11
downward 40:7                                                  ground 13:21; 15:25;                                            look 15:5; 17:14; 33:1;
                               facilitate 17:19                16:12; 26:4,19                                                  34:1
Drive28:l6,17;29:3, 5,
6,19, 21; 30:8; 31:5; 39:21    facilities 26:16; 35:21,24      groundwater 4:14,19,                                            looked 32:16
drop 26:23; 34:18; 37:9        farm 32:17                      21;5:12;6:3,6;7:9,12;
                                                                                                                               looking 16:25; 17:8
                               fast 27:10                      8:10,13,16,21;9:15,16;         J e r s e y 2:7; 3:23; 3:3,21;
dropped 31 3                                                                                                                   looks 10:19
                               feasibility 14:2                10:4,19; 11:4; 13:19;          7:4;9:10,18; 12:21; 13:14;
dropping 4:22; 31:16;                                                                                                          lot 26:1, 3,12; 33:22;
                                                               17:18; 20:19; 22:6; 23:7,      15:20; 18:20; 28:6; 35:16;
38:24; 39:4,9                  February 9:13,14                                                                                39:10
                                                               20; 24:8; 26:23; 27:1, 5;      39:15
d r o p s 39:11                federal 6:20; 19:9                                                                              Louis 29:19,20
                                                               31:4; 35:19; 37:14; 39:24      J e r s e y ' s 18:19
dry5:15;6:12,13;12:4           feel 27:21
                                                               guess 36:25                    joke 38:14
During 4:18; 17:11; 19:1;
21:2
                               feet 4:5; 7:2, 5; 12:10;
                               15:24; 16:12; 27:8; 29:12,
                                                                                              July 2:17                                   M
                                                                                              J u n e 9:8
                               17; 30:3, 5; 33:5,7; 38:3,                  H                                                   machine 22:12
            E                  5, 22; 39:25
                               few 10:6                                                                   K                    magnitude 31:1,6
                                                               half 7:15
                               fifteen 9:19                                                                                    mail 21:1
e-mail 21:1                                                    Hall 5:20
                               figure 12:15; 39:2,18                                                                           main 18:4; 19:4
ECHOLS 2:1, 2                                                  h a p p e n e d 24:13; 30:19   keep 7:20; 31:23
                               filling 21:7                                                                                    mainly 6:11
                                                               happening 37:15                key 31:22
e d g e 11:5,11; 28:16;                                                                                                        maintenance 4:17
                               final 10:25                     h a p p e n s 36:19            kind 10:24
31:10; 32:7; 33:5                                                                                                              major 8:1
                               find 33:16                      hard 27:5                      knocked 14:16
effective 19:25                                                                                                                makes 24:3
                               FIOCCI 21:23, 24; 22:10,        hazardous 6:19                 known 24:21
effectiveness 18:12,13;        17;23:11,15,21;24:3,9,                                                                          manager 3:3,24
20:7                                                           head 22:20,24                  Kristin 3:3; 7:17; 14:18;
                               23; 25:1, 20; 27:7; 29:24;                                                                      manufacturer 3 6
eight 12:10; 25:21, 24                                         heading 40:6                   38:ll;4d:23
                               38:2,13; 39:3,9                                                                                 many 22:1,11,13,17;
eighteen 16:11                 fire 13:19; 26:20               health 10;14;19:7
                                                                                                                               26:20
either 20:25; 26:16; 35:14     first 4:8; 5:24; 11:2;          hell 39:10
                                                                                                                               map 13:7; 28:3, 22,23;
eligible 6:20                  21:13; 24:12; 28:9; 29:1        Hello 2:1
                                                                                                                               30:20
else 38:17                     five 4:4; 31:7                  here's 5:20; 14:8; 28:6,6      Iandfill35:12,14,17, 24          March 6:14; 9:9; 10:10
emanating 7:12                 five-year 10:11                 high 6:2; 7:6; 33:16           landfills 36:6                   Mark 3:8; 22:8; 29:13
end 3:13                       flushes 37:22                   higher 32:25                   last 32:11                       MAROLDA 27:13,14;
e n d s 2:17                   form 24:11                      history 5:23; 26:13            later 18:24                      28:25;29:9,18;30:7,12;

d e p e n d s - MAROLDA         (2)                               Min-U-Script®                        FINK & CARNEY ( 8 0 0 ) NYC-FINK
                                                                                                                                      500640

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY                                                                                                          Hearing
GARDEN STATE CLEANER - SUPERFUND SITES                                                                                          August 11, 2010
31:9; 32:14, 20; 33:8; 34:3   noted 21:20; 41:5             people's 31:11                    public 2:16, 20; 19:1;        requires 36:3
material 4:25; 26:4           notice 37:16                  per7:3,7,8; 12:13; 13:4,          21:2                          requiring 16:22
may 18:20; 19:22; 30:21       NPL 6:16                      6; 29:8; 30:24; 31:7              pull 36:2                     residential 6:1
Maybe 26:7; 39:24             number7:8; 11:24,25;          perchloroethylene 6:5,            pulling 30:9                  respond 41:2
MAYOR 37:3                    22:21                         10                                pulsed 16:3                   r e s p o n s e 10:2
mean 38:19                                                  p e r h a p s 11:16               pump 4:13                     result 4:22
means 8:3; 18:7                          o                  period 2:16; 19:1; 21:2
                                                            p e r m a n e n c e 18:13; 20:7
                                                                                              pumping 27:21; 28:18;
                                                                                              31:24; 40:14
                                                                                                                            results 6:24; 11:20
                                                                                                                            review 2:23; 10:11
measured 22:16; 25:13
meet 20:1                                                   permitted 35:21                   p u m p s 8:8; 15:15          RI/FS 6:24
                              obviously 26:11
                                                            p h a s e 9:1; 10:3,6; 17:12;     pure 24:21                    Richard 34:5
meeting 21:21; 40:18          October 6:14
                                                            25:11                             purposes 4:7                  Rick3:2,19,23;26:8
mentioned 14:20; 26:8;        off 16:4; 22:19, 24; 28:24;
33:3                          31:20; 33:19; 34:16;          picture 17:13                     put 11:10,23; 12:3; 14:8;     right 3:15; 3:19; 14:5;
                              36:20; 37:12                  place 8:6; 9:23; 17:9;            30:4; 32:6; 33:11; 36:21;     21:8; 23:14; 28:8; 29:5,6,
met 19:6
                              office 3:7                    23:2; 40:13                       40:12                         13,17; 32:10,19,20;
meter 25:17
                              offsite 17:2                  plan 2:9; 22:25                   putting 8:13; 34:1            33:13; 34:20; 39:19, 21;
method 14:21
                                                            plans 32:5                        puzzled 38:22                 40:13;4l:3
mic 3:20                      Once 9:22; 17:12; 20:8;                                                                       risk 3:6
                              27:4                          plant 5:13; 9:17; 15:19;
mid4:ll;12:l6
                              one4:6;7:8,13;11:2;           17:18; 20:19; 22:6; 25:8,9;                                     Road 5:16; 28:7,11; 29:1,
middle 13:17                                                35:2                                                            3, 25; 30:2; 37:10; 38:3;
                              13:5,10; 21:25; 26:23;
might 17:14                   28:2; 31:2; 33:21; 36:11,     plant's 23:4                                                    39:16,20
migrated 11:7                 16                            please 21:15; 40:25               quantity 24:21                Robinson 3:2,21,23;
mile 7:15                     only 25:16; 30:3; 34:24;      plume 7:11,14; 8:14;              quick 39:12                   11:19; 17:24; 21:19; 22:5,
million 7:3,7,8; 12:13;       38:22                         9:20; 11:6,6,12; 24:5;            quite 17:5; 34:25             15,19; 24:7, 20, 25; 25:3;
13:4, 6; 22:9                                               26:25; 27:1; 28:5,11,23;                                        26:2, 22; 27:11, 24; 29:2,
                              open 21:10
                                                            29:4; 30:9, 25; 31:20; 34:7,                                    11, 16, 20; 30:11, 18;
minutes 21:21
missed 26:5; 40:9
                              operated 9:8,13; 12:16,
                              17
                                                            13;36:12,15,16;37:17;                        R                  31:12;32:16,21;33:10,
                                                            38:4                                                            18;34:4,14,20;35:6,11,
mixed 23:19                   operating 9:24                                                                                20; 36:10; 37:4; 38:10;
                                                            pluming 8:19                      railroad 5:3; 14:4,3
mobility 18:14; 19:l6         operation 4:17; 10:4;                                                                         39:1,11
                                                            point 26:8; 36:11                 rain 37:21
                              31:3                                                                                          rocket 38:5,8
modifying 18:17                                             p o r t i o n 4:20; 32:22         re-contaminating 37:24        ROD 2:13; 3:16;4:10;
                              optimize 10:23
money 27:23; 38:15                                          possibly 16:17                    re-inject 8:16                7:24,25;8:11,24;14:23;
                              order 15:1,4; 16:5,18;
monitoring 8:21; 33:23;       17:19;18:9;31:1,5             pound 25:21                       reach 21:4                    15:2,4,7
37:3                          organic 20:l6                 p o u n d s 22:16,18; 23:5,       real 27:9                     RSE 10:18
more 11:17; 19:25; 25:11;                                   10; 25:23; 26:13                  realized 4:20; 28:10
                              original 15:6,14; 30:2                                                                        run 25:8
26:12; 40:19;41:1
                              originally 13:25; 36:12,      practicable 20:12                 Really 30:12; 37:21;          ruptured 13:20
most6:18; 14:6,12;
                              15; 40:8                      practice 26:17                    39:12
15:23
                              out 5:8; 11:21; 19:22;        preferred 20:10                   received 2:10
mostly 6:13; 12:24; 23:6,
7                             20:8,8; 23:12, 22, 25;        present4:25; 11:17; 12:8          recommend 11:16
                              25:4,10,12; 27:6,9,16,        presentation 3:14                 recommendation 10:25
move 8:25; 24:5               21; 28:10; 35:7; 36:2, 11;                                                                   s a m e 31:15
                                                            pretty 11:22;31:15                r e c o m m e n d e d 11:9
moving 25:18; 39:7            37:22, 24; 38:1                                                                              sample 32:1
                                                            previous 26:6                     record 2:20; 4:9,11; 7:24
much 16:25;25:15;31:13        outline 13:14                                                                                s a m p l e s 12:1
                                                            prior 26:20                       recovered 22:2,14;
must 18:9                     outlined 12:14                                                                               saying 25:18
                                                            Priorities 6:16                   24:14,18; 26:10
myself 40:23                  outside 31:10                                                   reduce 19:13                 scientist 38:6,8
                              over7:15; 14:13; 23:10;       probably 17:5; 24:15;                                          s c r e e n e d 32:21; 33:6;
                                                            35:12,13                          reduction 18:13
           N                  31:4; 40:4,19
                                                            p r o b e s 11:24                 reference 34:7               40:2,4
                              overall 19:5,6                                                  regulations 19:10            sections 18:5
                                                            problem 21:14; 38:16;
name 21:13,23; 34:6;          overlay 13:13,24                                                related 2:24                 seeing 26:3; 31:14,16;
                                                            40:11
37:1                          ownership 5:17                                                  remaining 12:23; 20:13       32:3; 37:6
                                                            p r o c e s s 17:24; 18:1
Natalie 21:4                                                                                  remedial 3:2; 14:1           select 18:10
                                                            product 22:14; 24:15, 22;
nation's 6:18                                                                                 remediation 10:17            s e l e c t s 7:21
                                                            25:25; 26:1
National 6:16                                                                                 remedy 4:20; 7:21; 8:2,      s e n d 20:24; 40:25
                                                            project 3:3, 24; 38:12
naturally 33:20               p.m41:5                                                         10;9:13; 10:13; 14:25;       s e p a r a t e 25:4
                                                            properly 8:23; 9:25;
near 6:6                      Pacific 36:25                                                   15:6;18:3,10;20:4,10         s e p a r a t e s 23:9
                                                            10:21
n e e d s 14:23; 33:12        part 7:8; 13:6; 40:10         properties 5:1; 11:23;            remember 37:1                set 19:4
New 3:7; 5:17; 18:19, 20;     parts 7:3,6; 12:13; 13:4;     26:5                              removal 17:20                seven 25:21
30:4; 35:13,13                29:8; 30:24; 31:7             property 12:9; 13:9;              remove 8:8; 15:16; 16:6;     seventy 39:25
next 3:20; 13:13, 24;         passed 22:11                  14:10; 15:24                      19:21; 20:17                 shallow 12:23; 13:10
28:13; 30:20                  past 28:17                    p r o p o s e d 2:9               removed 12:19; 15:18;        Sharon 27:13
nine 18:2, 3; 19:14           PCE6:4,10,12, 25;             propulsed 16:22                   17:16; 22:7; 23:13; 26:12    shelf 32:6
nineties 4:12; 12:17          11:13; 12:12; 16:10; 23:8;    Protection 2:5; 19:7              reporter 21:12,17            short-term 18:15
north 34:10                   25:19                         protective 10:14                  repository 2:22              s h o r t e s t 20:2
note 21:9                     Pennsylvania 35:15            provides 19:13; 20:3              require l6:2                 s h o w 28:21; 30:18; 39:1,

FINK & CARNEY (800) NYC-FINK                                   Min-U-Script®                                               (3) material - show
                                                                                                                             500641

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Hearing                                                                                            SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY
August 11, 2010                                                                         G A R D E N STATE C L E A N E R - S U P E R F U N D S I T E S

 13                             still 4:24; 12:6,8, 23;           treat4:5,15; 8:13; 16:8;      12,13
showing 13:9; 32:3              23:16, 22; 24:4,6; 26:3,4;         17:8,15; 35:23               weren't 4:22
s h o w s 12:15; 13:24;         33:24; 34:12; 37:16, 20           treated 15:18; 20:18;         west 13:17
28:4,13                         stop 24:4                         35:2                          what's 7:23; 8:25; 10:1;
side 13:17                      Stream 30:13,16                   treating 8:3; 13:21; 16:15    17:13; 28:25
signed 4:8; 8:1                 street 37:2                       treatment 5:13; 9:17;         Wheat 28:7, 11; 29:2, 24;
significantly 11:14             stripped 25:12                     10:5, 20; 15:19; 17:2,10,    30:2; 37:10; 38:3; 39:16,
site 4:6,9; 5:22; 7:22; i       studies 4:23; 10:7; 11:1,         17,18, 20; 20:12,15,17;       19
9:10,18; 10:13; 12:5, 21;       20                                22:6; 36:3                    whereas 6:12
 14:21, 23; 15:20; 16:8,10;                                       trends 32:2,3                 wherever 33:16; 37:11
                                Study 11:23; 14:2
21:7; 39:22; 40:5                                                 trichlorethylene 6:9          whole 39:10
                                Stuff 27:3; 37:22; 40:9,19
site's 20:19                    submit 18:24                      try 34:16                     willing 41:2
sites 2:25; 4:1,4; 6:15,        Subtitle 35:13                    trying l6:8                   wondered 25:1
19;7:13,14,25; 11:18;                                             turn 28:24                    work 4:19
                                sudden 38:4
34:11,11                                                                                        working 10:8,21
                                suitable 35:17                    turned 23:17; 25:2
situ 8:4; 17:9,17; 20:12,                                         turning 16:4                  worse 38:17
17                          ;   summary 20:9
                                                                  twelve 9:21; 12:10            writing 20:25; 41:1
six 16:11                       Summer 5:15
                                                                  twice 32:1                    written 18:23
sixty 39:24                     Superfund 4:3; 6:17
slide 28:13                     sure 33:23                        two 2:24; 4:3; 7:25; 11:1,
                                surface 15:25; 16:12              20; 12:24; 13:10, 11; 18:7,
slides 27:25                                                      8; 19:3, 5; 23:1; 32:11;
sloppy 26:17                    SVE 9:8; 12:15; 15:14;
                                                                  36:13                         yards 12:7,22; 15:22;
slug 37:23                      16:10
                                                                                                16:9
small 5:13
Smith 3:6
                                switch 7:18
                                s y s t e m 4:15; 8:4, 22; 9:8,              u                  year 12:18; 31:2; 32:2
                                                                                                y e a r s 23:10; 26:20; 32:12
soil 2:14;6:7;7:1,7;8:3,        13;10:5,18, 20, 23;11:4;
                                12:15; 14:9; 15:14; 16:5;         U.S 2:4; 3:9                  York 3:8; 35:15
4,6,9; 9:4, 5; 11:22, 24;
12:1,8; 13:8; 14:9; 15:8,       28:15                             under 5:17
                                s y s t e m s 9:2,22; 23:1;       underneath 16:16
17, 23; 16:9,16, 25; 17:1;
                                36:8
19:23; 20:1,13; 23:2;                                             unfortunately 33:17
34:19; 35:1,4,7,10; 36:2                                          up 7:2, 22; 12:13; 13:3;      zone 11:8; 14:13; 28:20;
soils 20:11                                                       21:10,16; 27:8; 32:9, 11,     32:25
solid 23:17; 25:2                                                 25; 33:24, 25; 36:13, 23;
somewhere 35:14                 talking 5:2; 32:18; 34:9          37:14, 20; 40:14
sorry 14:16                     tank 13:18,19; 24:17;             upgradient 8:18; 9:21
s o u r c e 4:24; 11:17;        26:9                              use8:8; 15:6,15; 32:15
13:23; 31:21; 36:13, 20,                                          used 6:11; 14:14
                                TCE6:2,9,10; 11:13;
22; 37:12; 38:1, 23
                                 13:3, 21; 15:23; 23:6; 25:4,
s o u r c e s 37:20
South 2:7; 3:23; 5:3,4,          19; 26:23; 29:4; 30:24
20;7:3;9:10,18; 12:21;          technicalities 27:20
13:14; 15:20; 28:6; 39:15;      technology 17:10; 20:18           vacuum 8:8; 15:15; 23:1
40:1                            ten 23:10                         vapor 8:4; 9:4,12; 14:9;
speak 21:15                     test31:ll,12                      13:8
spelling 21:15                  tested 9:23                       v e r s u s 19:4
spend 27:23                     Thanks 3:21                       vertically 39:7
spending 38:13                  thought 12:19; 14:3,6             VOCs 17:15
spill 24:16; 26:21              t h o u s a n d 13:4; 23:4,9;     volatile 20:16
spilled 13:20                   25:23, 24; 29:8; 30:23            volatiles 19:22
s t a n d a r d s 19:24; 20:1   three 18:4                        volume 18:14; 19:16
start 28:2; 32:8; 39:25         threshold 18:6
started 4:12; 5:7,16;
23:12
                                throughout 8:14; 9:20;
                                10:5; 26:15
                                                                             w
                                t h u s 6:19
starting 32:13; 37:8,9                                            waste 6:19; 35:17, 22;
                                times 35:22
State 2:8; 4:1; 5:14,21,                                          40:15
24; 6:6, 25; 9:7; 12:2, 5;      today 2:6; 13:3; 18:21
                                tonight 2:12; 3:18; 3:2           water 6:3; 8:17,18; 25:5,
16:7,13; 17:22; 18:18, 20;                                        6; 39:3
19:9; 20:21; 21:13; 28:7;       top 22:19, 24; 27:23
                                total 23:8                        way 10:8; 15:10; 21:19;
39:16                                                             25:4,16
stay 24:4                       toxicity 18:14; 19:16
                                                                  weight 25:14
staying 31:13                   tracks 5:5; 14:4, 5
                                                                  wells 8:7,14; 9:19, 21;
stays 24:11                     transported 17:2
                                                                  11:10; 16:18; 28:5; 29:25;
stenographer 2:19               traveling 39:4,6
                                                                  30:2,8;31:10,11,13,23;
stick 40:17                     travels 3 9 8                     32:1; 37:5; 38:3; 40:2, 3,

showing - zone (4)                                                   Min-U-Script®                       FINK & CARNEY ( 8 0 0 ) NYC-FINK
                                                                                                                                   500642

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Lawyer's Notes




                 500643

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ATTACHMENT D

Written Comment




                  500644

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 1


Garden State Cleaners Site
Rick Dapp
to:
Rick Robinson
08/17/2010 07:28 PM
Cc:
hboenning
Show Details



History: This message has been forwarded.
Mr. Robinson:

Thank you for informing me of the public meeting in Buena Borough on 8-11-2010 and providing this
informational gathering.

Per our discussion, I do not believe that your plan addresses our concerns pertaining to our close contiguous
ownership proximity to the project, loss of use, possible injury liability, our costs to carry and the timeframe
indicated. Accordingly, I have asked our legal counsel to review the proposed plan and the prior EPA reporting
at the site in order to provide us with a better understanding and appropriate advisement with regard to the
issues as they relate to our property. We will be away in Florida from 8/19 through 8/31. During our absence.
Archer & Greiner, PC of Haddonfield will review the matter and provide legal advisement. I have provided their
information below.

Rick and Laura Dapp
1834 Chris Court, Vineland, NJ 08361

Henry O. Boenning, Esq.
One Centennial Square
Haddonfield, NJ 08033
Direct Dial: 856-354-3019 .
Mobile: 609-230-2736
Fax: 656-673-7019
hboenninq(a)arche rlaw.com
www.archerlaw.com


 | T | Archer & Greiner, P.C.




                                                                                                    500645
file://C:\Documents and Settings\rrobin02\Local Settings\Temp\notesl24A7C\~web3926.h...              9/13/2010

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      APPENDIX IV

Administrative Record Index




                              500646

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        Iliilillliiilllli
                                                         108370



                 GARDEN STATE CLEANERS CO. SITE
                        OPERABLE tJNIT ONE
               ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD FILE UPDATE
                       INDEX OF DOCUMENTS



5.0   RECORD OF DECISION

5.2   Amendment to the Record of Decision

P.  500001 - Report: Superfund Five-Year Review. Report,
    500019   South Jersey Clothing Company and Garden State
             Cleaners Sites, Buena Borough, Atlantic County,
             New Jersey, prepared'by U.S. Environmental
139706.      -Protection Agency, Region 2, April 27, 2004.

P.  500020 - Report: Draft Report, Remediation System
    500056   Evaluation, South Jersey. Clothing Company/Garden
             State Cleaners, Atlantic County, Buena Borough,
             New Jersey, prepared by U.S. Array Corps of
108357       Engineers, Hazardous, Toxic,- and Radioactive
             Waste Center of Expertise, prepared for U.S.
             Environmental Protection Agency, Region 2, and U.S.
             Army Corps of Engineers, Philadelphia District,
             April 2005.

P.  500057 - Report: Final Groundwater Model Report, South
    500170   Jersey Clothing Company/Garden State Cleaners
             Superfund' Site, Mino'tola, New Jersey, prepared -
             by U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Philadelphia
108358       District, prepared for U.S. Environmental
             Protection Agency, Region 2, May 2006.

P.  500171 - Memorandum to Mr. Rick Robinson, U.S. Environmental
    5 0 02 51  Protection Agency, Region 2, from Mr. Edward J.
              Gilbert, through Ms. Rebecca Connell, U.S.
              Environmental Protection Agency, Environmental
108359        Response Team, re: Source Re-Characterization
              Summary Report, South Jersey Clothing Company/
              Garden State Cleaners, November -9, 2007.

P.    500252 - Memorandum to Mr. Rick Robinson, U.S. Environmental
      500306    Protection Agency, Region 2, from Mr. Edward J.
              , Gilbert, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,




                                                                       500647

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

              Environmental Response Team, re: Source Re-
108360        Characterization Summary Report, South Jersey
              Clothing Company/Garden State Cleailers,
              September 8, 2008.

 P. 500307    Report: January 2009 Soil Analytical Detections,
i    500308   January 2 009.
|l0e361
:P. 500309    Memorandum to Mr. Rick Robinson, U.S. Environmental
     500331   Protection Agency, Region 2, from Mr. Edward J.
              Gilbert, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
              Environmental Response Team, re: Source Area
108362        Remedial Alternatives, South Jersey Clothing
              Company/Garden State Cleaners, Amended,
              March 5, 2 009.

P.   500332   Report: Superfund Five-Year Review Report,
     500362   South Jersey Clothing Company and Garden State
              Cleaners Sites, Buena Borough, Atlantic Connty,
              New Jersey, prepared by U.S. Environmental
105106        Protection Agency, Region 2, September 25, 2009.

     500363   Report: Draft, South Jersey Clothing Company/Garder
     500416   State Cleaners Superfund Site, Semiannual
              Compliance Report, January through June 2 009,
              prepared by Science Applications International
108363        Corporation, prepared for U.S. Army Corps of
              Engineers, Philadelphia District, and Sevenson
              Environmental Services, Inc., December 2009.

     500417   Memorandum for. Record,, re.: Groundwater Model
     500439   Update, South Jersey Clothing Company/Garden
              State Cleaners Superfund Site, Minotola, New
              Jersey, prepared by U.S. Army Corp of Engineers
108364        Philadelphia District, December 1, 2009.

P. . 500440   Memorandum to Mr. Rick Robinson, U.S. Environmenta
     500500   Protection Agency, Region 2, from Mr. Edward J.
              Gilbert, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
              Environmental Response Team, re: Source Area
108365        Delineation for Remedial Alternative; Electrical
              Resistivity Heating; South Jersey. Clothing
              Company/Garden State Cleaners, July 19, 2010.




                                                                 500648

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

p.  500501 - Report: Proposed Plan Cost Estimate Alternative 1:
    500503 . Soil Vapor Extraction (1991 ROD Remedy), undated.
108366
P. 500504 - Report: Proposed Plan Cost Estimate Alternative 2:
    500507   Soil Excavation, Off-Site Treatment and/or
             Disposal, Backfill, In-situ Treatment of Redisual
             Soil Contamination, Acquisition and Demolition of
108367       GSC Building, undated.

P.  500508 - Report: A Guide to Preparing Superfund Proposed
    500528   Plans, Records of Decision, and Other Remedy
             Selection Decision Documents, 3.0 Writing the
             Proposed Plan and 4.0 Pre-Record of Decision
108368       Changes, prepared by U.S. Environmental Protection
             Agency, undated..

P.  500529 - Report: A Guide to Preparing Superfund Proposed
    500557   Plans, Records of Decision, and Other Remedy
             Selection Decision Documents, 7.0 Documenting Post-
             ROD Changes: Minor Changes, Explanations of
108369       Significant Differences, and ROD Amendments;
             8.0 Documenting No Action, Interim Action, and
             Contingency Remedy Decisions; and 9.0 Documenting,
             Specific Remedy Selection Situations, prepared by
             U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, undated.




                                                                  500649

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                               lillliliiilliiiilli
                                                    108372


               GARDEN STATE CLEANERS CO. SITE
                      OPERABLE UNIT ONE
            ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD FILE UPDATE #2
                     INDEX OF DOCUMENTS •



5.0   RECORD OF DECISION

5.2   Amendment to the Record of Decision

P. 500558 - Report: Superfund Program Proposed Plan, South
   500567   Jersey Clothing Company and Garden State
            Cleaners Superfund Sites, prepared by U.S.
108371      Environmental Agency, Region 2, July 2010.




                                                                     500650

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       iiillililiilii
                                                           108373
                 SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING CO. SITE
                        OPERABLE UNIT ONE
               ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD PILE UPDATE
                       INDEX OP DOCUMENTS



5.0   RECORD OF DECISION

5.2   Amendment to the Record of Decision       .

P.  500001 - Report: 'Superfund Five-Year Review Report,
    500019   South Jersey Clothing Company and Garden State
             Cleaners Sites, Buena Borough, Atlantic County,
             New Jersey, prepared by U.S. Environmental
139706       Protection Agency, Region 2, April 27, 2004:

P.   500020- - Report: Draft Report, Remediation System
  • 500056     Evaluation, South Jersey Clothing Company/Garden
               State Cleaners, Atlantic County, Buena Borough,
               New Jersey, prepared by=U.S. Army Corps of
108357         Engineers, Hazardous,' Toxic, and Radioactive
               Waste Center of Expertise, prepared for U.S.
   \           Environmental Protection Agency, Region 2, and U.S.
I              Army Corps of Engineers, Philadelphia District,
               April 2005.

P.  500057 - Report': Final Groundwater Model Report, Soutti
    500170   Jersey Clothing Company/Garden State Cleaners
             Superfund Site, Minotola, New Jersey, • prepared
             by U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Philadelphia
108358       District, prepared for'-U.S. Environmental
             Protection Agency, Region 2, May 2006.

P.  500171 - Meraora.ndum. to M.r. Rick Robinaon-, u.s. Eiivix-onmenf::ai
    500251   Protection Agency, Region 2, from Mr. Edward J.
             Gilbert, through Ms. Rebecca Connell, U.S.
             Environmental Protection Agency, Environmental
108359       Response Team, re: Source Re-Characterization
             Summary Report, South Jersey Clothing Company/
             Garden State Cleaners, November 9, 2007.

P.    500252 - Memorandum to Mr. Rick Robinson, U.S. Environmental
      500306   Protection Agency, Region 2, from Mr. Edward J.
               Gilbert, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,




                                                                        500651

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

               Environmental Response Team, re: Source Re-
108360         Characterization Summary Report, South Jersey
               Clothing Company/Garden State Cleaners,
               September 8, 2 008.

P.  500307     Report: January 2009 Soil Analytical Detections,
    500308     January 200 9.
108361
P.• 500309     •Memorandum to Mr. Rick Robinson,- U.S. Environmental
    500331      Protection Agency, Region 2, from Mr. .Edward J.
                Gilbert, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
                Environmental Response Team, i-e: Soui-ce Area
108362          Remedial Alternatives, South Jersey Clothing
                Company/Garden State Cleaners, Amended,
                March 5, 2009.

P.   500332    Report: Superfund Five-Year Review Report,
     500362    South Jersey Clothing Company and Garden State
               Cleaners Sites, Buena Borough, Atlantic County,
               New_J^rs_ey, prepared by U.S^. Environmentai
105106         Protection Agency, Region 2, September 25, 2009.

P.   500363    Report: Draft, South Jersey Clothing Coropany/Gardej
     500416    State Cleaners Superfund Site, Semiannual          .f
               CcOTgliance _Regorl^ ^armary^j:h_^^      2 0£9,              •J
               prepared by Science Applications International
108363         Corporation, prepared for U.S. Army Corps of
               Engineers, Philadelphia'District, and Sevenson
               Environmental Services, Inc., December 2009.        |

P.   500417    Memorandum for Record, re: Groundwater Model
     50043,9   Update, South Jex-sey Clothing Company/Garden
               State Cleaners Superfund Site, Minotola, New
               Jersey, prepared by U.S-. Ax"my Corp of Engineers . '.[
108364         Philadelphia District, December 1, 2009.            -.

P.   500440    Memorandum to Mr. Rick Robinson, U.S. Environmental.
     500500    Protection .Agency, Region 2, from Mr. Edward J.  I
               Gilbert, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,    [.
               Environmental Response-Team, re: Source Area
108365         Delineation for Remedial Alternative; Electrical
               Resistivity Heat-ing; South Jersey Clothing
               Company/Garden State Cleaners, July 19, 2010.     ;




                                                                   500652

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

P.  5.00501 - Report: Proposed Plan Cost Estimate Alternative .1:
    500503    Soil Vapor Extraction (1991 ROD Remedy), undated.
108366
P. 500504 - Report: Proposed Plan Cost Estimate Alternative 2:
    500507    Soil Excavation, Off-Site Treatment and/or
              Disposal, Backfill, In-situ Treatment of Redisual
              Soil Contamination, Acquisition and Demolition of
108367        GSC Building, undated.

P.  500508 - Report: A Guide to Preparing Superfund Proposed
    500528   Plans, Records of Decision, and Other Remedy
             Selection Decision Documents, 3.0 Writing the
             Proposed Plan and 4.0 Pre-Record of Decision
108368       Changes, prepared by U.S. Environmental Protection
             Agency, undated.

P.  500529 - Report: A Guide to Preparing Superfund Proposed
    500557   Plans, Records of Decision, and Other Remedy
             Selection Decision Documents, 7.0 Documenting Post-
             ROD Changes: Minor Changes, Explanations of
108369       Significant Differences, and ROD Amendments;
             8.0 Documenting No Action, Interim Action, and
             Contingency Remedy Decisions; and 9.0 Documenting
             Specific Remedy Selection Situations, prepared by
             U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, undated.




                                                                    500653

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                liliilliliiiii
                                                    108374



                SOtTTH JERSEY CLOTHING CO. SITE
                        OPERABLE UNIT ONE
             ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD FILE UPDATE #2
                       INDEX OF DOCUMENTS



5.0   RECORD OF DECISION

5.2   Amendment, to the Record of Decision

P. 500558 - Report: Superfund Program Proposed Plan, South
   500567   Jersey Clothing Company and Garden State
            Cleaners Superfund Sites, prepared by U.S.
108371      Environmental Agency, Region 2, July 2010.




                                                                 500654

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      APPENDIX V

State Letter of Concurrence




                              500655

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   ^ t a t e of '^eba ^l^racg
                                    DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMEN'IAL PRCI ECJ-ION
CHRIS CHRISTIE                                                                                                            BOB MARTIN
  Governor                                                                                                           -   - Commissioner

KIMGUADAGNO                                              -jCi,    '^'^^'^     '
 Ll. Governor                                            | K i { ©»:.&


           Mr. Walter Mugdan, Director      ^ ^ ^-
           Emergency and Remedial Response Division
           U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
           Region II
           290 Broadway
           New York, NY 10007-1866

           Re:       South Jersey Clothing and Garden State Cleaners Superfund site
                     Record of Decision Amendment


           Dear Mr. Mugdan:

           The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) completed its review of
           the "Record of Decision Amendment, South Jersey Clothing Company Site, Garden State
           Cleaners Site, Buena Borough, Atlantic County, New Jersey" prepared by the U.S.
           Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Region II in September 2010 and concurs with
           the selected remedy to address additional soil contamination found impacting the Sites.

           The remedy described in this document addresses continuing sources of groundwater
           contamination at the Sites that were not sufficiently addressed by remedial action
           activities completed in 1995 at the Garden State Cleaners site and, in 2001, at the South
           Jersey Clothing Company site.

           The major components of the amended remedy that the Department concurs with include:

                 •   Excavation of the contaminated soil, where practicable;
                 »   In-situ treatment of deeper soil and clay lenses with technologies such as chemical
                     oxidation or enhanced soil vapor extraction when excavation is impracticable;
                 9   Treatment of any volatile organic compounds (VOCs) removed by the in-situ
                     treatment system at the on-site groundwater treatment plant, where appropriate;
                     and
                 •   Acquisition and demolition of the Garden State Cleaners building.




                            New Jersey is an Equal Opportunity Employer i Printed on Recycled Paper and Recyclable

                                                                                                                           500656

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

DEP appreciates the opportunity to participate in the decision making process to select an
appropriate remedy and is looking forward to fliture cooperation witli EPA in further
remedial work at this site.

If you have any questions, please call me at 609-984-3074.

   !                                  Sincerely,




                                     Edward Putnam, Assistant Director
                                     Publicly Funded Remediation Element
                                     Site Remediation Program



C: Dave Sweeney, Assistant Commissioner, Site Remediation Program, DEP
   Carole Petersen, Chief, New Jersey Remediation Branch, EPA Region II




                                                                                         500657
