LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES, CIBA-GEIGY SITE, TOMS RIVER, NEW JERSEY
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/109689
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 65a7d0f7cdbd39cabd71fe14ac02b3570dfebbd2b2f3665cdd533f6f5540a47e
Source PDF pages: 14
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  I           SDMS Document
                                                  I


                                                                 109689



              EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES


                        CIBA-6EI6Y Site
                     Toms River, New Jersey

1.0   INTRODUCTION

The purpose of this Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD)
is to explain modifications to the groundwater remedy selected in
the United States Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA's)
Record of Decision signed on April 24, 1989 (ROD) for the CIBA-
GEIGY Superfund Site (Site). This ESD modifies the ROD to
require the recharge of treated groundwater to the upper portion
of the Kirkwood/Cohansey aquifer (Upper Sand Aquifer) underlying
the Site instead of discharge of treated groundwater to the Toms
River. In addition, the contaminants in the groundwater, except
total dissolved solids (TDS) and chloroform, will be treated to
cleanup standards which are the more stringent of the following:
1) the Toms River discharge limits as currently specified in the
ROD; 2) the New Jersey State Groundwater Quality Criteria or
antidegradation standards; 3) the more stringent of the Federal
or New Jersey State drinking water standards; or 4) the current
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection & Energy
(NJDEPE) Discharge to Groundwater Limits. Compliance with
cleanup standards for certain contaminants will be measured by a
Practical Quantitation Limits (PQLs), as determined by special
analytical techniques, when a particular cleanup standard is more
stringent than the PQL (see Sections 5 and 6, below.) With
respect to the treatment of TDS, a fully protective New Jersey
State Groundwater Quality Criteria will be required. For
contaminants that are not listed in the ROD but are regulated by
New Jersey State Groundwater Quality Criteria, such Criteria will
apply.

Attached as Table 1 is a listing of cleanup standards, including
the basis for such standards, required for treatment of
contaminants in the groundwater. Moreover, Table 5 of the ROD,
which lists the Federal and State Maximum Contaminant Levels
(MCL's) as the cleanup standards for aquifer restoration, has
been updated to include current MCL's, as set forth in Table 2 of
this ESD, to which the Upper Sand Aquifer and, if necessary, the
lower portion of the Kirkwood/Cohansey aquifer (Lower Sand
Aquifer) will be remediated. This ESD is issued in accordance
with Section 117(c) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), as amended, 42 U.S.C. §
9617(c), and Section 300.435(c)(2)(i) of the National Oil and
Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 C.F.R.
§ 300.435(c)(2)(i).



                                                      , CIB     oil       1177

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

2.0   PUBLIC PARTICIPATION ACTIVITIES
Public participation was incorporated into this ESD process to
ensure that the concerns of the community and the general public
were considered. The draft ESD was made available for pviblic
comment beginning on June 1, and concluding on July 19, 1993.
EPA placed a notice informing the public of the comment period in
the Ocean County Observer on June 1, 1993. A public meeting was
held during the comment period on June 17, 1993 at 7:00 PM, at
the Elks Lodge, located at the corner of Clifton and Washington
Streets, Toms River, New Jersey, to address any questions or
concerns the public had with the draft ESD and the proposed
groundwater recharge remedy. At this meeting, the public
expressed unanimous and overwhelming support for the groundwater
recharge remedy. Comments received during the piiblic comment
period have been addressed by EPA in a Responsiveness Summary
attached to this final ESD.
The ESD and documents which form the basis for the decision to
modify the response action will be incorporated into the
Administrative Record maintained for the Site in accordance with
Section 300.835(a)(2) of the NCP. The Administrative Record is
available for public review at an information repository in the
Ocean County Library, 101 Washington Street, Toms River, New
Jersey. A copy is also on file at EPA Region II, 26 Federal
Plaza, New York, New York.

3.0   SUMMARY OF SITE HISTORY, CONTAMINATION PROBLEMS, AND
      SELECTED REMEDY
The Site is located in Toms River, Ocean County, New Jersey, and
encompasses the CIBA-GEIGY property and adjacent contaminated
areas, including the Toms River, wetland and floodplain areas.
Figure 1 provides an outline of the Site.
Currently, CIBA-GEIGY operates a dye standardization process, an
active landfill, and a waste water treatment plant at the Site.
During 1952 to 1977, dye manufacturing operations were conducted
with concurrent disposal of solid and liquid process wastes on
the Site. EPA identified seventeen (17) known or suspected waste
disposal source areas, which are the major sources of groundwater
contamination at the Site. Currently, all are inactive and
several have been closed and covered with soils and/or lined,
under permits issued by the NJDEPE.
In January, 1985, EPA began a Remedial Investigation and
Feasibility Study (RI/FS) at the Site pursuant to CERCLA. The
RI/FS was conducted to identify the nature and extent of
contamination, and develop remedial alternatives to address the
cleanup of contamination. The Remedial Investigation (RI)
confirmed the presence of groundwater contamination and
identified health threats associated with consumption of
contaminated groundwater by residents in areas outside of CIBA-




                                                   CIB   Oil. 1178

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

GEIGY's property. The RI also concluded that groundwater
contamination in the Upper Sand Aquifer was migrating from CIBA-
GEIGY's property in an easterly and southeasterly direction into
adjacent wetlands and the Toms River, and under the river east of
the former production area, as further described in the RI Report
and referenced in Figure 1. Contaminants identified in the
groundwater during the RI included chlorobenzene,
trichloroethylene, tetrachloroethane, toluene and benzene. These
chemicals are hazardous substances within the meaning of Section
101(14) of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. § 9601(14).
A Feasibility Study which set forth alternatives for remediating
the groundwater contamination was released to the piiblic for
comment on April 29, 1988. The remedial alternatives included a
groundwater pump and treat system with discharge of treated
groundwater to the Toms River or the Atlantic Ocean; and recharge
of treated groundwater to the Upper Sand Aquifer.
On April 24, 1989, after a 134 day public comment period, EPA
signed a ROD for remediation of the groundwater. The remedy
called for extraction of contaminated groundwater, design of a
wastewater treatment plant to treat the extracted groundwater,
and discharge of the treated groundwater to the Toms River.   The
ROD also called for: sealing of contaminated residential
irrigation wells; monitoring of groundwater and the Toms River;
conducting further studies to evaluate each of the source areas;
and evaluating the Lower Sand Aquifer.

4.0   POST-ROD ACTIVITIES
Since the issuance of the ROD, EPA has continued the forum for
public involvement it created in 1988 during the statutory
comment period for the ROD. EPA and the NJDEPE have held
periodic public meetings in Toms River to keep the pviblic
informed about site activities and to address questions and
respond to public concerns.
As part of the Remedial Design, EPA conducted pilot studies
utilizing contaminated groundwater to determine if the
contaminants could be treated to the cleanup standards required
by the ROD for the river discharge remedy. The pilot studies
evaluated the feasibility of using CIBA-GEIGY's Powdered
Activated Carbon Treatment (PACT) system, as well as various
physical and chemical treatment systems to meet the cleanup
standards in the ROD. The results of EPA's groundwater treatment
pilot studies confirmed that, with a few modifications, CIBA-
GEIGY's PACT system could treat all contaminants to the cleanup
standards required in the ROD. In September 1989, CIBA-GEIGY
entered into an administrative order on consent with EPA to
perform the groundwater extraction system portion of the Remedial
Design for the Site.




                                                  CIB   Oil II'

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

In the Fall of 1991, while EPA was conducting groundwater
treatment pilot studies for the Toms River discharge remedy,
several parties requested that EPA reconsider the recharge of
treated groundwater on the Site, in lieu of the river discharge.
These parties included CIBA-GEIGY, environmental groups,
community groups, elected officials and individual members of the
public. EPA had previously considered and rejected groundwater
recharge in the 1989 ROD. The complex hydrogeology of the Site
and the limitations with groundwater modeling capabilities at
that time had limited EPA's ability to determine with certainty
whether recharge could be accomplished without creating secondary
adverse impacts. EPA believed that groundwater recharge could
alter the natural flow of groundwater to the river in the areas
under the Pine Lake Park subdivision of Manchester Township,
located north of the Site, and contribute to the lateral or
vertical spread of contaminants in the groundwater.
In 1991, CIBA-GEIGY proposed that a groundwater recharge approach
could be designed, utilizing computer software technology not
previously available at the time of the ROD, which would control
and manage possible adverse effects mentioned above.
The results of EPA's groundwater treatment pilot studies
confirmed that, with a few modifications, CIBA-GEIGY's PACT
system could treat all contaminants in the groundwater to the
cleanup standards required for recharge of treated groundwater to
the Upper Sand Aquifer, as set forth in Taible 1 of this ESD.
5.0 CRITERIA FOR GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AND EVALUATION OF DESIGN
SUBMITTAL
EPA agreed to evaluate groundwater recharge concurrently with the
groundwater treatment pilot studies so as not to delay
implementation of the remedy. In 1991, CIBA-GEIGY investigated
and modeled, under EPA oversight, the recharge of treated
groundwater on the Site. CIBA-GEIGY and EPA described the design
parameters utilized for the computer model and distributed the
results at several technical review committee meetings held in
Toms River during 1991, and at pviblic meetings held on January
23, 1992, April 6, 1992, December 17, 1992 and February 16, 1993.
Throughout the evaluation process of this groundwater recharge
alternative, the NJDEPE supported EPA's oversight efforts,
participated at pviblic and technical meetings, and reviewed
documents submitted by EPA and CIBA-GEIGY concerning this
alternative. In order to protect human health and the
environment, the following criteria for groundwater recharge were
estciblished during this process involving EPA, NJDEPE, the public
and CIBA-GEIGY:

    - Extract contaminated groundwater at a rate estimated
    between 2.5 and 4 million gallons per day (MGD) and achieve
    cleanup standards for all contaminants in the groundwater,
    except TDS and chloroform, which are the more stringent of
    the following: 1) the Toms River discharge limits as
    currently specified in the ROD; 2) the New Jersey State
                                4

                                              : CIB   oil   1180

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    Groundwater Quality Criteria or antidegradation standards;
    3) the more stringent of the Federal or New Jersey State
    drinking water standards; or 4) the current NJDEPE Discharge
    to Groundwater Limits. Compliance with cleanup standards
    for certain contaminants will be measured by PQLs, as
    determined by special analytical techniques, when a
    particular cleanup standard is more stringent than the PQL.
    If the PQL becomes more stringent for any of these
    conteiminants, Settling Defendant may be required to meet the
    revised PQL, With respect to the treatment of TDS, a fully
    protective New Jersey State Groundwater Quality Criteria
    will be required. For contaminants that are not listed in
    the ROD but for which a New Jersey State Groundwater Quality
    Criteria exists, such Criteria will apply. After treatment,
    all of the treated groundwater will be retained in tanks or,
    if necessary, the emergency holding impoundment, to allow
    the monitoring of residual levels of contamination prior to
    discharge through infiltration and recharge areas to the
    Upper Sand Aquifer at the Site.

    - Capture the entire groundwater contaminant plume,
    including any Site-related contaminated groundwater beyond
    CIBA-GEIGY's property boundary.
    - Recharge 100 percent of the treated groundwater.
    - Implement groundwater recharge in a similar time frame as
    the ROD river discharge remedy.
    - Recharge groundwater so as not to cause the horizontal or
    vertical spread of groundwater contaminants beyond the
    capture zones of the extraction wells making up the
    groundwater extraction smd recharge system.

    - Not allow groundwater recharge to 1) alter the natural
    flow of the groundwater to the river in the area underlying
    the Pine Lake Park subdivision of Manchester Township
    bordering the northern boundary of the CIBA-GEIGY Site; or
    2) allow recharged or contaminated groundwater to flow under
    residential areas of Pine Lake Park.

    - Locate recharge basins on the north and northeast areas of
    the CIBA-GEIGY property but not above or adjacent to
    contaminant source areas. A southeast recharge area will be
    allowed if it can be determined that there will be no
    adverse impact on the Backfilled Lagoon source area and the
    above criteria can be achieved.

Based on the aforementioned criteria, CIBA-GEIGY submitted a
groundwater recharge proposal on June 1, 1992 which outlined the
design and installation of an extraction well system to capture
approximately 3 MGD of contaminated groundwater. The proposal
also outlined the location of groundwater recharge areas along
the east, north and northeast areas of the CIBA-GEIGY property.



                                                f-'B   Oil   11 Si

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

During EPA's preliminary evaluation of the groundwater recharge
proposal, EPA became aware of a plan by the Toms River Water
Company (TRWC) to increase pumping by as much as 4.5 MGD above
the current level of pumping at the Parkway Well Field, located
approximately three quarters of a mile east of the Toms River.
This increase could alter the direction of the groundwater flow
created by the groundwater recharge remedy. In addition, EPA was
concerned that an increase in pumping of more than 3.0 MGD by
TRWC could possibly capture recharged groundwater. Moreover, an
increase of more than 4.5 MGD could possibly capture the
contaminant plume and, therefore, contaminate the public drinking
water supply. Accordingly, EPA reevaluated groundwater recharge
and required design modifications to CIBA-GEIGY's proposal and an
agreement between CIBA-GEIGY and TRWC, in order to ensure that
projected future pumping increases by the TRWC at the Parkway
Well Field will not capture recharged groundwater or
contamination-from the Site.
CIBA-GEIGY submitted a revised groundwater recharge proposal in
November 1992, in order to address the potential impact that
recharge may cause to the TRWC supply wells. In the revised
proposal, extraction of contaminated groundwater was reduced to
2.7 MGD and a larger portion of the recharge was diverted to the
north and northeast recharge areas.
EPA distributed CIBA-GEIGY's revised groundwater recharge
proposal to the pviblic for review and comment prior to public
meetings on December 17, 1992 and February 16, 1993. At these
meetings, the public expressed strong support for the groundwater
recharge proposal. In addition, TRWC representatives stated an
intention to enter into an agreement with CIBA-GEIGY to address
the design modifications to CIBA-GEIGY's proposal required by
EPA-
EPA and the NJDEPE reviewed CIBA-GEIGY's revised groundwater
recharge proposal, and determined that it incorporated the above
design criteria and that such design criteria could be achieved.
It will be fully protective of human health and the environment
with a control to ensure that the groundwater recharge does not
1) alter the natural flow of the groundwater to the river, in the
area east of the Toms River, or 2) allow recharged or
contaminated groundwater to flow into the TRWC pviblic water
supply wells located in the Parkway Well Field.
EPA conducted a risk assessment of CIBA-GEIGY's proposal and
cited the conclusions in a fact sheet distributed to the public,
dated December 1992. The risk assessment indicated that
groundwater recharge with the aforementioned control will pose no
additional risk, and is fully protective of human health and the
environment.




                                             CIB   Oil   1182

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

6.0   DESCRIPTION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES
EPA, after consultation with the NJDEPE, is selecting the
following modifications to the river discharge remedy selected in
the ROD for the groundwater cleanup:
      - Recharge treated groundwater to the Upper Sand Aquifer.
      - Extract contaminated groundwater at a rate estimated
      between 2.5 and 4 MGD and achieve cleanup standards, as set
      forth in Table 1 of this ESD, for the recharge of treated
      groundwater to the Upper Sand Aquifer for all contaminants,
      except TDS and chloroform, which are the more stringent of
      the following: 1) the Toms River discharge limits as
      currently specified in the ROD; 2) the New Jersey State
      Groundwater Quality Criteria or antidegradation standards;
      3) the more stringent of the Federal or New Jersey State
      drinking water standards; or 4) the current NJDEPE Discharge
      to Groundwater Limits. Compliance with cleanup standards
      for certain contaminants will be measured by a PQLs, as
      determined by special analytical techniques, when a
      particular cleanup standard is more stringent than the PQL.
      These contaminants include, but are not limited to, copper,
      zinc, nickel, vinyl chloride, and benzene. If the PQL
      becomes more stringent for any of these constituents.
      Settling Defendant may be required to meet the revised PQL.
      With respect to the treatment of TDS, a fully protective New
      Jersey State Groundwater Quality Criteria will be required.
      For contaminants that are not listed in the ROD but for
      which a New Jersey State Groundwater Quality Criteria
      exists, such Criteria will apply. After treatment, all of
      the treated groundwater will be retained in tanks or, if
      necessary, the emergency holding impoundment to allow the
      monitoring of residual levels of contamination prior to
      discharge through infiltration and recharge areas to the
      Upper Sand Aquifer at the Site.

      - Monitor the northern boundary of the CIBA-GEIGY property
      to ensure that groundwater recharge does not 1) alter the
      natural flow of the groundwater to the river in the area
      underlying the Pine Lake Park subdivision of Manchester
      Township bordering the northern boundary of the CIBA-GEIGY
      Site; or 2) allow recharged or contaminated groundwater to
      flow under Pine Lake Park.
      - Require groundwater monitoring east of the Toms River to
      ensure that recharged groundwater or the contaminant plume
      is not drawn into public water supply wells at the Parkway
      Well Field. Rely on existing New Jersey Water Allocation
      Permit Procedures, Section 7:19-1,2,3,6, and 7 et seq.. New
      Jersey Administrative Code (1990), to empower NJDEPE to deny



                                               CIB   Oil   lis

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      any proposed withdrawal increases of the TRWC that would
      interfere with remedial activities at the Site, until such
      time as there is a contractual agreement between TRWC and
      CIBA-GEIGY which addresses the above concerns. The
      monitoring of wells east of Toms River and New Jersey Water
      Allocation permitting requirements will ensure protection of
      public health.
      - Eliminate the ROD requirement for a reverse osmosis (RO)
      technology for the removal of total dissolved solids (TDS),
      because TDS is naturally present in the groundwater at a
      higher concentration than the TDS in the Toms River.
      - Extract and treat contaminated groundwater until the Upper
      Sand Aquifer and, if necessary, the Lower Sand Aquifer are
      remediated to the more stringent of the current Federal and
      State MCL's, as set forth in Table 2 of this ESD.
Although river discharge and groundwater recharge involve the
extraction and treatment of contaminated groundwater using
virtually identical treatment technologies, groundwater recharge
will not require treatment by a system to remove TDS and,
therefore, is a less expensive option. The RO technology is a
costly, energy intensive technology that would have necessitated
the off-Site transportation and disposal of a concentrated brine
water, which is not required for the groundwater recharge remedy.

EPA estimated the total cost for the ROD river discharge remedy
to be approximately $164,500,000 plus the costs of river and
groundwater monitoring programs. The total cost of the modified
remedy is now estimated to be approximately $54,145,000 plus the
cost of river and groundwater monitoring programs estimated to be
$5,900,000 for a total remedy cost of approximately $60,045,000,
The modified remedy results in a cost reduction of approximately
$104,455,000, which is primarily due to eliminating the capital
and high long-term maintenance costs of the RO unit. Although
the estimated cost of the groundwater cleanup remedy will
decrease, the overall intent and purpose of the remedy, as
presented in the ROD, will not change.
The modified remedy has the support of the affected community and
the general public. The comments given at the public meetings
did not raise any substantial objections or concerns about the
modified remedy. Moreover, the vast majority of comments
received to date, as well as resolutions passed by nearby
townships, favored groundwater recharge. The NJDEPE has
continually indicated its support for the modified remedy.
7.0   AFFIRMATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS
EPA, after consultation with the NJDEPE, has modified the
selected remedy for the discharge of treated groundwater based on



                                                CIB   Oil   11S4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

additional information provided by the public and CIBA-GEIGY
during the remedial design studies. The modified remedy will be
as protective of human health and the environment as the ROD
remedy.
The modified remedy requires cleanup standards for groundwater to
meet or exceed Federal or New Jersey State requirements for
recharge of treated groundwater to the aquifer. It also requires
the Upper Sand Aquifer and, if necessary, the Lower Sand Aquifer
to be remediated to cleanup standards which are the more
stringent of the Federal and State MCL's. In addition, the
modified remedy is technically feasible, cost-effective, and
provides treatment which permanently and significantly reduces
the toxicity, mobility and volume of hazardous substances in the
groundwater. The modified remedy is more acceptable to the
public than the ROD river discharge remedy, and has related
environmental and economic benefits as compared to the ROD
remedy.   This ESD complies with the procedures specified in the
NCP.




William J.^^Kfszynski^^^.ET                 Date
Acting Regional Administrator




                                                •^"'^'   o i l   ,.:^...
                                                                 l-(.as

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ESDTBLJ                                      TABLE 1


POLLUTANT (ppb)                 1989                CIBA-GEIGY       CLEANUP STDS.'
(Parts Per Billion)             KU) RIVER           PROPOSED STDS.   AND COMPLIANCE
                                DISCHARGE           FOR RECHARGE     STDS.* FOR
                                LIMITS              03/10/1993       GROUNDWATER
                                                                     RECHARGE AND BASIS'



Benzene                               1                 1            1     P    <.2G)
Chlorobenzene                         4                 4            3
Oilorofora                            0.19              3            3     NJDEPE.A(.19R)
DibroBDchloroaethane                  HE                5            5.5
1,2-Dichloroethane                    2                 2            2     P    (1.15A)
Cartxm Tetrachloride                  2                 2            2     P    (.4G)
Ethylbenzene                          32                32           32
Toluene                               26                26           26
1,1-D i ch loroethene                 2                 2            2    P     (1.5A)
Trans -1,3-D {ch I oropropane         NE                NONITOR      MONITOR
Trans-1,2-Dichloroethene              10                10           10    R
Tet rachIoroethene                    1                 1            1     P     {.4G)
Trichloroethene                       1                 1            1     R.A.G
1,1,2,2-TetrachIoroethane             NE                2            2     P     (1.5A)
1,1,1-Trichloroethane                 21                21           15    NJDEPE
Methylene Chloride                    2                 2            2     R.A.G.N
1,2-<H) Dichlorobenzene               77                77           77    R
1,3-D ich lorobenzene                 31                31           31    R
l.il-Dichlorabenzene                  15                15           10    A
bis(2-Ethylhexyl)Phthalate            103               30           30    P    <3G)
Napthalene                            22                22           15    NJDEPE
Nitrobenzene                          27                10           10    NJDEPE
Phenol                                15                15           10    A
1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene                8                 8            5     A*
Vinyl Chloride                        2                 2            2     P     (.8G)
Total Xylenes                         NE                40           20    A
1-2-3 Trichlorobenzene                NE                NONITOR      8     H*
CIS-1,2 Dischlorethylene              NE                10           5     HJDEPE
1,2 Dichlorophopane                   NE                1            1     P    {.75G)
1,2,3-Trichloropropane                NE                1            20    HJDEPE
Acrylonitrile                         NE                NE           50    P    (.06G)
Benzidine                             NE                NE           50    P (.0002G)
Methyl Ethyl Ketone                   NE                300          150   A
Acetone                               NE                700          TOO   G
4-Chlorotoluene                       NE                NONITOR      NONITOR
2-Chloroethylvinyl Ether              NE                MONITOR      MONITOR
2-Chlorotoluene                       NE                MONITOR      MONITOR
PCBs                                  NE                .5           .5 P        (.02G}
Styrene                               HE                100          50    A
1,1,2-Trichloroethane                 NE                 3           2     HJDEPE




                                               10

                                                                          ; CIB     {       11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

TABLE 1 (Con't)


                                     1969 ROD               NORE RESTRICTIVE        CLEANUP STDS.'
                                     RIVER                  FEDERAL NCL OR          AID COMPLIANCE
POLLUTANT                            DISCHARGE              NJ GROUDUATER           STDS.* FOR GROUNDUATER
(parts per billion)                  LIMITS                 QUALITY CRITERIA        RECHARGE AND BASIS*



Caciiiui                                    10                   10
Chroaiia
 Trivalent                                  31                  NE                  31    R
 Nexavalent                                 11                  IE                  11    R
 Total                                      50                  50                  so    R.A
Copper                                      1.65                10                  10 P       (1.65R)
Lead                                        50                  5                   10 P (5G)
Nickel                                      22                  22                  22 R
Zinc                                        15                  15                  15 R
Arsenic                                     50                  8                   8   P
Mercury                                     2                   2                   2   P (1.25A}
Seleniia                                    10                  10                  10 R
Iron                                        1000                300                 300 S.F.N
TSS as/I                                    40                  HE                  40 R
TDS ag/l                                    45                  SOO                 500 6.F.H
Acute Toxicity
 CLC50) - X eff                             >50                  NE                 HA
Chronic Tooiicity
 (NOEC) - X eff                             >100                 HE                 HA
pH Standard Units                           4 -7                 6.5 - 8.5          5 - 9 SU (A)
Nitrate                                     10,000               io,nnn             10,000 (R.G)
sulfate                                     HE                   250,000            250,000 (R,G)
Chloride                                    HE                   250,000            250,000 (R,G>



1 - Cleanup Standards, except for TDS and chlorofoni, are the aore stringent of the following: 1) the Tons
River discbarge liaits as currently specified in the ROD; 2} the New Jersey State Gromioter Quality
Criteria or antidegredation standards; 3 ) the Bore stringent of the Federal or New Jersey State drinking
water standartls; or 4) the current HJDEPE Discharge to Gromdwater Liaits.

2 - Coifiliance with clears^) standards for certain contaainants will be aeasured by a Practical Quantitation
Liait (Pffi.). as deterwined by special analytical techniques,ritenthe clean4> standard is aore stringent
than the POL.

3 • BASIS FOR CLEAHUP STANDARDS AMD COMPLIANCE STANDARDS OF TREATED GROUNDWATER TO THE UPPER SAND AQUIFER:

             - To   Ri^«r discharge liait as outlined in the 1989 ROD.

        A - RJ State Anti-Degradation Policy Criteria (H.J.A.C. 7:9-6.8). Standard was calculated based on
        a background equals the PQL. Grouiduater saapling aay be conducted by CIBA-GEIGY to deteraine the
        anti-degredation standards in accordance with the above regulations.

        H - HJ State drilling Uater NaxiaM Contaainant Level (NCL).

        F - Federal ck-inking water Naxiaia Contaainant Level (MCL).

        G - HJ State Gromfaater Quality Standard.

        UDEPE - Current HJDEPE Discharge to Gromdwater Perait liait.

        P - Practical Quantitation Liait (PQL). yhere an applicable standard is aore stringent than the
        POL, coi^jliance will be deterained by the PQL. The nuiter in the parenthesis represents the actual
        applicable standard.

ADDITIONAL NOTES:
HE - No Standard Exists
HA - Hot Applicable
* The S I M of all Trichlorobenzene Isoaers can not Exceed 8ppb.
** Based an 133 percent of beckgrotni. Increases above 133 percent of faackgromd aay be granted.


                                                       11


                                                                                         CIB     Oil     1187

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             TABLE 2
        CHEMICAL-SPECIFIC MCLs FOR GROUNDWATER PROTECTION
         FEDERAL AND NEW JERSEY DRINKING WATER STANDARDS
     CONTAMINANTS                      TREATED WATER
     (mq/L unless cthervise noted)
Physical:
Turdibity                              1 TU (Nephelometric
                                       Turdibity Unit)
Color                                       10 CD (Color Units)
Odor                                        3 TON (Threshold
                                            Number)
Total Dissolved Solids                      500
Microbiological:
Total Coliform                         No more than 5% of the
                                       samples per month may be
                                       positive. For systems
                                       collecting fever than 40
                                       samples/month/ no more
                                       than 1 sample per month
                                       may be positive.
Inorganic Chemicals;
Arsenic                                     0.05
Barium                                      2
Cadmium                                     0.005
Chloride                                    250
Chromium                                    0.1
Copper                                      1.3 (Action Level)
Corrosivity                                 Within 1 of optimum
                                            Ph as determined by
                                            Langlier Index
Fluoride                                    4 .
Foaming Agents                              0.5
Hardness (as CaCO,                          250 upper limit, 50
lover limit
Iron                                        0.3
Lead                                        0.015 (Action Level)
Mzmganese                                   0.05
Mercury                                     0.002
Nitrate                                      10
pH Units                                    6.5 - 8.5
Selenixun                                   0.05
Silver                                      0.1
Sodium                                       50
Sulfate                                     250
Zinc                                        5




                               12

                                                       CIB Oil    IISS

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       TABLE 2 (continued)
        CHEMICAL-SPECIFIC MCLs FOR GROUNDWATER PROTECTION
         FEDERAL AND NEW JERSEY DRINKING WATER STANDARDS
     CONTAMINANTS                        TREATED WATER
     (mq/L unless othervise noted)

Organic Chemicals:
Endrin                                   0.0002
Lindane                                  0.0002
Methozychlor                             0.04
Toxaphene                                0.003
2, 4-D                                   0.07
2, 4, 5-TP (Silvex)                      0.05
Total Trihalomethanes (TTHMs)            0.10
Radioactivity:
Gross Alpha                              15 pCi/L
Combined Radium (226 & 228)               5 pCi/L
Manmade: Beta                             4 millirem/yr
NJA-280 Compounds (ug/L):
Benzene                                  1
Carbon Tetrachloride                     2
Chlordane                                0.5
Chlorobenzene                            4
m-Dichlorobenzene                       600
o-Dichlorobenzene                       600
p-Dichlorobenzene                        75.
1/ 2-Dichloroethane                       2
1, 1-Dichloroethylene                     2
cis-Dichloroethylene                     10
trans-1, 2-Dichloroethylene              10
Methylene Chloride                        2
PCBs                                    500
Tetrachloroethylene                       1
Trichloroethylene                         1
1, If 1-Trichloroethane                  26
.The EPA esteiblished MCL will apply becaues NJDEP will not be
reproposing an MCL for this contaminant in the near future.




                                13

                                                      CI,        1189

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           FIGURE 1


    N
< : >




    EQUALIZATION
    LAOOOHPUWOEWEUS

    7S4-1000
    755-1000

    CAROmALOmVE
    PUWGE WELLS

    749-1000
    747-1000
    748-1000
    749-1000
    750-1000




        •   * = AcHvaPuigaVWrt




AppnaicatoTl-.llir

                                                                             Figure 1

CDM
•nvnonmrniM m n g m t t n . tehnUtls.   >6TT   TTO   ai3
                                                                          Site Plan

plann»r% » managmtmm consutanrs                                       Cibi'Gwgv S i i .
