LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES, VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SUPERFUND SITE, VINELAND, NEW JERSEY.
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/110530
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: c8ac86fa7dee5a6032a2fdecf756f47103c85043eac8c5211053daf1086507c2
Source PDF pages: 11
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          SDMS Document




                                                    V       J1P530
                EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES
               VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SUPERFUND SITE

Site Name and Location

Vineland Chemical Company
1611 West Wheat Road
Vineland, New Jersey
Introduction

The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) presents
this Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) to explain the .
changes made to the remedy selected in the September 28, 1989
Record of Decision (ROD) for the Vineland Chemical Company
Superfund site. These changes relate to those portions of the
remedy which address the remediation of- arsenic-contaminated
plant site soils (designated Operable Unit 1) and arsenic-
contaminated ground water (designated Operable Unit 2 ) . They
result from information obtained or developed subsequent to the
1989 ROD.

This ESD is issued in accordance with Section 117(c) of the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act of 1980, as amended (CERCLA), 42 U.S.C. 9617(c), and Section
300.435(c)(2)(i) of the National Oil and Hazardous Substances
Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 CFR 300.435(c)(2)(i), which
contain provisions for addressing and documenting changes that
occur to a remedy after a ROD is signed. The ESD and documents
which form the basis for the decision to change the response
action will be incorporated into the Administrative Record for
the site in accordance with Section 300.825(a)(2) of the NCP.
The Administrative Record is available for review during normal
business hours at EPA Region II, 290 Broadway,. New York, New York
10007, and at the City of Vineland Health Department at the
Vineland City Hall, 7th and Wood Streets, Vineland, New Jersey
08360.'

Siimmary of Site History, Contamination Problems, and Selected
Remedy

The Vineland Chemical Company is located at 1611 West Wheat Road
in the northwest part of the.City of Vineland. Vineland is in
Cumberland County, approximately 25 miles from the Delaware Bay
in south-central New Jersey. The site is located in a mixed
residential and agricultural area. There were twelve buildings
and five abandoned chicken coops on the plant site. Some of
these structures were used by the Vineland Chemical Company for
various purposes. Four of the buildings were used for product
manufacturing, one contained a laboratory, two were used for
vehicle storage and/or maintenance, two were used for treatment
of the process waste waters and one housed a boiler/heating
plant. The Vineland Chemical Company ceased operations in 1994.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

As early as 1966, the New Jersey Department of Health observed
untreated wastewater being discharged into unlined lagoons at the
Vineland site. This wastewater was contaminated with arsenic at
concentrations up to 67,000 parts per billion (ppb). Waste salts
containing 1-2 percent arsenic were stored outside in uncovered
piles. Precipitation dissolved' some of these salts and carried
them into the ground water and eventually into nearby surface
water bodies.        •

In 1988, EPA conducted a Remedial Investigation and Feasibility
Study (RI/FS) to determine the nature and extent of the
contamination at the site and to develop remedial alternatives
to address the contamination. The findings of the Rl/FS are
summarized below.

Because of Vineland Chemical's improper handling, storage and
disposal of arsenic-based salts and process wastewater dating
back to 1949, the soils, sediments and nearby surface waters are
contaminated with arsenic. Sampling conducted during the
remedial investigation and the design investigations showed.that
plant site soils under and around the manufacturing buildings and
the walls and the floors of the buildings themselves are
significantly contaminated. Soils in the lagoon area are also
heavily contaminated where process wastewater was allowed to
percolate into the subsurface. Precipitation carries the arsenic
through the porous soil into the shallow aquifer. Heavily
contaminated ground water flows into the Blackwater Branch, then
1.5 miles downstream into the Maurice River, and subsequently 7.5
miles into Union Lake.

Since the arsenic is associated with the fine particles suspended
in surface water, areas of high arsenic concentration are being
redistributed downstream in the river bottoms and Union Lake.
The remedial investigation revealed elevated arsenic
concentrations in the soils and sediments as far south as
Delaware Bay. Arsenic concentrations in the Maurice River are
above the federal drinking water standard, i.e., 50 ppb, 26.5
miles downstream from the Vineland Chemical Company site.

On September 28, 1989, a Record of Decision was signed for the
Vineland Chemical Company site. The site is complex, with
multiple contamination areas: the plant site, the Blackwater
Branch and Maurice River, and Union Lake.' This complexity and
the interrelationship of the areas, necessitate a cleanup
approach involving discrete phases or operable units. The remedy
selected for the site is described below.

     Operable Unit 1 - Plant Site Source Control

Plant site soils will be cleaned to health-based levels using
in-situ (in-place) soil flushing to accelerate the washing of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

arsenic into the shallow aquifer. This aquifer is already
contaminated and is to be remediated as part of Operable Unit 2.

     Operable Unit 2 - Plant Site Management of Migration

During approximately the same time period needed to implement the
Operable Unit 1 plant soils remedy, the contaminated ground water
will be pumped at a high rate, treated to meet 'drinking water
standards, and reinjected into the aquifer at the maximum
practicable rate. The remainder will be discharged to the river.'

     Operable Unit 3 -   River Areas
Once the Operable Unit 2 action is underway and arsenic flow from
the plant site is stopped, cleanup of the river areas can begin.
Contaminated sediments in the Blackwater Branch floodplain will
be excavated, treated to remove arsenic, and redeposited.
Subject to review after completion of an Environmental.Assessment
of the effects of dredging on the river ecology, submerged
contaminated sediments in the Blackwater Branch will be dredged,
treated and deposited on the plant site.

If the contaminants are still present above action levels after a
three-year flushing period, and after the above Environmental
Assessment of the effects of dredging on the river system is
complete, the Maurice River sediments will be dredged, treated
with water wash extraction and deposited on the plant site.

     Operable Unit 4 - Union Lake Sediments

Removal and treatment of arsenic-contaminated sediments around
the shores of Union Lake will be performed after a three-year
flushing period, and after remediation, i f any, of the Maurice
River._ Sampling will be conducted prior to remediation to
confirm that contamination exists above the action levels.

Description of the Significant Differences and the Basis for
Those Differences

The differences between the remedy selected in the 1989 ROD and
the actions described in this ESD involve portions of Operable
Unit 1 dealing with the on-site contaminant source and Operable
Unit 2 which addresses ground water contamination. They include
the demolition of on-site buildings, reduction in the capacity of
the ground water extraction and treatment system, modification of
the treatment process, and revising the treated water discharge
point to surface water. These changes.are discussed in more
detail below. All other operable unit actions specified in the
1989 ROD remain unchanged.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               -4-
 EPA selected in-situ soil flushing in the 1989 ROD to address
-plant site soils contaminated with arsenic. The remedy involved
 excavation of approximately 54,000 cubic yards of contaminated
 soils on the plant site and the consolidation of these soils with
 approximately 72,000 cubic yards of undisturbed contaminated
 soils into two active flushing areasi The two areas would be
 bermed and continuously flooded with water. The water, in turn,
 would dissolve and carry arsenic into the underlying ground water
 where it would be captured by the ground water extraction and
 treatment system which would operate simultaneously with soil
 flushing. There, the ground water would be treated to the-50
 parts per billion (ppb) standard and a portion utilized as flush
 water.

Soil sampling conducted during subsequent design investigations
has increased the total volume estimate to at least 150,000 cubic
yards. In addition, the design proposes consolidating all
150,000 cubic yards of contaminated plant site soils in a single
8-acre lagoon area for flushing.

Although it was stated in the 1989 ROD that some arsenic may have
seeped through the floors of the process buildings, only those
soils under one building (no. 9) were sampled at that time.
Arsenic was found at 471 parts per million (ppm) eight feet below
the building floor in the unsaturated soil zone. The results
suggested that further contamination may exist in the soils
beneath other buildings or paved areas. Despite this, the remedy
selected for the site did not include the remediation of the
contaminated soils directly under the plant site buildings and
surrounding paved areas. The reasons for this determination are
explained below.        •

The area around the buildings is paved; therefore, the soil
contamination was not considered to represent a human health
threat. The buildings and paved areas are shown on the attached
Figure 1.- In addition, it was believed that the arsenic under
the buildings would be, fairly immobile except from a fluctuating
water table, usually ten to fifteen feet beneath the ground
surface. It was also assumed that the Vineland Chemical Company
would stay in business and continue to use the plant site
buildings and paved areas.

Following the death of the owner in October 1990, operations at
the Vineland Chemical facility began to diminish. In 1992, EPA
assessed the plant site conditions after being informed by the
plant manager that the Vineland Chemical Company plant would be
abandoned. There were thousands of gallons of arsenic solutions
stored in tanks and containers on the site. In June 1992, EPA
secured the buildings and installed fences around soil areas
containing high levels of arsenic. A fence was also installed
around the plant site to restrict trespassers. Removal of the
hazardous materials stored in the tanks and containers began in

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               -5-
the fall of 1992. The Vineland Chemical Company ceased
operations and the plant site buildings were abandoned in early
1994.

Due to the changed circumstances at the site, EPA decided to
investigate the subsurface soil conditions. During the design
phase, borings were advanced through the floors of all the plant
buildings and paved areas. Samples were also collected from
inside the buildings including the walls, floors, ceilings and
equipment. Significant amounts of arsenic were discovered in
some of the buildings and in the soils under the buildings at   >
depths down to the water table. Arsenic was found at a level of
2,530 ppm below building 3; 158 ppm in the subsurface soils under
building 7 (laboratory); 1,530 ppm below building 8; 11,100 ppm
in the brick flooring under building 9; 5,650 ppm below building
10; 72 ppm in the subsurface soils under building 5 (boiler
plant); 334 ppm below the wastewater treatment plant; and 508 ppm
in the wood framing of a chicken coop.
Based on these findings, EPA decided to demolish and dispose of
eight buildings on the plant site that were themselves
contaminated with arsenic or were constructed over contaminated
soils that need to be remediated. Because the arsenic had
permeated the building materials, decontamination was not
considered to be a viable option. Remediating the contaminated
buildings eliminated the human health risk associated with
exposure to contaminated building interiors. In addition,
removal of the buildings provided access to the contaminated
soils below which will be addressed as part of the Operable Unit
1 remedy. The building demolition work cost approximately $2.7
million.

Under the action described in this ESD, the floors of the
buildings will remain in place until the plant site soil remedy
is initiated. An estimated 55,000 cubic yards of contaminated
soils are under the buildings and the paved areas. . Leaving the
floors and pavement intact will temporarily protect against
exposure and mobilization of the contaminated soils.

As a result of the large amount of contaminated soil under the
buildings, the total quantity of soil to be remediated at the
Vineland site has increased. The selected flushing remedy for
plant site soils was based on a smaller quantity of contaminated
soil and, therefore, had a lower cost. EPA believes that the
increase warrants a re-evaluation of the plant site soil remedy
to determine whether it still represents the most cost-effective
solution. This evaluation is underway. Upon completion, EPA
will either proceed with the current remedy for the plant soils
or propose to. change the remedy. Any such change will be the
subject of another ESD or ROD amendment.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

with regard to the contaminated ground water, efforts are being
taken to complete the associated design work as soon as possible.
The ground water remedy must be implemented to stop the
continuing migration of arsenic contamination into the ground and
surface waters. It is envisioned that implementation of the
ground water remedy will proceed concurrent with the plant site
soils evaluation discussed above.

In addition to the timing of the ground water remedy, the size of
the extraction and treatment system has been modified from that
envisioned in the ROD. Ground water modeling performed during
the design indicated that an extraction rate of 4 million gallons
per day (MOD) would drain the adjacent Blackwater Branch. Also,
at that pumping rate, a large amount of clean ground water would
be collected along with the contaminated water (i.e., arsenic
concentrations greater than 50 ppb).
Additional modeling was performed to assist EPA in reducing the
plant size and extraction rate, and thus, minimizing the
associated negative environmental impacts. The results of the
modeling effort indicated that an extraction rate of
approximately 2 MGD w^as sufficient to collect all of the
contaminated ground water. At this.rate, the migration of
arsenic contamination into the adjacent Blackwater Blanch would
be stopped, which is one of the primary goals of the ground water
remedy.

The other major goal of the ground water remedy is to restore the
aquifer to its designated drinking water use. It has been
determined through modeling that ground water extraction should
continue until the concentration of arsenic in the aquifer water
is no more than 350 ppb. At this point, natural attenuation
processes are expected to reduce the concentration to the
drinking water standard of 50 ppb over time.

As with any ground water remedy, the system must be continuously
evaluated with respect to its operational effectiveness. It may
be necessary to investigate various techniques to improve removal
efficiencies such as increased pumping in hot-spot areas, pulsed
pumping, reinjection rates, etc. If experience indicates that
continued operation of the treatment plant will produce limited
or no additional benefits in terms of ground water remediation, a
modification of the remediation goals may be considered at that
time. Any such change would involve full public participation.

In addition to the change in plant size, the treatment process
was ,modified slightly. Intensive design investigations showed
that the plume was composed of two distinct zones containing
organic and inorganic arsenic. Bench testing and pilot-scale
testing proved that the 50 ppb remediation goal could still be
achieved, however, some modifications were necessary.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               -7-
The ground water containing inorganic arsenic was easily treated
to below 50 ppb using the process similar to the one identified
in the ROD -- chemical oxidation using hydrogen peroxide,
coagulation with ferric chloride and sodium hydroxide,
flocculation with potassium permanganate and polymers, and
clarification using dissolved air floatation. Two additional
treatment processes specified in the ROD were determined not to
be necessary. The costly ion exchange polishing step was
replaced by dissolved air floatation which is less expensive.
The activated carbon system needed for the removal of TCE was
eliminated because TCE was not found in subsequent ground water
sampling during design.                  >

With regard to the ground water contaminated with organic
arsenic, bench and pilot-scale testing indicated the treatment
processes could only effectively treat the organic arsenic to 200
ppb. Ground water containing organic arsenic requires a slightly
different two cycle oxidation/coagulation/flocculation/dissolved
air floatation process. Sodium hydroxide and potassium
permanganate are then added to both the organic and inorganic
flows for additional coagulation and flocculation. Finally, a
polymer will be added prior to a sand filtration step. Through a'
combination of treatment and blending, the overall effluent will
achieve the 50 ppb discharge goal.

Upon completion of the remedial action, the treatment plant will
be decommissioned and removed. In addition, the associated
underground piping, vaults, valves and related hardware and
utilities will be excavated and removed. Finally, the monitoring
and recovery wells will be closed in accordance with NJDEP well
closure regulations.

Support Agency Comments

The State of New Jersey concurs with EPA's revision to the remedy
and decision to issue this ESD.

It should also be noted that any ground water extraction and
treatment activities (designated Operable Unit 2) undertaken
prior to and during the period of flushing of the plant site
soils (designated Operable Unit 1) will not count towards the
State's operation and maintenance responsibilities with regard to
ground water restoration pursuant to Section 104(c)(6) of the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act of 1980 as amended.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Affirmation of Statutory Determinations

Considering the new information that has been developed and the
change made to the selected remedy, EPA and New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection believe that the remedy remains
protective of human health and the environment, complies with
federal and state requirements identified in the ROD and ESD as
applicable or relevant and appropriate to this remedial action,
and is cost effective. In addition, the revised remedy utilizes
permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies to the
maximum extent practicable for this site.

Paiblic Participation Activities

In accordance with the requirements of CERCLA, EPA will publish a
notice of this ESD in the local newspaper, The Daily Journal.
The ESD has been placed in the Administrative Record for the
site, which is available at the information repositories for
public review.



                                                 (Shi i q
Jeamnfe M. Fox                            Date
Regional Administrator

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                       :   -\ \ - .


A ..\           \        1 Mil ,   .J.
        X           ^'   ' Ml'''




                                    ©                                                    I - ,- -I


                                     LEGEND :                  s. —.       ^^ rv: .^-
                                                                                         m                  •J-

     SCALE IN FEET                       0   ZONE 1-CONTAMINATlON TO A DEPTH OF 2" | ] ^ Z 0 N E 5   -CONTAMINATION TO A DEPTH OF S'
 0     100    200        300
                                         0   ZONE 2-coNTAMiNATioN TO A DEPTH OF 6- J (        Bulldings      aod   paved     areas

                                         0   ZONE 3-CONTAMINATION TO A DEPTH OF ff [ ] ACTIVE LINED LAGOONS

                                         ^   ZONE 4-CONTAUINATION TO A DEPTH OF 8'

                                         ^   ZONE 5-CONTAMINATION TO A DEPTH OF 10'

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                  Robert C. Shinn, Jr.
                                           Department of Environmental Protection                                     Commissioner
CluiRlinu Todd Whitman
                                                   Diviiii* cf Pukbdy Fwded Site Rcmttfaiien
C.'civcrnor                                                        CK41J

                                                                (609)984-2990
                                                              {«09)S«.M«0(F«)C)




                                                                                                    4 June 1997

          Mr. Richard Caspe, Director
          U S . Environmental Protection Agency
          Emergency and Remedial Response Division
          290 Broadway
          New York, NY 10007.1866
           RE;        Vineland Chemical Company Superfund Site
                      Explanation of Significant Difference

           Dear Mr. Caspe:

           The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection has evaluated and concurs with the
           Ex^l^aTon of Signifi«nt Difference (ESD) for the Vineland Chemical Company Site submitted on 27
           May 1997 and attached.
           The significant changes from the 1989 Record of Decision discussed in this ESD are:

                 1. the demolition of prv-site buildings,
                 2. the increase in the volume of on-site soils,
                 3. because of the increased volume of soils, EPA will reevaluate the OUl soUs remedy to
                    determine if it still represents the most cost effective, and
                       the reduction in the capacity of the groundwater extraction and treatment plant.
                 4.
             The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection appreciates the opportunity to partid^e in
             this decision and looks forward to future cooperation on the Vineland ChenucaJjCompany Superfiind
             Site.
                                                                                               Sincere!



 Post-It'" brand fax transmittal memo 7671 • ot pages »
                                  from
 Co.
                                          •KO^t^f^                                             Director
 D«|>t.                          Phono*
 ST?
       :aa-iAi w i               Fin*


                                                     Ntw ^tsey is an Eqa»! Oppcrtunity ttnptoytt
                                                                   Reeyded Paptt

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 THE UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY ANNOUNCES
THE EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES TO THE REMEDY FOR THE
           VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SUPERFUND SITE
                      VINELAND, NEW JERSEY

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announces the Explanation of
Significant Differences (ESD) for the Vineland Chemical Company Superfund site in
Vineland, New Jersey. The ESD modifies the original cleanup selected in the 1989
Record of Decision (ROD).

The changes to the 1989 ROD relate to the remediation of arsenic-contaminated soils
and groundwater and include demolishing on-site buildings; reducing the amount of
groundwater being extracted and treated; modifiying the groundwater treatment
process, and revising the treated water discharge point. The ESD is being issued to
explain why these changes are necessary and will serve to document this change.

EPA has determined that the approach documented in the ESD is technically sound,
cost effective and remains protective of human health and the environment. The ESD
and other site-related documents are available for review during normal business hours
at the following locations:

EPA, Region 2                    City of Vinelend Health Department
^90 Broadway.                    Vineland City Hall
New York, New York               7th and Wood Streets
                                 Vineland, New Jersey

For more information about this site, please contact Matt Westgate, Project Manager at
(212)637-4422.
