LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES, BOG CREEK FARM SUPERFUND SITE, (W/ATTACHMENT)
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/111110
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: fa422cbff0c0eeebecf1f48156815f38fbef37dcc88316c45fc9b9a3977827a3
Source PDF pages: 6
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
              JAN      ,3 20D5                   REGION II
  DATE:


 BJECT: Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) for the Bog Creek Farm Superfund Site, Howell
       Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey
                                                                                                  SDMS Document
 FROM:
          Carole Petersen, Chief
    .J.Q. X-.V-T, Jersey
          New     .,v,xovjr Remediation        Branch
                            xvwxixv^c»..xv-.i*x^x«.^v.xx
                                                                                                        Hill
                                                                                                      111110
                                                                                                               •
          Bill McCabe, Acting Director
          Emergency and Remedial Response Division

          Attached for your review and signature is the Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) for
          tiie Bog Creek Farm Superfimd Site, Howell Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey.

          The ESD explains the modification made to the remedy selected;in the September .30,1985
          Record of Decision (OU-1 ROD) for the Bog Creek Farm Superfund site.

          The OU-1 ROD selected an interim remedy requiring the limited excavation and on-site
          incineration of 15,000 cu, yds. of contaminated soils. The OU-1 ROD establishes that if post-
          remediation monitoring and modeling demonstrate that the remedy is not meeting established
          goals including groundwater cleanup standards established in the 0U2 ROD then additional
          excavation would be required. Sampling efforts and analyses conducted by the Emergency
          Response Team, and a May 2004 Corp. of Engineers (COE) analysis established that an
          estimated additional 21,000 cu. yds. of soil is present with elevated VOC concentrations
          exceeding the New Jersey Impact to Groimdwater Soil Cleanup Criteria. The May 2004 COE
          Analysis evaluates six altematives including both on-site and off-site treatment and disposal
          options and provides a cost analysis for each altemative. EPA has selected Altemative 1 which
          includes excavation and removal of the 21,000 cu. yds. of contaminated soils at an estimated cost
          of $5.4 million.

          NJDEP has reviewed the ESD and has provided their concurrence.

          If you have any questions, I am available to discuss thisfiirtherat your convenience.

          Attachments.




                                                                                            500199
HeaKM II FORM 1320-1 ( 8 / 6 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

               EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES

                   BOG CREEK FARM SUPERFUND SITE


Site Name and Location

Bog Creek Farm Superfund Site
Howell Township
Monmouth County, New Jersey

INTRODUCTION

The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) presents
this Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) to explain the
modification made to the remedy selected in the September 30,
1985 Record of Decision (OU-1 ROD) for the Bog Creek Farm
Superfund site. This modification relates to operable unit one
and specifically addresses the volume and disposal of highly
contaminated soil required to be excavated so that groundwater
cleanup goals can be attained within a reasonable time frame.

This ESD is issued in accordance with Section 117(c) of the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability
Act of 1980, as amended (CERCLA), 42 U.S.C. 9617(c), and Section
300.435(c)(2)(i) of the National Oil and Hazardous Substances
Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 CFR 300.435(c) (2) (i) , which
contain provisions for addressing and documenting changes that
occur to a remedy after a ROD is signed. The ESD and documents
which form the basis for the decision to change the original
remedial response action will be incorporated into the
Administrative Record for the site in accordance with Section
300.825(a)(2) of the NCP. The Administrative Record is available
for review during normal business hours at EPA Region II, 290
Broadway, New York, New York 10007, (212) 637-4308, and at the
Municipal Building in Howell Township, Monmouth County, New
Jersey.

SUMMARY OF SITE HISTORY, CONTAMINATION PROBLEMS, AND SELECTED
REMEDY

The Bog Creek Farm site is located in a rural section of Howell
Township adjacent to the north branch of Squankum Brook, a
tributary to the Manasquan River. The site is approximately
three miles upstream from the intake of the Manasquan Reservoir
Water Supply System. It is alleged that, in 1973 and 1974, the
former owner of the property dumped paint wastes, disinfectants,
and trash into trenches he had excavated. Neighbors' complaints
of odors emanating from the site drew the attention of the local


                                                        500200

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

health department and, later, the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP).

EPA performed a remedial investigation and feasibility study
(RI/FS) at the site in 1984 and 1985 to determine the extent of
contamination and evaluate remedial alternatives. The results of
the RI/FS indicated the presence of extremely high concentrations
of organic contaminants (44,000 parts per million (ppm) total
volatile organics) in the soil. Contaminants migrated into the
groundwater and discharged into a pond and a bog at the site, and
to the north branch of Squankum Brook.

The first operable unit ROD (OU-1 ROD) for the Bog Creek Farm
site was signed on September 30, 1985. Because of the nature of
the contamination at the site, an operable unit approach was used
for remedial action implementation. The OU-1 ROD includes
removing the waste water and sediments from the pond and the bog,
treating the waste water on-site and discharging to the stream,
and excavating and incinerating (either on-site or off-site)the
waste deposits and contaminated soil having greater than 200 ppm
of total volatile organics.

The second operable unit ROD (OU-2 ROD)for Bog Creek Farm, signed
on June 28, 1989, called for installation of a grout curtain,
groundwater extraction, treatment, and reinjection to restore the
Upper Kirkwood aquifer to site-specific cleanup levels, and
excavation and incineration of contaminated sediments from the
north branch of Squankum Brook.

The sediments removed from the north branch of Squankum Brook
were incorporated with the contaminated soils of the first
operable unit and treated on-site in a mobile incinerator. That
work was completed in the fall of 1990. The major component of
OU-2, the groundwater treatment system, was constructed in 1993.
After testing and startup, the Long Term Response Action (LTRA)
began its first full year of operation by August 1994 and was
declared Operational and Functional a year later on August 1,
1995.

Since August 1999, (the end of the 5*^^ year of the ten-year long
LTRA period), EPA has conducted numerous tests and investigations
to determine the most effective method of extracting additional
contaminants from the soil/groundwater matrix. The objective of
the tests and investigations were to evaluate methods for
establishing the groundwater cleanup goals (established in the
OU-2 ROD) thereby reducing the number of years the NJDEP would
have to operate the pump and treatment system after they assume
the operation and maintenance responsibilities for the site;
scheduled for September 2005.



                                                  500201

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

EPA's Emergency Response Team (ERT) along with contractor support
have been assisting Region II in this effort, and after extensive
sampling of both the soil and groundwater, confirmed that the
existing treatment plant (which is performing up to design
specifications) would have to operate for many years to attain
the cleanup goals set under the OU-2 ROD. The primary reason is
that significant soils contamination (up to 16,800 ppm total
VOCs) remain at the Site and in order to achieve site cleanup
goals within a reasonable time frame, ERT concluded that
additional soil remediation would have to be conducted. In
addition, a Remediation System Evaluation (RSE) was completed in
September 2002. The RSE was conducted by a team of expert
hydrogeologists and engineers, independent of the Site,
conducting a third-party evaluation of site operations. The RSE
report recommends that a more aggressive approach to site
remediation of soils is merited based upon the concentration of
contaminants in soil and groundwater detected during the ERT
investigations, as well as the RSE analysis of the projected
life-cycle operating costs of the existing pump and treat system.

In May 2004, the U.S. Army Corp. of Engineers (COE) completed the
"Bog Creek Alternatives and Estimate Evaluations" (May 2004 COE
Analysis) which provides EPA with six alternatives/cost estimates
for additional contaminated soils remediation including both on-
site and off-site soil treatment and disposal options. The May
2004 COE Analysis also includes optimization alternatives for the
groundwater treatment plant, and in-situ dissolved plume
remediation alternatives.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES AND THE BASIS FOR
THOSE DIFFERENCES

The difference between the interim remedy selected in the 1985
OU-1 ROD and the actions described in this ESD relate to the
excavation and disposal of contaminated soil. Other components
of the OU-1 ROD remain the same.

The OU-1 ROD selected an interim remedy requiring the limited
excavation of contaminated soils and either on-site or off-site
incineration of the excavated soils and resulted in the
excavation and on-site incineration of 15,000 cu. yds. (cubic
yards)of soil and sediments at a cost of $14.2 million. The OU-1
ROD establishes that if post-remediation monitoring and modeling
demonstrate that the remedy is not meeting established goals then
additional excavation would be required. The 1989 OU-2 ROD
established groundwater cleanup levels that are based upon the
groundwater contaminant levels allowed for the site under a
permitted discharge to Squankum Brook. Based upon information
available for the OU-2 ROD, including the residual contamination
at the Site, it was estimated that groundwater would reach the


                                                   500202

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

cleanup standards within ten years of pump and treat operations.

The sampling effort conducted by ERT established that an
estimated additional 21,000 cu. yds. of soil is present with
elevated VOC concentrations exceeding the New Jersey Impact to
Groundwater Soil Cleanup Criteria that could potentially impact
the groundwater. These contaminated soils will be removed in
order to achieve groundwater cleanup levels established in the
OU-2 ROD as well as current NJDEP requirements for protection of
groundwater (Maximum Contaminant Levels). Without removal of the
soils the groundwater pump and treatment remedy will not reach
cleanup objectives for the groundwater for many decades. The May
2004 COE Analysis evaluates six alternatives including both on-
site and off-site treatment and disposal options and provides a
cost analysis for each alternative. EPA has selected Alternative
1 which includes excavation and removal of the 21,000 cu. yds. of
contaminated soils at an estimated cost of $5.4 million.

The OU-1 ROD comparison of relative costs for both on-site or
off-site incineration of the contaminated soils versus off-site
disposal indicates that incineration was the more cost-effective
alternative at the time. Off-site disposal in a regulated
landfill, and if required by regulation, off-site incineration of
some portion of the soil is currently more cost-effective then
on-site incineration of the entire estimated 21,000 cu. yds.

Finally, the OU-1 ROD indicates that at the time that the OU-1
ROD was issued, there were concerns regarding landfill capacity
for contaminated soils. Currently, landfill capacity exists to
accept the additional volume of soil that needs to be excavated
and disposed of under this ESD.

SUPPORT AGENCY COMMENTS

The NJDEP concurs with EPA on this modified remedy.

AFFIRMATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

EPA and NJDEP believe that the modified OU-1 remedy remains
protective of human health and the environment, complies with
federal and state requirements that were identified in the ROD
and this ESD as applicable or relevant and appropriate to this
remedial action, and over the long-term is cost effective. In
addition, the revised remedy utilizes permanent solutions and
alternative treatment technologies to the maximum extent
practicable for this site.




                                                      500203

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

PX7BLIC PARTICIPATION ACTIVITIES
In accordance with the NCP, a formal public comment period is not
required when issuing an ESD. However, EPA will announce the
availability of this ESD in the Asbury Park Press. This ESD will
be placed in the Administrative Record for the site.




                                                       ^.:u>^s
William McCabe                              U       JTate
Acting Division Director,
Emergency and Remedial
Response Division




                                                       500204
