LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT, DECISION SUMMARY
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/111116
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: f613060e53da9d8a8739ab94210c21640ea80ef495838f6e22e8f96e5500c0f5
Source PDF pages: 110
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 SDMS Document



                                                    111116




  RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT

          DECISION SUMMARY

        Bog Creek Fann Superfund Site

Howell Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey




 United States Environmental Protection Agency

                   Region n

             New York, New York

                September 2005



                                                 500833

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                                      PAGE

SITE NAME, LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION                       1

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTROTIES                    1

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION                      3

CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES        3

SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS                           4

HUMAN HEALTH RISK ASSESSMENT                               6

EXISTING REMEDY                                            7

SCOPE AND ROLE OF RESPONSE ACTION                          8

BASIS FOR REMEDY MODMCATION                               8

REMEDLiy. ACTION OBJECTIVES                                9

DESCRIPTION OF REMEDL^L ALTERNATIVES                      10

COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES                      14

PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE                                    18

SELECTED REMEDY                                           18

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS                                  20

DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES                      22

APPENDICES

APPENDIX I     FIGURES
APPENDIX n     TABLES
APPENDIX m     ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX
APPENDKIV      STATE CONCURRENCE LETTER
Ai^PENDDCV     RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY


                                                      500834

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT

        BOG CREEK FARM SUPERFUND SITE
HOWELL TOWNSHIP, MONMOUTH COUNTY, NEW JERSEY




UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
                    REGION n
               NEW YORK, NEW YORK

                SEPTEMBER 2005




                                                500835

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               DECLARATION STATEMENT

SITE NAME AND LOCATION

Bog Creek Farm Superfund Site (EPA ID# NJD063157150)
Howell Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey

STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

This decision document presents the Amended Remedy for the contaminated groundwater at the
Bog Creek Farm Superfund Site (the Site) located in Howell Township, Monmouth County, New
Jersey. The original Record of Decision addressing contaminated groundwater at the Bog Creek
Farm Superfund Site was signed on June 28,1989.

The Amended Remedy was selected in accordance with the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and LiabiUty Act, as amended, and to the extent practicable, the
National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan. This decision is based on
the Administrative Record file for the Site.

The State of New Jersey concurs with the amended remedy.

ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE

The response action selected in this Record of Decision Amendment is necessary to protect
pubUc health or welfare or the environmentfi-omactual or threatened release of hazardous
substancesfi-omthe Site into the environment.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY

The Amended Remedy described in this document involves the remediation of groimdwater at
the Site, which is contaminated with volatile organic compoimds (VOCs), semi-volatile organic
compounds (SVOCs), pesticides, and metals. The Amended Remedy calls for a modified
groundwater extraction and treatment system, followed by re-injection of the treated water into
the aquifer. Unlike the groundwater treatment system currently in place, the Amended Remedy
allows for placement and pumping of the groundwater recovery wells to match the post-
excavation Site conditions and to activelyjgumptihemost h i ^ y contaminated areas at the Site.
In addition, if it is determined that residual hot spots in soils remain after the current excavation
phase is completed, the Amended Remedy allows for in situ treatment of the remaining hot spots.
The Amended Remedy will treat and restore groimdwater at the Site so that it meets New Jersey
Groundwater Quality Standards for Class UA Aquifers (see Appendix II, Table 1) and will reduce
Site cleanup time and life-cycle costs compared with the 1989 ROD remedy.




                                                                                           500836

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The major components of the Amended Remedy follow:

•      Groundwater extraction and ex situ treatment to maintain hydrauUc plume control and to
       facilitate contaminant mass removal and aquiferflushingvia focused pimiping and
       effluent re-injection/recharge within plume areas;

•      It may also include one of the following in situ technologies if it is determined that
       residual hot spots remain after the current excavation phase is completed: soil vapor
       extraction/air sparging (SVE/AS), enhanced anaerobic bioremediation (EAB), or in situ
       chemical oxidation (ISCO); and

•      Appropriate maintenance and performance monitoring to ensure the effectiveness of the
       remedy. A p^Epjnmance monitoring program for the Amended Remedy is to be
       developed which evaluates the effectiveness, optimizes the operation parameters,
       determines the parameters for remedy closure, and confirms compUance with the cleanup
       goals.

The groundwater remedy selected in 1989, which consists of groundwater extraction, on-site
treatment, and reinjection to the underlying aquifer(s), will be modified by this Record of
Decision Amendment.

DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

Part 1: Statutory Requirements

The Amended Remedy is protective of human health and the environment, complies with federal
and state requirements that are applicable or relevant and appropriate to the remedial action, is
cost-effective, and utilizes permanent solutions and alternative treatment or resource recovery
technologies to the maximum extent practicable.

Part 2: Statutory Preference for Treatment

The Amended Remedy satisfies the statutory preference for treatment as a principal element of
the remedy.

Part 3: Five-Year Review Requirements

Because this remedy will not result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants
remaining on-site above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, but may
take more than five years to attain the remedial action objectives and cleanup levels for the
groundwater, a policy review may be conducted within five years of construction completion for
the Site to ensure that the remedy is, or will be, protective of himian health and the environment.




                                                                                      500837

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ROD DATA CERTIFICATION CHECKLIST

The following information is included in the Decision Summary section of this Record of
Decision Amendment. Additional information can be foimd in the Administrative Record file
for the Site, the index of which can be found in Appendix HI of this dociunent.

•      Chemicals of concern and their respective concentrations may be found in the "Simimary
       of Site Characteristics" section.

       A discussion of source materials constituting principal threats may be found in the
       '•Principal Threat Waste" section.

       Current and reasonably anticipated future land use assiunptions are discussed in the
       "Current and Potential Future Site and Resource Uses" section.

       Estimated capital, annual operation and maintenance, and total present worth costs are
       discussed in the '^Description of Remedial Altematives" section.

       Key factors that led to selecting the remedy (i.e., how the Amended Remedy provides the
       best balance of tradeoffs with respect to the balancing and modifying criteria,
       emphasizing criteria key to the decision) may be found in the "Comparative Analysis of
       Altematives" and "Statutory Determinations" sections.




George Pavlou, Director                                                Date
                                                                           alia/e^
Emergency and Remedial Response Division
Region n




                                               m
                                                                                      500838

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE NAME. LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION

The Bog Creek Farm Superfimd Site is located in a rural, agricultural and recreational area of
Howell Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey at 579 County Road 547 (see Appendix II,
Figure 1-1). The Site is bordered by two residences to the west, openfieldsto the south and east,
and the north branch of Squankum Brook to the north. Several farms raising horses, nursery
stock, vegetables, grain, sod, andflowersare situated nearby. Allaire State Park, used by golfers,
fisherman, hunters, and equestrians, is located approximately one half mile east of the Site.
There are approximately 900 people living within one mile of the Site.

The Site soil and groimdwat^ are contaminated with volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and a
variety of other contaminants. In addition, nearby Squankum Brook is designated as a New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) Category 1 (CI) Surface Water body,
which eventually discharges to the Manasquan River (also Category 1). Category 1 is a special
level of protection that targets water bodies that provide drinking water, habitat for Endangered
and Threatened species, and popular recreational and/or commercial species, such as trout or
shellfish. Waterways can be designated Category 1 because of exceptional ecological
significance, exceptional water supply significance, exceptional recreational significance,
exceptional shellfish resource, or exceptionalfisheriesresource. The Category 1 designation
provides additional protections that help prevent water quality degradation and discourage
development where it would impair or destroy natural resources and envirormiental quality.

An existing groundwater treatment building and plant are currently located on the Site, as part of
an ongoing EPA remediation (see Appraidix II, Figure 1-2).

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES

Site Operations

VOC contamination in Site soil and groundwater reportedly resultedfi:omthe dumping of
chemical wastes associated with the former property owner's paint manufacturing operations.
During 1973 and 1974, varioxis wastes, including organic solvents, paint residues, lacquer
thinners, animal carcasses, and residential debris, were dumped m open areas and excavated pits
on the eastern part of the 12-acre farmland property. Subsequent investigations revealed two
primary waste areas at the Site. The major area was a Former Waste Trench located
approximately 300 feet south of Squankum Brook in the eastem end of the Site. The trench,
filled with chemicals and debris, was approximately 150 feet long, 40 feet wide and 10 feet deq).
A smaller waste area, containing several buried drums, was found approximately 130 feet east of
the trench in the Former Disposal Area.




                                                -1-
                                                                                    500839

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Site Discovery, State and Federal Response Actions

In July 1977, NJDEP, together with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the
Howell Township Health Department excavated several test pits and trenches at the Bog Creek
Farm Site and tested the surface water, sediments and residential wells. In 1979,fivemonitoring
wells were installed on-site by NJDEP and the Howell Township Health Department. In 1983,
air sampling was conducted by NJDEP.

The Site was added to the National Priorities List (NPL) in 1983. In 1984, EPA conducted field
investigations at the Site. In 1985, EPA issued a Record of Decision (ROD) for the Site to
address these verified sources of contamination. In 1989 and 1990, contaminated soils and
sediments were excavated and incinerated on-site in accordance with the 1985 ROD. In addition,
contaminated waterfi-oma former pond and bog were collected and treated in an aqueous waste
treatment system at the Site.

A second ROD was issued in 1989 in which EPA selected a remedy to address the remaining
groundwater contamination. To protect against contanainated groimdwater discharges to the
north branch of Squankum Brook, a slurry wall was constructed along the brook. In addition, a
pump and treat system was constructed to extract and treat the contaminated groundwater before
re-injecting it back into the groundwater. This treatment system began full operation in August
1995, and is currently in its 10* year of operation. However, despite the source control
excavation and ongoing groimdwater treatment, chemicals of concern in the groimdwater persist
at concentrations exceeding current maximum contaminant levels (MCLs).

EPA has conducted numerous tests and investigations to determine the most effective method of
extracting additional contaminantsfiromthe contaminated aquifer. The objective of the tests and
investigations was to evaluate methods for attaining the groundwater cleanup goals (established
in the Operable Unit (OU) 2 ROD, 1989) so as to reduce the number of years the NJDEP would
have to operate the pump and treatment system after assuming operation and maintenance
responsibilities for the Site. Based upon the results of the tests and investigations, EPA
confirmed that the existing treatment plant (which is performing up to design specifications)
would have to operate for many years (decades) to attain the cleanup goals because significant
sub-surface soil contamination remains at the Site.

In May 2004, EPA and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (COE) completed an analysis which
provided six alternatives/cost estimates for additional contaminated soils cleanup, including both
on-site and off-site soil treatment and disposal options. The May 2004 analysis also included
optimization altematives for the groundwater treatment plant, and in situ cleanup altematives for
the hard to reach soils/groimdwater contaminants.

In response to the COE's report and other groundwater and soil investigations, EPA issued an
Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) in January 2005. The ESD established that an
estimated 21,000 cubic yards of VOC-contaminated soil would need to be excavated in order for

                                               -2-

                                                                                      500840

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

the groundwater treatment remedy to reach its cleanup objectives within a reasonable period of
time. EPA began implementing the scope ofwork outlined in the ESD in May 2005. Full
implementation includes the excavation and off-site shipment of contaminated soils, backfilling,
andfinalrestoration of the excavated areas. These activities are scheduled for completion by May
2006.

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

The Post-Decision Proposed Plan and supporting documentation for the contaminated
groundwater were released to the public on August 15,2005. These documents were made
available to the public at the EPA Administrative Record File Room, 290 Broadway, 18* Floor,
New York, NY; the Town Clerk's Office and attiieHowell Library, 318 Old Tavern Road,
Howell, NJ.

On August 16,2005, EPA issued a notice in the Asburv Park Press, which contained information
relevant to the public comment period for this Site, including the duration of the comment
period, the date of the public meeting and the availability of the administrative record. The
public conmient period began on August 15,2005 and ended on September 13,2005. A public
meeting was held on August 31,2005, at the Howell Township Municipal Building Council
Chambers located at 251 Preventorium Road, Howell Township, Morunouth County, New
Jersey. The purpose of the meeting was to inform local officials and interested citizens about the
Superfund process, to discuss the Post-Decision Proposed Plan, to receive conunents on the Post-
Decision Proposed Plan, and to respond to questionsfi-omarea residents and other interested
parties. In general, the public supported the Agency's proposed amended remedy. Alternative 3;
Groundwater Extraction and Treatment with In Situ Treatment. Responses to comments received
at the public meeting and in writing during the pubhc comment period are included in the
Responsiveness Summary (Appendix V).

CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES

Land Use:

The Site is located in a rural, agricultural and recreational area in Howell Township, New Jersey.
In 2000, the population density of Howell Township was 803 people per square mile (US
Census Bureau 2005). Based on the EPA Site Fact Sheet, there are ^proximately 900 people
Uving within one mile of the Site.

The property is zoned for A.R.E. meaning "Agricultural, Residential and Estate." There is no
future use planned for the Site imder present ownership; however, the Town has recently
acquired the adjacent property to constmct recreational facilities.




                                               -3-
                                                                                  500841

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Groundwater Uses:

The primary groundwater users in the region are private well owners. The private and public
wells located near the Site tap the Kirkwood-Cohansey Aquifer. Groundwaterfiiomthis aquifer
is Class HA, with a primary designated use as potable water and conversion via treatment to
potable water. Secondary uses ofClassEA water include agricultural and industrial use. Two
wells, less than 50 feet in depth, are located on the western portion of the property (upgradient
fix)m the contamination) providing water to the residences and a stable area west of the Site.
Another well of similar depth is located approximately 0.3 mile east of the Site and hydraulically
isolatedfix)mthe contamination by Squankum Brook. The remaining wells are over 350 feet
below ground surface and are hydraulically isolatedfix)mpotentially Site-related contamination.

Site groimdwater discharges to surface water at Squankum Brook, classified by NJDEP as FW2-
NT[C1]. As noted earUer, Squankum Brook is also a Category 1 groundwater-fed streamfi-oma
sole-source aquifer. Designated uses of FW2 waters include both primary and secondary contact
recreation. Primary contact recreation means recreational activities where the human body may
be completely submerged in the water (e.g., swimming, water skiing), while secondary contact
recreation means recreational activities where contact with the water is minimal and where
ingestion of the water is not probable (e.g.,fishingand boating). In addition, FW2-NT is the
classification for non-trout waters: waters not considered suitable for trout, but may be suitable
for many other fish species.

Squankum Brook flows into the Manasquan River about 5,000 feet downstream of the Site. The
Manasquan River is designated for use as a drinking water supply.

SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS

As part of the recent Focused Feasibility Study, groundwater modeling was performed to better
understand the existing hydrogeologic conditions at the Site. A conceptual site model was also
developed to summarize the contamination sources, contaminant transport and fate, and exposure
pathways. In addition, EPA recently completed more soil and groundwater sampling. Soil
sampling around and underneath the existing groimdwater treatment buildings was conducted to
delineate the nature and extent of residual soil contamination. Groundwater sampling was
performed to determine the magnitude of remaining groundwater contamination. The following
sections are based on all of the recent sampling and the modeling completed as part of the FFS.

Groundwater

The Site is underlain by the Kirkwood formation, which is subdivided into the Upper Kirkwood
and Lower Kirkwood. Site contamination has only been identified in the Upper Kirkwood, and it
is believed that the Lower Kirkwood behaves as an aquitard, bounding the depth of, and
preventing downward migration of, contamination. The depth to water across the Site ranges


                                               -4-

                                                                                        500842

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

fit)m 0 feet at the Squankum Brook to approximately 10 feet. The hydraulic conductivity is
estimated at approximately 1 to 6 ft/day within the contaminated area.

Beneath the Kirkwood formation is the Manasquan formation, which is predominantly clayey silt
and acts as a confining layer. Previous investigations have found that contamination is lirnited to
the Upper Kirkwood; therefore, the stratigraphy of the Manasquan formation is not discussed.

Upper Kirkwood

The thickness of the Upper Kirkwood unit varies, increasing fit)m 10 feet thick near the north
branch of Squankum Brook to approximately 30 feet thick near the former disposal areas. The
upper unit is predominantly very fine tofinesand with some silty sands and coarser materials.
The predominant flow of groundwater in the Upper Kirkwood is in a northeasterly dirwtion in
the area of the Bog Creek Site toward the previous waste trenches and then toward the north
branch of Squankum Brook. The groundwater then discharges into the north branch of
Squankum Brook, which serves as a barrier for groundwater in the Upper Kirkwood. Any
groundwater contaminants derivedfix)mthe Site will flow into the north branch of the Squaiikum
Brook. This is confirmed by groimdwater sampling data.

Lower Kirkwood

The Lower Kirkwood is relatively uniform in thickness, and is estimated to be approximately 30
feet thick across the entire Site. The lower unit consists of silty sands, silts, and clays.
Groimdwater flow in the Lower Kirkwood is to the east with discharge into the Manasquan River
(over a mile to the northeast).

NatureandExtentof Groundwater Contamination

Based on 2003 groundwater sampling results, the Site remains significantly contaminated witii a
variety of VOCs, including chlorinated VOC and petroleum hydrocarbon contaminants, hi
particular, the following compounds and maximum concentrations were detected: 1,2-
dichloroethane (DCA)30,000 micrograms per Uter (ng/1), vinyl chloride 590 jigA,
benzene 8,800 ^igA,tiichloroethene(TCE) 520 ^gA, cis-l,2-dichloroethene (DCE)8,300 ng/1,
 1,2,4-tiimethylbenzene 1,600 jigA, toluene 58,000 ng/1, tetrachloroethene (PCE) 590 ^g/l,
 1,1,2-trichloroethane (TCA) 640 ^g/l, 1,1,1-tiichloroeihane 260 ^g/l, 2,4-methylphenol 3,900
jig/1, phenol 1,900 ^g/l, and lead 25 jig/l. Table 2 presents a summary of 2002 groundwater data
which is characteristic of the groundwater contamination at the Site.

The groundwater contamination within the Upper Kirkwood appears to be centralized in two
"lobes" (see Appendix n. Figures 1-3 and 1-4). The west lobe is centered approximately 120 feet
west oftiietreatment plant. This lobe is roughly 150 feet across and extends north to the brook.
The east lobe is located just east of the treatment plant. This lobe is roughly 120 feet across and
is more elongated than the west lobe. Sample results also indicate there are a few smaller hot
spots present in addition to the primary lobes. The presence of light non-aqueous-phase liquid
                                               -5-

                                                                                500843

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

(LNAPL) appears likely in some areas. This is based on a comparison of VOC concentrations in
groundwater relative to the saturation concentrations, primarily for benzene and toluene. The
vertical extent of groundwater contamination in both lobes is estimated to be less than 30 feet
below ground surface.

In addition, the results show that several chemicals of potential concern (COPCs) have been
detected in the vicinity of Squankum Brook, north of the existing slurry wall. The slurry wall
was installed as part of the ongoing groundwater remediation selected in the 1989 ROD to
protect discharge to the Brook. It is beUeved that this contamination was aheady present prior to
constmction of the slurry wall,

HUMAN HEALTH RISK ASSESSMENT

A streamlined Human Health Risk Assessment (HHRA) was performed as part of the recent FFS.
It supplements the 1988 baseline risk assessment prepared for the Bog Creek Site. The objective
of the streamlined HHRA was to assess whether chemicals in addition to the compounds
identified in the 1989 ROD are a potential threat to human health and need to be addressed by the
cleanup remedy.

As part of the streamlined risk assessment, COPCs were identified through atieredscreening
process. In the first tier of screening, the maximimi detected concentrations of COPCs in the
groimdwater, surface water, and sediment were compared torisk-basedscreening values. Risk-
based screening values were used (Region 9 Preliminary Remediation Goals), which are health
protective and equivalent to a cancer risk of 1 x 10"* or a hazard index of 0.1. Chemicals retained
as COPCsfi-omTier I were evaluated further in Tier II with refined assumptions to reduce
uncertainty in the screening process and help prioritize COPCs to be addressed in the cleanup
remedy.

Tier I identified 52 COPCs in groundwater, 5 COPCs in sediment, and 4 COPCs in surface
water. These are chemicals that were detected at least once at a concentration above the EPA
Region 9 PRGs for tq> water or residential soil (cancerrisk= IxlO"* or hazard quotient of 0.1).
Tier n considered thefi-equencyof detection, background concentrations, and screening levels
adjusted to a cancer risk of 1x10'^ and a non-cancer hazard of 0.1. Tier n identified 43 COPCs in
groimdwater and no COPCs in sediment or surface water.

Of the COPCs determined to be the risk drivers (those that trigger the need for cleanup) for
groundwater in the 1989 ROD, trans-1,2-dichloroethene, copper and zinc are no longer chemicals
of potential concern for human health. While most of the COPCs identified by the streamlined
risk assessment are VOCs, several SVOCs, pesticides, and metals have also been identified. The

VOCs determined to be of greatest concern in the 2005 streamlined HHRA (ranked by ratio of
concentration to screening value) and their corresponding detected concentration ranges are:

        1,2-dichloroethane (DCA)                     1.1-30,000 jig/l
                                               -6-
                                                                                         500844

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       vinyl chloride                                1.7 - 590 jig/1
       benzene                                       1.9-8,800 ng/1
       trichloroethene (TCE)                         1.0 - 520 jig/1
       cis-1,2-dichloroethene (DCE)                  1.7 - 8,300 \ig/\
       1,2,4-tiimethylbenzene                        1.1 -1,600 ^ig/l
       toluene                                       1.2-58,000 ng/1
       teti-achloroethene (PCE)                      1.3-590^g/l
       l,l,2-tiichloroethane(TCA)                    l.l-640^g/l

The risk drivers that were identified in the 1989 ROD and were retained as COPCs in the
streamlined risk assessment are: 1,1,1-trichloroethane, toluene, 2,4-metiiylphenol, phenol, and
lead.

A complete list of COPCs retained as a resuU of the Tier II screening process can be located in
Appendix H, Table 1. The results of Tier I and II screening process for groundwater are
summarized in Appendix II, Table 3,

EXISTING REMEDY

Groundwater

The existing groundwater remedy is a pump and treat system that is a modification of the plant
originally used to treat water generated during the excavation of the trench, pond, and bog in 1990.
The system called for in the 1989 ROD consists of an extraction system, treatment plant iex situ
treatment), and re-injection gallery. The extraction system operates continuously at a rate of 25 to
30 gallons per minute (gpm), and the treatment plant is operated in batch mode on weekdays.

The extraction system is comprised of:

       Slurry wall aligned along the Squankum Brook's southern bank
       33 extraction wells aligned inside (upgradient) of the slurry wall
       One common manifold attached to all wells
       Vacuum extraction pump
       Influent tank

The treatment plant is comprised of:

       pH adjustment
       Metals removal
       Sand filtration
       Two packed-tower air strippers in series
       Liquid-phase and vapor-phase granular activated carbon (IPGAC and VPGAC)
       Effluent taiJcs

                                               -7-

                                                                                    500845

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Sou

EPA recently completed soil sampling around and underneath the existing treatment buildings and
former disposal areas to delineate the extent of remaining soil contamination. Based on these
investigations, EPA has undertaken the removal of up to 21,000 cubic yards of VOC-contaminated
soil. This activity is scheduled for completion by May 2006.

The Site background information and remedial alternative analyses contained in this Record of
Decision are based on the Site conditions prior to the completion of the soil removal action
currently underway. Because this action will result in significant removal of groundwater
contaminant source materialsfiromthe Site, future investigations (post excavation evaluations)
will be necessary before full implementation of an alternative to expedite cleanup of the
remaining groimdwater contamination.

SCOPE AND ROLE OF RESPONSE ACTION

The contaminated groimdwater at the Bog Creek Farm Site has been the focus of an ongoing
groundwater extraction and treatment remedy since 1995. However, aimual monitoring data and
evaluations indicated that the existing remedy would not reach groimdwater cleanup standards in
the ten-year timefi-ameprojected in the 1989 ROD. Accordingly, a Focused Feasibility Study
(FFS) was performed to develop a better understanding of current Site conditions and
groimdwater contamination, and to evaluate alternative remedies to expedite Site cleanup. The
Post-Decision Proposed Plan released in August 2005 focused on the persisting groundwater
contamination and described the cleanup altematives evaluated as part of the FFS, as well as
EPA's preferred altemative. The preferred remedy will use a groundwater pump and treat
system, and, if determined to be effective, in situ groimdwater treatment to expedite the removal
of residual hotspots if they remain after the excavation is completed.

BASIS FOR REMEDY MODIFICATION

Based on recent groundwater sampling, the Site remains significantly contaminated with a
variety of volatile organic contaminants, including chlorinated VOCs and petroleum hydrocarbon
contaminants. Select semi-volatile organic compoimds (SVOCs), metals, and pesticides have
also been detected at some sampling locations. The groundwater contamination s^pears to be
centralized in two areas on the Site with a few smaller hot spots present. The presence of light
non-aqueous-phase liquid appears likely in some areas.

The existing groundwater remedy is a pump and treat system. The remedy consists of an
extraction system, treatment plant (ex situ treatment), and re-injection gallery. The design and
configuration of the pumping wells does not allow forflexibilityin pumping rates or pumping
selected wells, and therefore does not address the centralized areas of groimdwater contamination
efficiently. Continuation of this system will extend the need for treatment for a significant period
of time and increase overall life-cycle costs.


                                               -8-
                                                                                       500846

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Conversely, the Amended Remedy will allow for placement and pumping of the groimdwater
recovery wells to match the expected, post-excavation Site conditions and to actively pump in the
most highly contaminated areas of the Site. Ifit is determined that residual hot spots in soils
remain after the current excavation phase and post excavation evaluation is completed, the
Amended Remedy provides for in situ treatment of the remaining hot spots as needed. In
addition, the Amended Remedy will treat and restore groundwater at the Site so that it meets
New Jersey Groundwater Quality Standards for Class HA Aquifers (see Appendix E, Table 1).
The Amended Remedy will reduce Site cleanup time and life-cycle costs compared with the 1989
ROD remedy,

REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES

Remedial action objectives (RAOs) are specific goals to protect human health and the
enviroimaent. These objectives are based on available information and standards such as
applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs) and impropriate criteria,
advisories, and guidance (i.e.. To Be Considered or "TBCs") andrisk-basedaction levels
established based on the risk assessment. Remedial action objectives developed for the
groimdwater considers all identified Site concerns and contaminant pathways, and are Usted
below:

•      Prevent exposure to contaminated groimdwater.

•      Prevent/minimize contaminated groimdwater discharge to the north branch of Squankum
       Brook.

•      Reduce Site cleanup time and life cycle costs.

•      Restore contaminated groundwater to drinking water standards within a reasonable time-
       fi^me.

The ARARs identified in the 2005 FFS are the New Jersey Groundwater Quality Standards for
Class HA Aquifers (See Appendix n. Table 1). The designated use of all Class II groundwater is
to provide potable water using conventional treatment. Both existing and potential potable water
uses are included. Class IIA criteria specify the highest level of contaminant that is allowed in
drinking water. These standards are promulgated, apply to public water systems, and are
intend^ to protect human health by limiting the levels of contaminants in drinking water. These
drinking water standards are appropriate cleanup goals since Squankum Brook flows into the
Manasquan River, which is designated as a drinking water supply. The 1988 Baseline Risk
Assessment for the Site concluded that none of the exposure pathways evaluated was considered
significant. There was initial concem that nearby residents could be exposed to groundwater
contamination via local wells. Upon further analysis, the pathway was not considered to be
significant, because the contaminated portion of the aquifer is not used for drinking purposes,
and Site conditions indicate that the groundwater contamination is confined by the Lower


                                               -9-
                                                                                500847

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Kirkwood and the north branch of Squankum Brook, as described in the Summary of Site
Characteristics section above. However, the contaminant levels in groimdwater are above
ARARs, and the NJDEP Groundwater Protection Strategy requires the protection of this natural
resource against adverse impacts to the envirormient as well as to potential future users. In
addition, Wstoric discharge of the Upper Kirkwood to the north branch of the Squankum Brook is
partially responsible for environmental degradation. The complete restoration of groundwater is
the primary objective of the Amended Remedy.

DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

Based upon the results of the Focused FeasibiUty Study, EPA evaluated three cleanup
altematives that address the groimdwater contamination at the Bog Creek Farm Superfund Site.
These altematives are summarized below and are described in detail in the Focused FeasibiUty
Study Report. The screening process through which these altematives were developed is also
described in the FFS report. The timefi-amesbelow for constmction do not include the time for
remedial design or the time to procure contractors.

Altemative 1 : No Action

Estimated Coital Cost:                                                                         $0
Estimated Armual Operation and Maintenance
(O&M) Cost:                                                                                    $0
Total Estimated Present Worth:                                                                 $0

CERCLA and the National Contingency Plan (NCP) require the evaluation of No Action as a
baseline to which other altematives are compared. No remedial actions or institutional controls
would be implemented as part of this remedy. While there is an on-going EPA remediation at the
Site, the No Action altemative evaluated in the FFS assumes the existing groimdwater remedy would
be terminated.

Because this altemative would result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants remaining
at the Site above levels that allow for unlimited use and imrestricted exposure, EPA would review
such action at least everyfiveyears.

Alternative 2: Groundwater Extraction and Treatment

Estimated Capital Costs:                                                             $1,612,000
Estimated Annual O&M Years 1-2                                                     $613,000/year
Estimated Annual O&M Years 3-10                                                    $403,000/year
Estimated Annual O&M Years 11-30                                                   $298,000/year
Total Estimated Present Worth                                                        $6,400,000
Constmction Time                                                                         2 years



                                              -10-
                                                                                     500848

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Altemative 2 reUes on hydraulic control of the contaminated groundwater, ex situ treatment of the
extracted groundwater, and subsequent re-injection/recharge ofthe treated groundwater to the aquifer
via the existing re-injection trenches upgradient of the contaminant areas. This configuration relies
on a continualflushingof the contaminated zone to achieve Site cleanup levels.

Groimdwater extraction would be accompUshed by the installation of multiple new extraction
wells within the contaminated plume areas, upgradient of the existing extraction wells and
Squankum Brook (see Appendix 11, Figure 1-5). A total of 17 new extraction wells were
estimated for evaluation purposes; well numbers and locations will befinalizedduring tiie
remedial design.

Due to the extent of contamination and presence of BTEX (benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and
xylenes), chlorinated VOC, and SVOC contaminants, the extracted groundwater would be
subject to a variety of treatment options prior to re-injection. The exact components of the new
treatment train would befinalizedduring the remedial design, based on the results of pilot testing
and treatability study data collected at that time. For the purposes of this Record of Decision, it
was assumed that the groundwater treatment system would consist of the following steps, fcom
start to finish: 1) influent flow equalization; 2) metals and particulate treatment by green sand
filtration; 3) air stripping; 4) off-gas treatment by vapor-phase carbon and potassium
permanganate zeolite; and 5) groimdwater polishing for SVOCs by liquid-phase carbon
treatment. The purpose of each of these steps is summarized below. It is estimated that
constmction and initial startup of Altemative 2 could be completed within two years.

The equalization tank would serve to stabilize the combined influent flow rate and water quaUty
to the treatment plant, so that consistent operational settings can be generally maintained for
treatment. The green sand filter unit would serve to remove dissolved and suspended metals and
total suspended solids viafiltrationand oxidation. This pretreatment step would reduce O&M
requirements associated with air stripping. Air strippers would serve to reduce the groundwater
VOC concentrations to levels acceptable for groundwater discharge. Off-gas treatment of the air
stripper effluent would be required until total off-gas VOC emissionsfi-omall components
decrease below NJDEP air discharge criteria. A maximum VOC emissions rate of 2.2 lbs per
day was assumed for evaluation purposes based on guidance provided by NJDEP. Liquid-phase
granular activated carbon (LPGAC) would be used to remove SVOC contaminantsfix)mthe
groimdwater effluent after the air stripper, prior to discharge back into the aquifer via the existing
upgradient re-injection trenches. LPGAC treatment would eventually become unnecessary
during the course of remediation as the SVOC concentrations decline.

The remedy duration for this altemative is dependent on influent groimdwater quality
concentrations at the time the remedy is implemented. As mentioned previously, the ongoing
soil cleanup should significantly reduce contaminant concentrations entering the groimdwater.
However, based on the 2003 concentrations assumed in the FFS, it is expected that Altemative 2
may take up to 30 years to remediate the Site.



                                                -11-
                                                                                   500849

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

For cost evaluation purposes, it was assumed that long-term monitoring of groimdwater for
COPCs will be performed semi-aimually for thefirstthree years after the system is operating.
After three years of semi-annual monitoring, EPA would conduct an evaluation in consultation
with NJDEP to either continue with semi-annual monitoring or to develop a more appropriate
routine monitoring schedule. The purpose of the monitoring is to confirm achievement of RAOs
and track progress of the remedial action until cleanup goals are achieved. The long-term
monitoring program will befinalizedduring the remedial design.

Because this remedy will not result in hazardous substances, pollutants or contaminants
remaining on-site above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure after
implementation of the remedy, a statutoryfive-yearreview is not required.

Alternative 3: Groundwater Extraction and Treatment with In Situ Treatment

Estimated Capital Costs:                                                                  $2,272,000
Estimated Annual O&M Years 1-2                                                          $811,000/year
Estimated Annual O&M Years 3-10                                                         $543,000/year
Estimated Annual O&M Years 11 -30                                                       $298,000/year
Total Estimated Present Worth                                                             $8,200,000
Constmction Time                                                                              2 years

Altemative 3 includes Groundwater Extraction and Treatment, as described under Altemative 2,
along with in situ treatment to augment contaminant mass removal. Ex situ treatment provides
reduction in toxicity, mobility, and/or volume of contaminants following extraction of the
contaminated groimdwaterfi-omthe subsurface. In situ treatment takes place below the ground,
within the contaminated area, destroying or converting groundwater and soil contaminants to less
toxic compounds or forms. Multiple in situ technologies were retained during the screening
process for this altemative based upon their potential to faciUtate achievement of remedial action
objectives when appUed individually or in sequential combination. Bench and/or pilot testing of
these technologies are required to better assess their site-specific feasibility. Such testing is often
performed during the remedial design phase and is used to support detailed design decisions for
full-scale implementation. The ex situ pump and treat system implemented under Altemative 3
may differ slightly depending upon which in situ technology is selected since each may alter the
chemistry of the groundwater in different ways.

For cost evaluation purposes, it was assumed that long-term monitoring of groimdwater for
COPCs will be performed semi-aimually for thefirstthree years after the system is operating.
After three years of semi-aimual monitoring, EPA will conduct an evaluation in consultation with
NJDEP to either continue with semi-aimual monitoring or to develop another appropriate routine
monitoring schedule. The purpose of the monitoring is to confirm achievement of RAOs and
track progress of the remedial action until cleanup goals are achieved. The long-term monitoring
requirements will befinalizedduring the remedial design.



                                                -12-
                                                                                            500850

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Multiple design configurations were developed in the FFS to illustrate how groundwater
extraction and treatment may be combined with each in situ technology retained for
consideration under this alternative. The cost analysis, however, is based upon the assumption
that Soil Vapor Extraction/Air Sparging (SVE/AS) would be used alone for in situ treatment.
Under this assumption, it is estimated that constmction of Altemative 3 could be completed
within two years. All of the retained technologies are surmnarized below.

SVE/AS

SVE/AS would be used to expedite reduction of groundwater contaminants below cleanup
criteria via physical and aerobic biological processes. All VOC contaminants would be subject
to enhanced physical vapor-phase extraction and recovery associated with SVE/AS. SVE would
occur at the groimdwater extraction wells to minimize constmction costs. Approximately 25 AS
wells would be installed within the plume area using a grid system (see Appendix II, Figure 1-6).
AS would be performed using an air compressor. Contaminated vapors recovered by SVE wells
would be subjected to ex situ treatment to reduce VOC contaminant concentrations below
NJDEP air discharge criteria before discharge to the atmosphere.

Groundwater monitoring would be performed prior to initiating SVE/AS treatment to estabUsh
the baseline conditions for comparison! Subsequent rounds of groundwater monitoring would be
performed to assess the performance and progress of the technology and to support future
decisions regarding SVE/AS system operation and optimization.

EAB (Enhanced Anaerobic Bioremediation)

EAB would be used to expedite the reduction of groundwater contaminants below cleanup
criteria via anaerobic biodegradation processes. This technology would predominantiy target
chlorinated ethane and ethene contaminants, including 1,1,1-TCA, TCE, cis-l,2-DCE, 1,1-DCE,
and vinyl chloride. Implementation of EAB would involve multiple injections of amendments
(e.g., electron donor, nutrients, and/or microbes) into the contaminated aquifer. The initial
injection event would use a grid system with approximately 44 injection points (see ^pendix H,
Figure 1-7). Subsequent injection events would roughly occur every 0.5 to 3 years, depending
upon the type of substrate used, and would target areas where groimdwater contaminants persist
above cleanup goals.

Groundwater monitoring would be performed prior to the initial EAB injection to establish the
baseline conditions for comparison. Subsequent rounds of groimdwater monitoring would be
performed after each EAB injection to assess the performance and progress of the technology and
to support decisions regarding subsequent EAB injection events.

ISCO (In situ Chemical Oxidation)

ISCO would be used to expedite reduction of groimdwater contaminants below cleanup criteria.
This technology would primarily target dissolved-phase chlorinated VOCs and petroleum
                                              -13-
                                                                                500851

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

hydrocarbon contaminants. ISCO would involve multiple injections of a chemical oxidant, such
as Fenton's Reagent, into the contaminated aquifer. This reagent has been shown to be effective
for oxidizing the contaminants present at this Site. The initial injection event would be
completed using a grid system with multiple injection points. A total of 155 points were
estimated for evaluation purposes (see Appendix n. Figure 1-8). It is expected that subsequent
injection events would occur every 6 to 12 months and would target areas where groundwater
contaminants persist above cleanup goals.

Groundwater monitoring would be performed prior to the initial ISCO injection to establish the
baseline conditions for comparison. Subsequent rounds of groundwater monitoring would be
performed after each ISCO injection to assess the performance and progress of the technology
and to support decisions regarding subsequent ISCO injection events.

Because this remedy will not result in hazardous substances, pollutants or contaminants
remaining on-site above levels that allow for unlimited use and imrestricted exposure after
implementation of the remedy, a statutoryfive-yearreview is not required.

COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES

In selecting a remedy, EPA considers the factors set out in Section 121 of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C.
§9261, by conducting a detailed analysis of the viable remedial altematives pursuant to the NCP,
40 CFR §300.430(e)(9) and Office of SoUd Waste and Emergency Response (OSWER) Directive
9355.3-01. The detailed analysis consists of an assessment of the altematives against each of
nine evaluation criteria and comparative analysis focusing upon the relative performance of each
altemative against those criteria. The results of this analysis are summarized in Appendix n.
Table 4.

Threshold Criteria - The first two criteria are known as "threshold criteria" because they are
the minimum requirements that each response measure must meet in order to be eligible for
selection as a remedy.

1. Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment
This criteria addresses whether each altemative provides adequate protection ofhuman health
and the environment and describes how risks posed through each exposure pathway are
eliminated, reduced, or controlled, through treatment, engineering controls, and/or institutional
controls.

Altemative 1, The No Action Altemative, would not provide protection of human healtii or the
enviromnent, because contamination would persist in the groundwater, and potential exposure to
contaminated groundwater would not be restricted. Altemative 2 would provide protection of
human health and the envirormient, as the contaminated plume would be under hydraulic control,
contaminant concentrations would reduce over time, and aquiferflushingwould help to restore
groimdwater quality. Altemative 3 would also provide protection of human health and the


                                              -14-
                                                                                    500852

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

environment. In addition to providing hydraulic control and aquifer flushing, concentrations of
contaminants could be significantly reduced during the initial years of operation if m situ
treatment proves applicable. However, groundwater extraction and treatment may still be
required for up to 30 years of operation in order to meet the groundwater cleanup criteria.

2. Compliance with applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs)
Section 121(d) of CERCLA and NCP §300.430(f)(l)(ii)(B) require that remedial actions at
CERCLA sites at least attain legally applicable or relevant and appropriate Federal and State
requirements, standards, criteria and limitations which are collectively referred to as "ARARs,"
unless such ARARs are waived under CERCLA Section 121(d)(4).

Applicable requirements are those cleanup standards, standards ofcontrol, and other
substantive requirements, criteria, or limitations promulgated under Federal environmental or
State environmental orfacility siting laws that specifically address a hazardous substance, a
pollutant, contaminant, remedial action, location, or other circumstance found at a CERCLA
site. Only the State standards that are identified by a state in a timely manner and that are more
stringent than Federal requirements may be applicable. Relevant and appropriate requirements
are those clean-up standards, standards of control, and other substantive requirements, criteria,
or limitations promulgated under Federal environmental or State environmental orfacility siting
laws that, while not "applicable" to a hazardous substance, pollutant, contaminant, remedial
action, location, or other circumstance at a CERCLA site, address problems or situations
sufficiently similar to those encountered at the CERCLA site that their use is well-suited to the
particular site. Only those State standards that are identified in a timely manner and are more
stringent than Federal requirements may be relevant and appropriate.

 Compliance with ARARs addresses whether a remedy will meet all of the applicable or relevant
and appropriate requirements ofFederal and State environmental statutes or provides a basis
for invoking a waiver.

Actions taken at any Superfund site must meet all ARARs of federal and state law, or provide
grounds for invoking a waiver of these requirements. These include chemical-specific, which are
health- or risk-based concentration limits; location-specific, which are based on the geographical
location of the site and its surroundings; and action-specific, which are controls on particular
types of remedial activities.

Altemative 1 will not meet chemical-specific ARARs for contaminated groundwater discharge to
surface water or groundwater quality.
                                             «
Under Altematives 2, contaminant concentrations are expected to decrease over time; however,
chemical-specific ARARs for groundwater quality may not be met within the estimated 30-year
timefiame.




                                                 -15-
                                                                                500853

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Under Altemative 3, contaminant concentrations are expected to decrease significantly during the
initial years ofthe remedial action as a result of/wjift/treatment. Groundwater extraction and
treatment may be required for up to 30 years to meet the chemical-specific ARARs. Under bofli
Altematives 2 and 3, long-term monitoring would be conducted to assess the degree of
compliance achieved over time. Treatment plant and well constmction would meet location-
specific ARARs protective of wetiands andfloodplainsfor Altematives 2 and 3. V£^)or and
groundwater effluent dischargesfiromthe ex situ treatment system would meet corresponding
NJDEP action-specific ARARs for both Altematives 2 and 3. Under Altemative 3, in situ
treatment would be conducted to meet action-specific ARARs. NJDEP and/or local permit
equivalencies may potentially be required for the following: 1) well installation, 2) general
constmction, 3) groundwater allocation, 4) discharge of treated groundwater effluent to aquifer,
 and 5) off-gas discharge to ambient air for Altematives 2 and 3.

Primary Balancing Criteria - The nextfivecriteria, criteria 3 through 7, are known as
"primary balancing criteria." These criteria are factors with which tradeoffs between response
measures are assessed so that the best option will be chosen, given the site-specific data and
conditions.

3. Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence
Long-term effectiveness arui permanence refers to expected residual risk and the ability of a
remedy to maintain reliable protection of human health arui the environment over time, once
cleanup levels have been met This criterion includes the consideration of residual risk that will
remain on site following remediation and the adequacy and reliability of controls.

Altemative 1 would not reduce risk in the long term, since the contaminants would not be
controlled or destroyed. Since both Altematives 2 and 3 would be effective for hydrauUc control,
both mitigate risks of off-site migration of contaminants. It is expected that Altemative 2 would
provide a gradual reduction in contaminant concentrations and the associated residual risks.
Altemative 3 would reduce contaminant concentrations and the associated risks more
significantly during the initial years of operation.

Both Altematives 2 and 3 are considered adequate and reUable, since both consist of a groundwater
extraction and treatment component, which is a proven technology, to maintain hydrauUc control of
the groundwater contamination. Long-term groundwater monitoring would be performed over the
course of the remedy implementation to assess the degree of remedy effectiveness over time. The
in situ component of Altemative 3 may provide further reUabiUty to the remedy, as it more
aggressively targets contamination within the aquifer. However, due to uncertainty associated with
in situ treatment, pilot testing would be required prior to remedy installation to determine the most
appropriate treatment technologies/approach.

4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility or Volume (TMV) of Contaminants Through Treatment
Reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment refers to the anticipated
performance of the treatment technologies that may be included as part of a remedy.

                                               -16-
                                                                                         500854

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Altemative 1 would not reduce TMV through treatment, as no active treatment of contaminated
groundwater occurs. Altemative 2 would reduce contaminant mobiUty by providing hydrauUc
control. Gradual reduction in toxicity and volume of contamination is expected through ex situ
treatment. Altemative 3 would also reduce contaminant mobiUty via hydrauUc plume control. In
addition, it could significantly reduce contaminant toxicity and volume via in situ treatment if
Site conditions prove favorable.

5. Short-term Effectiveness
Short-term effectiveness addresses the period of time needed to implement the remedy and any
adverse impacts that may be posed to workers, the community and the environment during
construction and operation of the remedy until cleanup levels are achieved.

For Altemative 1, protection of the community and workers is not appUcable, since no remedial
action occurs. Altematives 2 and 3 would require well installation and treatment plant
constmction, but impacts to the coirmiunity would not be significant as the surrounding area is
predominantly rural. Workers would be protected through the use of air monitoring, engineering
controls, and appropriate personal protective equipment.

6. Implementability
Implementability addresses the technical and administrative feasibility of a remedyfrom design
through construction and operation. Factors such as availability ofservices and materials,
administrative feasibility, and coordination with other governmental entities are also considered.

Since it requires no action, Altemative 1 is technically and administratively the easiest to
implement. Altemative 2 is the second easiest to implement, as the technical feasibiUty of pump
and treat systems is well established. Altemative 3 is implementable as well, as in situ treatment
of groundwater has received widespread use. Altemative 3 would require pilot studies to siq>port
detailed design decisions. Regulatory/permitting requirements for Altematives 2 and 3 are not
expected to be unduly burdensome.

7. Cost
Includes estimated capital and O&M costs, and net present worth value of capital and O&M
costs.
Altemative 1 has no cost. The total estimated present worth cost is $6,400,000 for Altemative 2
and $8,200,000 for Altemative 3.

Modifying Criteria - The final two evaluation criteria, criteria 8 and 9, are called "modifying
criteria " because new information or commentsfromthe state or the community on the
Proposed Plan may modify the preferred remedy and cause another response measure to be
considered.



                                              -17-
                                                                                    500855

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

8. State/Support Agency Acceptance
Indicates whether, based on its review of the RI/FS reports and the Proposed Plan, the state
supports, opposes, and/or has identified any reservations with the selected response measure.

The State of New Jersey concurs with the Selected Remedy, Altemative 3.

9. Community Acceptance
Summarizes the public's general response to the proposed altemative and other information
described in the Proposed Plan and the RI/FS reports. This assessment includes determining
which of the response measures the community supports, opposes, and/or has reservations
about

During the public comment period,tiiecommunity expressed no disagreement with the selection
of Altemative 3. The attached Responsiveness Summary summarizes tiie community comments
on the Post-Decision Proposed Plan.

PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE

The NCP establishes an expectation that EPA will use treatment to address the principal threats
posed by a site wherever practicable (NCP Section 300.430(a)(l)(iii)(A)). Identifying principal
threat wastes combines concepts of both hazard and risk. In general, principal threat wastes are
those source materials considered to be highly toxic or highly mobile that generally cannot be
contained in a reliable manner or would present a significant risk to human health or the
enviromnent should exposure occur. Conversely, non-principal threat wastes are those source
materials that generally can be reUably contained and that would present only a low risk m the
event of exposure. The maimer in which principal threats are addressed generally will determine
whether the statutory preference for treatment as a principal element is satisfied.

EPA considers the residual VOC soil contamination, and the benzene and toluene LNAPL
groimdwater contamination at the Site to meet the definition of "principal threat wastes," since
both constitute source materials that continue to release toxic and mobile VOC contaminants to
groundwater. As previously stated, EPA is in the process of removing up to 21,000 cubic yards
of VOC-contaminated soilfi-omthe Site. The action chosen in this ROD Amendment, together
with the on-going soil removal action, will meet the "principal threat" waste expectation
described above.

SELECTED REMEDY

Based upon consideration of the results of the Site investigation, the requirements of CERCLA,
the detailed analysis of the response measures, and pubUc comments, EPA and the State of New
Jersey have determined that Altemative 3, Groundwater Extraction and Treatment with the
potential to use In Situ Treatment as needed, is the appropriate Amended Remedy for addressing
the contaminants in Site groimdwater. The selected altemative, Altemative 3, for cleanup of the
contaminated groundwater consists of the following components.
                                             -18-
                                                                                    500856

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

•      Design and constmction of a new groimdwater extraction and treatment system to
       maintain hydrauUc plume control and to faciUtate contaminant mass removal and aquifer
       flushing via focused pumping and effluent re-injection/recharge;

•      It may also include one ofthe following mjz/« technologies: soil vapor extraction/air
       sparging (SVE/AS), enhanced anaerobic bioremediation (EAB), or in situ chemical
       oxidation (ISCO), ifit is determined tiiat residual hot spots remain after the current soil
       excavation phase is completed; and

•      Appropriate maintoiance and performance monitoring to ensure the effectiveness of the
       remedy. A performance monitoring program for the Amended Remedy is to be
       developed which evaluates the effectiveness, optimizes the operation parameters,
       determines the parameters for remedy closure and confirms compUance with the cleanup
       goals.

Along with Altemative 2, Altemative 3 is protective of human health and the enviromnent while
the in situ option holds the advantage of more significantly reducing contaminant levels during
the initial years of operation. Altemative 3 provides long-term effectiveness and reliabiUty by
maintaining hydraulic control. Altemative 3 also compUes with chemical-, location-, and action-
specific ARARs for the Site. The primary advantage of Altemative 3 is itsflexibiUty.fftiie
results of the groundwater pre-design investigation, to be performed following completion of the
on-going soil excavation, indicate that in situ treatment, such as SVE/AS, will appreciably
shorten the cleanup time for the pump and treat, that option will be available without the need for
an ESD or ROD amendment.

The estimated cost of Altemative 3 is $8,200,000. A smmnary of the estimated remedy cost for
Altemative 3 is included as Table 5 of this ROD Amendment. The information in the cost
estimate summary table is based on the best available information regarding the anticipated scope
of the remedial altemative. Changes in the cost elements are likely to occur as a result of new
information and data collected during the engineering design of the remedial altemative. Major
changes may be documented in a memorandum in the Administrative Record file, an Explanation
of Significant Differences, or a ROD amendment. This is an order-of-magnitude engineering
cost estimate that is expected to be within +50 to -30 percent of the actual project cost.

Following the determination that the groimdwater extraction and treatment system is operational
and functional, there will be a ten-year long term remedial action (LTRA) period.

EPA will evaluate the need for an institutional control, such as a Classification Exception Area,
Deed Notice, or designation of a WeU Restriction Area.

Based on information currently available, EPA believes the Preferred Altemative meets the
threshold criteria and provides the best balance of tradeoffs among the other altematives with
respect to the balancing and modifying criteria. EPA expects the Preferred Altemative to satisfy
the statutory requirements of CERCLA § 121(b), as discussed below.
                                               -19-
                                                                                   500857

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS
As previously noted. Section 121(b)(1) of CERCLA mandates that a remedial action must be
protective of human health and the environment, be cost effective, and utilize permanent
solutions and altemative treatment or resource recovery technologies to the maximum extent
practicable. Section 121(b)(1) also estabhshes a preference for remedial actions which employ
treatment to permanently and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity, or mobiUty of the
hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants at the Site. Section 121(d) of CERCLA
further specifies that a remedial action must attain a degree of cleanup that satisfies ARARs
under federal and state laws, unless a waiver can be justified pursuant to section 121 (d)(4) of
CERCLA. As discussed below, EPA has determin^ that the Amended Remedy meets the
requirements of Section 121 of CERCLA.
Protection of Human Health and the Environment
The Amended Remedy, Altemative 3, will adequately protect human health and the environment
through removal of contaminantsfi-omSite groundwater via ex situ and in situ treatment. EPA
will evaluate the need for an institutional control such as a Classification Exception Area, Deed
Notice, or designation of a WeU Restriction Area.
Compliance with ARARs
At the completion of the response action, the Amended Remedy will have compUed with all
appUcable ARARs, including, but not limited to:
Chemical-Specific ARARs
Chemical-specific ARARs are defined as those that specify achievonent of a particular cleaniq)
level for specific chemicals or classes of chemicals. These standards usually take the form of
health- orrisk-basednumerical limits that restrict concentrations of various chemical substances
to a specified level. Because groundwater in the immediate vicinity of the Site is currently used
as a source of drinking water, chemical-specific ARARs and TBCs generally address drinking
water standards and protection of groundwater quahty. The chemical-specific ARARs/TBCs for
the modified remedy are sununarized in Appendix II, Table 6-1.

Location-specific ARARs and TBCs
Location-specific ARARs are those which are appUcable or relevant and appropriate due to the
location of the Site or area being remediated. FortiiisSite, these consist of regulations
appUcable to wetlands,floodplains, endangered species, and wildlife habitats. The location-
specific ARARs/TBCs for the modified remedy are sununarized in Appendix II, Table 6-2.




                                              -20-
                                                                                      500858

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Action-specific ARARs and TBCs

Action-specific ARARs are those which are appUcable or relevant and appropriate to particular
ranedial actions, technologies, or process options. These regulations do not define site cleanup
levels but do affect the irnplernentation of specific types of remediation. For example, although
outdoor air has not been identified as a medium of concern, air quaUty ARARs are Usted below,
because some potential remedial actions may result in air emissions of toxic or hazardous
substances. These action-specific ARARs are considered in the screening and evaluation of
various technologies and process options in subsequent sections of this report. The action-
specific ARARs/TBCs for the modified remedy are summarized in Appendix n. Table 6-3.
Cost Effectiveness

EPA has determined that the Selected Remedy is cost effective in mitigating the principal threat
posed by residual VOC soil contamination and benzene and toluene NAPL groundwater
contamination. The overall effectiveness of the Selected Remedy has been determined to be
proportional to the costs. The Selected Remedy therefor represents a reasonable value for the
money to be spent.

Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Altemative Treatment Technologies to the
Maximum Extent Practicable
EPA has determined that the Amended Remedy utilizes permanent solutions and altemative
treatment technologies to the maximum extent practicable, and provides the best balance of
trade-offs in terms of the five balancing criteria, while also considering the statutory preference
for treatment as a principal element and considering State and community acceptance.
Of those altematives considered to address the groundwater contamination at the Site, the
Amended Remedy is a permanent remedy that extracts and treats the groundwater. The in situ
component of the remedy has the advantage of significantly reducing contaminant levels during
the initial years of operation, which may in tum shorten the Ufe-cycle period. Only Altemative 3
allows for this greaterflexibiUty.ffthe results of the pre-design investigation, to be performed
after completion of the on-going soil excavation, indicate that in situ treatment, such as SVE/AS,
could appreciable shorten the cleanup time for the pump and treat, that option wiU be available
without the need for an ESD or ROD amendment.

Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element
By using a combination of ex situ treatment processes, as well as the option for in situ treatment,
the Amended Remedy satisfies the statutory preference for remedies that employ treatment as a
principal element.
Five-Year Review Requirements
Because this remedy will-not result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants
remaining on-site above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, but may
take more than five years to attain the remedial action objectives and cleanup levels for the



                                               -21-
                                                                                      500859

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

groundwater, a poUcy review may be conducted within five years of constmction completion for
the Site to ensure that the remedy is, or will be, protective of human health and the envirormient.
DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES
The Post-Decision Proposed Plan for the Bog Creek Farm Superfund Site was released for pubUc
comment on August 15,2005 and the pubUc corrunent period ranfiromthat date through
September 13,2005. The Post-Decision Proposed plan identified Altemative 3, Groundwater
Extraction and Treatment with In Situ Treatment, as the Preferred Altemative.
All written and verbal cormnents submitted during the public comment period werereviewedby
EPA. Upon review of these comments, EPA has determined that no significant changes to the
remedy, as it was originally identified in the Post-Decision Proposed Plan, were necessary.




                                               •22-
                                                                                     500860

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX I

 Figures




             500861

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   Data layers aouroa: www.nj.gov\clep\gla

                                                                                   Rgure1-1
                   •      ^
                                                                           Site Location Map
                                                                         Bog Creek Farm Site
                                         iFMt
                                                Howell Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey
COM   0   8N1X»0       24)00   9,000   4,000

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        / ^


                                                              \y

               •   '   \   .   .   ^




        County
       Route 547




Ui   Map baaed on data from USA<X
O
O




                                                                    •-f-
00
Ok                                         Squankum Biook
Ui                                                                                                                          Figure 1-2
                                           Fence                                                                             Site Map
                                                                                                                  Bog Creek Farm Site
                                       •   Extraction Welts
                                                                                I Feet
                                                                                         Howell Township, Monmouth County, New Jereey
                                           Slurry Wall
                                                              0 25 50    100   150

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        County
       RoutBr)4? - J —




                                                      —'      ,   Injection Trench                            ~




NotB: Base mapping and groundwater plume data
      are from the July 3, 2003 REAC Tecftnfca/ Memoranckim
      tor EPA Environmental Response Team

                 Bmnaiw, TolueiM, Ethylm*, XylwM (BTEX)
                                                                                                                                       Figure 1-3
                         2-10 mg/L BTEX                                                                                             BTEX Plume
                                                                               '     ^    '                           B o g Creek Superfund Site
                          10-25 mg/L BTEX
                                                                                                                                Howell Township
                         I 25-50 mg/L BTEX                                                                        Monmouth County, New Jersey
                                                                  0 20 40            80       120   160
                         I > 50 mg/L BTEX
CDM                                                                                                  I Feet

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                            X
                                   ^ , ^ ^ ' -

            \           A^                                                                                          \ ^
                       ^?                                                                  r
                                                                                          '       Gmundwatpr
                                                                                                 TrpdinWflt PInnt

                                                                                              I h r
                                                                                                   I'        ,^




                                                                                                                          ;rfl4 Disposal Area

                                                      /         Former Wasle Trench




     _ County
      RoLitp54?;                                            Former
                                                           Remedial
                                                                          \
                                                                                                                                                                  w
                                                           Excavation
                                                              Area



                                                 '-x'n"                       Injection Trench




Nofe: 68se mapping and groundwater plume data
      are from the M y 3, 2003 REAC Technical Memorandum
      for EPA Environmental Response Team

                   Total Chlorinated Compounds
                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 1-4
                                                                                                                                                                CVOC Piume
                                                                               •^t^-                                                                Bog Creek Superfund Site
                                                                                                                                                            Howell Township
                   m         IMSmgn.                                                                                                            IMonmouth County, New Jersey
                   J H H ^25 mg/L

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        Injection Trench




Note: Base mapping and groundwater pitmie data
      are from the July 3,2003 REAC Technical Memorandum
      for EPA Environmental Re^>onse Team

                                                                                                                                                      Figure 1-5
     Groundwater Extraction Well              Benzene, Toluene, Ethylene, Xylene (BTEX)
     (Extraction rates of 0.5 gpm to 1 gpm,   m s m •> «n mvi BTPV                                        Conceptual Site Layout for FtA Alternative 2 - 6WP&T
     10.5 gpm total)                          ur;..>ea z-wmga-BTm                             '   ^   '                              Bog Creek Superfund Site
                                              m       10-25 mgl. BTEX                                                                         Howell Township
                                                                                                                              Monmouth County, New Jersey
                                              H H     ZS-GOmglBTEX                  0 20 40
                                              • • I   >S0in||n.B7EX

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

/Vote: Base mapping and groundwatar plume data
       are from the July 3, 2003 REAC Technical Memorandum
       for EPA Environmental Response T e a n

     ^  \    Oual-PhaM Extraction (DPE) WISH
                                                           Benzene, Toluene, Ethylene, Xylene (BTEX)                                                  Figure, 1-6
    I • ;    (17 walls. 30'OPE radius of Influence)
                                                            1 1 1 2-10 mgfl. BTEX                                   Conceptual Site Layout for RA AitemaUve 3 -
      G      Air Sporga Well
             (25 wells, assumes 20" radius of Influenos)           10-25 mgA. BTEX                     •^h-                                GWP&T with SVeAS
                                                                                                                                      Bog Creek Superfund Site
             Limit of SVE vacuum Influenca                        25-50 mgA. BTEX                                                              Howell Township
    r\^      (75* radius of influanoa cantarad on                                           0 20 40     80    120    ^^         Monmouth County, New Jersey
             each of the 17 OPE walls)                            >50 mg/L BTEX
                                                                                                                      iFeet

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Note: Base mapping and groundwater plume data
      are from the July 3, 2003 REAC Technical Memorandum
      for EPA Environmental Response Team

         Groundwater Extraction Well           Total Chlorinated Compounds                                                                   Figure 1-7
                                                                                 N
         (Extraction rates of 0.5 to 1 gpm,    P i U 1-«mofl.
                                                                                          Concept
                                                                                          Conceptual Site Layout for RA Altemative 3 - GWP&T with EAB
         5 gpm total)                          • H 5-10 mgrt.               w-    —-e


  o
                                                                                                                             Bog Creek Superfund Site
          Electron Donor Injection Point       • • 1   10-15 mgA.                                                                      Howell Township
          (44 injection points, assumes                                         •
          15' radius of EAB influence)                                                                                   Monmouth County, New Jersey
                                               ^ ^ ^                0 20 40    80     120   160
                                               ^mmH >2S nm/L         HQK3HH               •-IFefll

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    ^^^'^'^^'




                                                       -'        ^      Injection Trench




Note: Base mapping and groundwater pliane data
      ana from the July 3, 2003 REAC Technical Memorandum
      for EPA Environmental Response Team

        Groundwater Extraction Well                    Benzene, Toluene, Ethylene, Xylene (BTEX)                                                   Figure 1-8
        (extraction rates of 0.5 to 1 gpm,


  O
        5 gpm total)
        Chemical Oxidation Reagent Injection Point
        (155 injection points, assumes 10' radius of
                                                       g ^ g l 2-10 mg/L BTEX
                                                       H I 10-25 mg/L BTEX
                                                       H I 25-50 mg/L BTEX
                                                                                                     -+•           Conceptual Site layout for Altemative 3 -
                                                                                                                                         GWP&T with ISCO
                                                                                                                                  Bog Creek Superfund Site
                                                                                                                                           Howell Township
        ISCO influence)
                                                                                           0 20 40   80   120   160         Monmouth County, New Jersey
                                                       • • > 50 mg/L BTEX
COM                                                                                                              I Feet

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Appendix II
   Tables




              500870

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                        Table 1

                   NJDEP Groundwater Ouality Criteria
                  for Class IIA Aouifers for Site COPCs

               ]Bog Creek Farm Superfund Site, Howell, NJ


                                                  NJDEP Groundwater
                                                   Quality Criteria
   CAS #                        Compound              (Class IIA)
                                                   ug/1      Criteria
                                                               note^

V o l a t i l e O r g a n i c Caapovaida (VOCs)
  71-55-6              1,1,1-Trichloroethane        30           s
  79-00-5              1,1,2-Trichloroethane         3           s
  75-34-3                1,1-Dichloroethane         50          ism
  75-35-4                1,1-Dichloroethene          2          PQL
  95-63-6             1,2,4-Trimethylbenzene        100        ignc
  95-50-1                1,2-Dichlorobenzene        600          s
 107-06-2                1,2-Dichloroethane          2          PQL
 108-67-8              1,3,5-Trimethylbenzene       100        ignc
 106-46-7                1,4-Dichlorobenzene         75          s
 108-10-1               4-Methyl-2-pentanone        400          s
  67-64-1                        Acetone            700          s
  71-43-2                        Benzene             1          PQL
 108-90-7                    Chlorobenzene           50          is
  75-00-3                     Chloroethane          100        ignc
  67-66-3                      Chloroform            6           s
 156-59-2              cis-1,2-Dichloroethene        70         is
 100-41-4                     Ethylbenzene          700          s
  98-82-8                  Isopropylbenzene         800          is
 103-65-1                   n-Propylbenzene         100         ignc
 127-18-4                 Tetrachloroethene          1          PQL
 108-88-3                        Toluene            1000         s
  79-01-6                  Trichloroethene           1           s

                                                            500871

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             Table 1
              NJDEP Groundwater Oualitv Criteria
             for Class IIA Aouifers for Site COPCs

            Bog Creek Farm Superfund Site, Howell, NJ

                                             NJDEP Groundwater
                                              Quality Criteria
  CAS «                Compound                  (Class IIA)
                                               ug/1       Criteria
                                                            nota^
 75-01-4            Vinyl Chloride              5              PQL
1330-20-7           Xylenes (total)            1000            is

Semi-Volatile Organic Compounds (SVOCs)
 105-67-9         2,4-Dimethylphenol           100              s
 95-48-7             2-Methylphenol            100             ignc
 106-44-5            4-Methylphenol            100             ignc
 117-81-7     bis(2-Ethylhexyl) phthalate       30             PQL
 87-68-3          Hexachlorobutadiene           1               s
 78-59-1               Isophorone              100              s
 91-20-3              Naphthalene              300             ism
 86-30-6          n-Nitrodiphenylamine          20             PQL
 108-95-2                Phenol                4000             s

Pesticides/PCBs
 309-00-2                Aldrin                0.04            PQL
 319-84-6              alpha-BHC               0.02            PQL
1024-57-3          Heptachlor epoxide          0.2             PQL

Metals
7440-36-0               Antimony                20             PQL
7440-38-2               Arsenic                 8              PQL
7440-47-3               Chromium               100              s
7439-89-6                 Iron                 300              s
7439-92-1                 Lead                  10             PQL

                                                      500872

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             Table 1

                NJDEP Groundwater Quality Criteria
               for Class IIA Aouifers for Site COPCs

             Bog Creek Farm Superfund Site, Howell, NJ

                                                 NJDEP Groundwater
                                                  Quality Criteria
     CAS #              Confound                     (Class IIA)
                                                  ug/1     Criteria
                                                             note^
 7439-96-5              Manganese                  50          s


Notes:
1)    NJDEP Groundwater Quality Criteria Notes
      s    specific
      is   interim specific
      ism interim specific (MCL based)
      ignc interim general non-carcinogenic
      PQL Practical Quantitation Limit




                                                               500873

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                            Table 2
                                Summary of Groundwater Data'
                                       Groundwater FFS
                          Bog Creek Superfund Site, Howell, New Jersey



                                               Avenge
                                                               CoficerHratlon       Deleclluiie
                                               DMaeiwI                                               Q u a % Crttafia (Class HA)
        CASf              Compound                                 Range
                                             Concwitratton
                                                                   (ligA.)          Sampladi'
                                                (MA.)                                                                  Crtlaria
                                                                                                         ugA.
                                                                                                                        nota*
      V o l a m Organic Compounds (VOCt)                                                                                           1
            71.55*                                                   1.5-2200            21 of 32                30
                                                      332.7                                                                       «
            rwxw 1,1,2-TrichlorDelhane                  542            1.4-260            6or32                   3             s
            75-34-3 1,1-Dichloroethane                  88.6           1.1-640           20 or 32                50           ton
            75-35-4 l.l-Dichloroethene                 68.5             37-100            2or32                   2          PQL
            9 M 3 - 6 1A4-Ttimelhy1benzene            452.2          1.1-1600            24 or 32               100          ignc
            95-50-1 I^DichlorDbenzene                   79.1           1.1-230           18 or 32               600              s
          107-06-2 U-Oichtoniethane                  3054.0         1.1-30000            10 or 32                 2          PQL
            78-87-5 l^-Oichloiopiopane                  15.0             15-15            l o r 32                1          PQL
          108-67-6 1,3,5-Trimethyl Benzene            159.9            1.4-SOO           20 of 32               100          Igne
          106-46-7 1.4-DichlorDbenzene                   4.9             1.7-14           4cr32                  75
            78-93-3 2-Butanone                          54.5             46-63            2or32                 300
                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                1
          591-76-6 2-Hexanone                         587.0           74-1100             2ar32                 100          ignc
          108-10-1 4-Methyt-2-pentanone              3471.4          97-16000             5ar32                 400             s
            67-64-1 Acetone                             97.8           2.1-750           13 or 32               700             s
            71-43-2 Benzene                          1808.1           1.9-8800           23 or 32                 1          PQL
          108-66-1 Bromotienzene                         1.7            1.7-1.7           l o r 32
          108-90-7                                      51.8           1.3-290           15 or 32                 SO           It
            75-00-3 Chtoroethane                        52.2             2.3-94           6or32                  100         Ignc
            67-66-3 ChlorofonT\                       246.0             1-1500           10 or 32                  8
          156-59-2 ds-U-OWiloroalhene                 948.7           1.7-8300           23 or 32                 70            Is
                                                                                                                                  (
            9947-6 Cymene                               12.7             12-29           12 or 32                100         Ignc
          100-41-4 Ethyll>enzene                     1738.8           1.8-6900           25 or 32                700             s
            87-68-3 Hexachkxobutadiene                  20.0              17-23           3or32                    1             s
            98-82-8 Isopropylbenzene                    44.9           2 2 -140          14 of 32                800            b
            75-09-2 Methylene Chloride               1295.8            14-5100            4or32                    2             s
            91-20-3 Naphthalene                         78.5           2.8-190           16 or 32                300          ton
          103-65-1 n-Prop^benzene                     207.0          2.8 -1300           19 or 32                100         Ignc
          100-42-5 Styrene                           1600.0         1500-1700             2cr32                  100             s
          127-18-4 TetrachlorDelhene                    91.1            1.3-590          12 or 32                  1         PQL
           108-88-3 Toluene                         10794.0         12-58000             25 or 32               1000             s
            7901-6 Trichloroelhene                      59.8              1-520          14 or 32                  1             s
            7 5 0 1 - * Vinyl Chtoiide                 139.2            1.7-590          12 of 32                  5         PQL
                        m & p-Xylene                 4457.7         4.5-13000            24 or 32
            95-47-6 o-Xylene                         1772.0           2.8-6000           26 or 32
         1330-20-7 Xylenes (total)                   1603.4             1-8800           26 or 32               1000              Is
                                                                                                                                       1
      Sem/-Vo(*Wt Organ/c Compounds (SVOCs)
         95-50-1 1,2-Dichlorot)enzene                  70.3           3.9 -150             6ar9                  600              s
                     1,4-Oichlorot)enzene               3.9            3.9-3.9             1or9                   75              s
        105-67-9 2,4-I)imelhylphenol                 2395.8           33-6200              4org                  100
         91-57-6                                        8.3            5.4-13              4or9                  100         I»1C
                                                                                                                                  »
         95^8-7 2-Methylphenol                       1316.3           13-3900              4019                  100         kmc
        106-47-«                                        4.1            4.1-4.1             ior9                   30            Is
        106-44-5 4-Methylphenol                      2912.0           36-6700              3or9                  100         ignc
        100-51-6 Benzyl Alcohd                         362             3.3-69              2or9                 2000             s
        117-«1-7 bis(2-Ethylhexyl) phthalate          190.0           190-190              ior9                   30         PQL
         8 5 * 8 - 7 Butylbenzylphthalate              15.0              15-15             1ar9                  100             s
         84-66-2 Diethylphthalate                      21.8            6.3-66              4ar9                 5000             s
        131-11-3                                       11.3            5.5-17              2or9                  100         knc
         84-74-2 Di-n-butylphthalate                   39.3           4.9-180              6ar9                  900            s
         87-68-3 Hexachlorobutadiene                   10.4             9.7 - 1 1          2or9                    1            s
         78-59-1 Isophorone                           915.0          230-1600              2ar9                  100            s
         91-20-3 Naphthalene                           922             26-150              6ar9                  300          ton
         86-30-6 n-Nitrosodiphenylamine                78.6            12-180              Sor9                   20         PQL
        106-95-2 Phenol                               583.3           13-1900              4or9                 4000            s
                                                                                                                                       1
      Metals
       7429-90-5 Aluminum                             787.5          200-2100               8or9                 200           s
       7440-36-0 Antimony                               3.1            3.1-3.1              ior9                  20         PQL
       7440-38-2 Arsenic                                4.8            2.3-11               9or9                   8         PQL
       7440-39-3 Banum                                 26.6           2.3-140               9or9                2000           s
       7440-70-2 Cakaum                             34411.1        8700-71000               9or9




CDM                                                                                                                                        PigelofZ

                                                                                                  500874

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                            Table 2
                                Summary of Groundwater Data*
                                       Groundwater FFS
                          Bog Creek Superfund Site, Howell, New Jersey



                                                  Awaga                                                NJDEP (Groundwater
                                                                     ConceiKiallun     Detections
                                                  DalactMl                                           Qualify Cittarta (Class HA)
        CASf              Compound                                      Range         vsrsusWals
                                                ConcM lU'BllOll
                                                                        (MBAJ          Sampled*
                                                     (MBA-)
                                                                                                                       CfHsrIa
                                                                                                         ugn.
                                                                                                                        nota*
       7440-47-3 Chromiuni                                  52               2J.22            90(9               100
       7440-50-8 Copper                                    54.0              54-54            lorg              1000
                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                 s
       7439-89-6 Iron                                   31811.1        2100-140000            9or9               300             s
       7439-92-1 Lead                                      172               7.7-25           3or9                10        PQL
       7439-95-4 Magnesium                               5211.1         2400-15000            9or9
       7439-96-5 Manganese                                183.6             11-750            9ar9               50              s
       7439-97-6 Mercury                                    0.3           0.33-0.33           lorg                2              s
       7440-02-0 NIcKel                                    15.8              5.6-26           2of9              100              s
       7440-09-7 Potassium                               3566.7          1700-7300            9or9
       7782-49-2 Selenium                                   22              22-22             lorg             SO                s
       7440-23-5 Sodium                                 13566.7         4900-30000            9org          50000                s
       7440-66-6 Zinc                                     176.4             11-720            7org           5000                s
                                                                                                                                     1
      Pes0c/dte
          72-54* 4,4'-ODD                                     0.11        0.11-0.11           lorg               0.1
                                                                                                                                 •
         309-00-2 Aldrin                                      0.09        0.05-0.11           3or9              0.04        PQL
         319-84-6 atpha-BHC                                   0.15        0.15-0.15           lorg              0.02        PQL
       5103-71-9 alpha-Chlonlane                              0.03        0.03-0.03           lorg               03       F.PQL
      33213-65-9 Endosultoll                                  0.09        0.09-0.09           lorg               0.4          s
          72-20-8 Endrm                                       0.07        0.02-0.11           2arg                 2          s
          58-89-9 gamma-BHC (Lindane)                         0.09        0.09-0.09           lorg               02           s
          7644-8 Heptachlor                                   0.10          0.1-0.1           lorg               0.4        PQL
        1024-57-3 Heptachlor epoxide                          0.12        0.07-0.17           2org               02         PQL
                                                                                                                                     1
      ffOTES

      1) December 2002 Sampling EvanL as summarlzad m Ihe July 3,2003 REAC ERT Report by Lockheed Maitm.

      2) NJDEP Grouidwater Quality CfMarla Notes
               s   specific
              Is   Interim specific
            ton    mtedm specific (MCL based)
           Ignc    kiteflm general noTHcardnogenic
             pql   practical quanwattonllmit
               F    vakie^ipliestothesumoralpria-andgamnia-chkicdane

      3) Does not kidude duplicate samples.

      4) Average is based on detected concentratkxs. Non-detecl results exckjded frem consWersdon.




CDM                                                                                                                                          Page2of2



                                                                                                                                         500875

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                     TABLBl


                                                                                                               Bog Craak tupwftind M a - How«H TowiwMp, NJ


     tecwwlo Tliiwftaiiie.            Fukn                      II
     Mwlkm:



                                                                                                 " • ^ ^                                                                                                                                                       RakooT 1
                                                                                                                                                            1        Ttarl         tlorl                  RaVocT          1      Ttara     Hark
     lExpOMira          CAS                          ClMinkal          MMmtifn       Maximiiin     Unk      Location     DolK*in          Rangaor                SoMnkig           COPC    Ralonalallor   MaxCcnc              scnMNng     COPC                MaxConcL 1
                                                                                                                                         Dotadkn                    Vikio          nag     BUoclenor       IsTtarl               vakM      Flag    Satodonor   totlark   1
     1 '**             Numbw                                         ConosniraSon   CeneankMon             oTMaidmum     Fraquincy
                                                                      (OIMMM)         (QiMMai)             Coneamralon                        Umks                  «ICA»)         (Y/N)     DsMkm        Scraankig             (ncAa)     (Y/N)    DcMkm

                                                                                        (1)                                                                                                                vakM                   (4)                 (3)       VakM

     iTipWkto
                      71-5M
                                                       VOCs
                                                                        0.22 J        2200
                                                                                                 ^uglL
                                                                                                   ^          PZ-34      41 r 88               • 1000           32E«02ne           YES        ASL            7                32E+a2ne     YES       ASL          7
                                                                        0.72 J         200         uglL       PZ-24       7 / 8 5              . 1000           2 . a & 0 1 ea     YES        ASL           1303              2.aEta0ca    YES       AS12        130
                       7S-34-3                                           O.SJ          •40
                                                                                       100
                                                                                                   •igIL      P2-8
                                                                                                              PZ-34
                                                                                                                         43 / a s
                                                                                                                          •   / 85
                                                                                                                                         0 2 - 1000
                                                                                                                                               - 1000
                                                                                                                                                                8.1E401 no
                                                                                                                                                                3.4E*01ne
                                                                                                                                                                                   YES        ASL            8                81E*01ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3.4E^1no
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           YES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           YES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ASL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ASL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                      75-3»4                                            0.34 J                     ugA.                                                                            YES        ASL            3
                       a7-«i-e                                          1.16 J        1.1«J        oolL     BC-MW4         1 / »5              - 1000                        NA    NO      NoSoraon
                      12»«Z-1                                           casD           5.8 J       uglL     BCMMW-g       2 / »S               - 1000           72E-01nc           YES        ASL            8                72E*1ne      NO         IFD

                      »»*             1,2'OKnoroMnzwMi
                                                                        028 J
                                                                        0.71 J
                                                                                      1«00
                                                                                       230
                                                                                                   UOIL       PM8
                                                                                                              PZ-31
                                                                                                                         •2   / 88
                                                                                                                         5 9 / 8 5
                                                                                                                                               •   2
                                                                                                                                               • 500
                                                                                                                                                                1.2E*00ne
                                                                                                                                                                3.7E'HI1 I K
                                                                                                                                                                                   YES
                                                                                                                                                                                   YES
                                                                                                                                                                                              ASL
                                                                                                                                                                                              ASL
                                                                                                                                                                                                            12«8
                                                                                                                                                                                                             8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12E*00no
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3.7E«01ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           YES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           YES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ASL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ASL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1298
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8      1
                                                                                                   «*L
                      1II7-0U                                           0.29 J      30000          uglL       PZ.24      2 2 / 8 8             • 1000            1.2E4)1 ca        YES        ASL          243820             12E*aOca     YES       ASU        24382    1
                      7M7-S                                               18            18         UOIL       PZ-34        1 / as              • 1000            1.8&01 ca         YES        ASL            •1               1.aE«00ca    NO         IFD
                      1IW47-8                                           a 4 i j        800         u*L        PZ-18      5 1 / 8 5             . 500            12E+aOne           YES        ASL           408               12E*00ne     YES       ASL         408
                      841-73-1                                          5.07 J        8.07 J       ugA.     BC4IIIVM       1 / 8 5             . 1000           1.8E+aine          NO         SSL
                      ia»4a-7                                           0.81 J       22.3*         ugA.     B&MW.g        «   / 88             . 1000           S.0E-O1ea          YES        ASL            48               S.0E«O0ca    YES       ASL2         4
                      7B-0»4         2-8ulmm                              48            •3         ugiL       PZ-10       2 / 88                   1000         7.0E*02ne          NO         BSL
                      S91-7S4        2-HBanofW                            74          1100         uglL       PZ-24       2 / 85               • 1000                        NA    NO      NeSeraon
                      ias-a«*
                      10S-10-1       44MViyrv'PvfHmQn9
                                                                       0.71J
                                                                          •7
                                                                                     10.S7J
                                                                                    laooo
                                                                                                   ugA.
                                                                                                   ugA.
                                                                                                            BCCW-8
                                                                                                              PZ-24
                                                                                                                          8 / 85
                                                                                                                          7 / 85
                                                                                                                                                   1000
                                                                                                                                               • 1000           ZOE-KBlK
                                                                                                                                                                             NA    NO
                                                                                                                                                                                   YES
                                                                                                                                                                                           No S c r a m
                                                                                                                                                                                              ASL            80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1 2.06402 ne     YES       ASL          80
                      •7-64-1        AMton*                              2.1J          7S0J        ugA.       PZ-24      22 / 8 8       0.32 •     3200         5.5E«02no          YES        ASL            1                8.8E«02ne    YES       ASL          1
                      71-43-2         BenzMW                            0.42 J       8800          ugA.       PZ-34      87 / 8 8              • 100            3.8E-01 ca         YES     ASUTQX          24868              3.SE400ca    VES       ASU         2487


     1                iM-as-1
                      7S-27-4
                      108-90-7        Ol 1 1 • h • • • • • •
                                      umoroDenESffw
                                                                         0.3 J
                                                                      46.t2J
                                                                         0.1J
                                                                                     48.08 J
                                                                                     •1.51 J
                                                                                       290
                                                                                                   ugA.
                                                                                                   ugA.
                                                                                                  ugA.
                                                                                                            BC-EWM
                                                                                                            BC-EW-1S
                                                                                                              PZ-17
                                                                                                                          3 / 85
                                                                                                                          2 / as
                                                                                                                         44 / as
                                                                                                                                                   1000
                                                                                                                                                   1000
                                                                                                                                                   1000
                                                                                                                                                                ZOE-KIOllO
                                                                                                                                                                1.8&01 ea
                                                                                                                                                                1.1E*01nc
                                                                                                                                                                                   YES
                                                                                                                                                                                   YES
                                                                                                                                                                                   YES
                                                                                                                                                                                              ASL
                                                                                                                                                                                              ASL
                                                                                                                                                                                              ASL
                                                                                                                                                                                                             22
                                                                                                                                                                                                            340
                                                                                                                                                                                                             27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.aE«O0nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.aE*00ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.1E«01iio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           YES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IFD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IFD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ASL         27      1
                      75-004                                             2.*           200 JO      ugA.     BC^EW-IB     IS / 88               • 1000           4.8E400ea          YES        ASL            43               4.»e*m ca    YES       A8L2         4
                      87-M-3          CMorakmn                              1         1500         ugA.       PZ.24      12 / 8 5              • 1000           1.7E41 ca          YES        ASL           •038              1.7E*00ea    YES       ASU         804
                      isa-8U                                            021J          8300         ugA.       P&34       88 / 8 8              . 100            8.1E*00in          YES        ASL           1384              • lEtOOnc    YES       ASL         1384
                      9»a7-e          CyniMW                            0.71 J          20         ugA.       PZ-10      28 / 8 8              • 1000                        NA    NO      NaScncn
                      10IM1-4         BhyBsnmw                         0.25 J        eaoo         ugA.       PZ-17       88 / 85                   10           1.3E402IM          YES        ASL            81               12E««2iie    YES       ASL          81
                      9»«-«                                            027 J           140        ugA.       PZ-10       t o / 88                  800          8.8E*01nc          YES        ASL            2                •.SEtOlne    Yra       ASL          Z
                     1634444         MMiyltMHiilyieiMr                 0.41 J         0.41 J      ugA.     BOMW-II        1 / 88                   1000         82E't00ea          NO         BSL
                      7WI»-2         MMnyMfW UROlvM                       14         5100         ugA.       PZ-24        4 / 88                   1000         4.3E*00ca          YES        ASL           1183              4.3E401ea    NO         IFD
                    KHpxylsne        nvXytone and pJtylMS              0.34 J          •IIP       ugA.      B&EW48       42 / 8 1                  2            llEfOInc           YES        ASL            43               Z1E«01nc     YES       ASL          41
cn                    104-«1-S                                         8.03 J         8.03J       ugA.      B&MVM         1 / 88                   1000         2.4E401IM          NO         BSL
o
o                     10MS-1                                           0.24 J        1300         ugA.        n*         84 / 85                   500          2.4E«01fie         YES        ASL            88               Z.4E«01ne    YES       ASL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  "*
                      »»47-a         ft-XylwM                          a28J          •000         ugA.        PZ-8       87 / 88                   2            2.1E401IR          YES        ASL           288               2.1E*01ne    YES       ASL         288     1
CO
•J                   100-42-5        Stynna                            1800          1700         ugA.       PZ44         2 / 88                   1000         1.8EM»ne           VES        ASL            10               1.8E«02ne    NO         IFD
                      SS4M                                             624 J          73.8 J D    ugA.      B&MP-1        3 / 88                   1000         2.4E401ne          YES        ASL            8                2.4E*01ne    NO         IFD
                     1Z7-1S-4                                          aasj           880         ugA.       n M         18 / 8 6                  1000         1.0E4Mca           YES        ASL          8880               1.0E«O0ca    YES       ASU         888
                     l O M M         TokMne                            022 J        SMXM          ugA.       PZ-S4       81 / 88                   •0           72E^1mi            YES        A8L           802               72E«01ne     YES       ASL         802
                                                                       0.MJ           020 J       ugA.     BC-EW-24       1 / 88                   1000         12E««1nc           NO         BSL
                    iaoai-az-«                                       877.70 J       877.78 J      ugA.     B&EW4S         1 / 88                   1000         4 . 0 f r 0 1 oa   YES        ASL          1444               4.0E«O0ea    NO        ro
                      7M1-6                                            021 J          520         ugA.       pz.a4       2 8 / 8 8                 1000         2.8E4aca           YES        ASL          18881              2.8E4)1ca    YES       ASU        1888     1
                      T54M-4         wwlj/i U»4kMB                     a27J           •00                    PZ43        28 / 88                   1000 1       2.064)2 ca         YES     ASUTOX          29800      1       3L0E4)1ca    YES      ASU
                                                                                                  -?«•                                                                                                                                                          2181     1




       H H R A ^ T a U a s a n d A p p D j t f s , S/ZIVZOOS
                                                                                                                                 lors

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                       TABLES

                                                                                                             Bvf Crask ViipHftind sito - HOWM TownsMf^ NJ

           tScnarfo-nmakama:          Fukm                    1

           L*;;
           ^ - " " —
                                                                                                                                                            11
           1
           JE.POM.          CAS                    Chankcal         MMmim          ktaikiuii     Unk      Locaaon           Datadkm           Rantaer        1
                                                                                                                                                                      -narl
                                                                                                                                                                   8crewiln9
                                                                                                                                                                                   i    Tlwl
                                                                                                                                                                                       COPC    RaOcnalalior
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1 RaSocr 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                               MaxCoiHX 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TIark
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SuMnkiQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TIarll
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              COPC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Raaoer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Raaonalafor MaxCone.
               Pok4       Numfear                                 CflflOMllFWOn ' ConusnirHon            ofMaxknum          Fraqucoqf         OMacOan               Viriua              Flag   Sdoclener        toTlarl          VakM          Flag        SdacScncr    toTlarfl
                                                                    (QuSMaO 1 (QuaMw)                    Concankalon                           Lknka                (ncfta)            (Y/N)    DcMkm                             (ne/ca)     (V/N)         DaMkn 1 U  bva^i^MH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UBHHV
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Scraankig
                                                                                     (1)                                                                                                          (3)            VakM               (4)                       (3)
                                      ,         SVOCa
                          123-91-1     1,4-Dknnna                     22            22          ugA.        IFF-1            1/5                2- 2             6.1E«00ca              NO       BSL
                          10887*      •t^^JlflWIHyipHWWI             S.48J       8200           ugA.        PZ-24            S / 18            18- 10.4          7.3E*01nc             YES       ASL              88           7.3E«1no       YES             ASL         88
                          91-57*                                      8.4 J         13          ugA.        PZ*1        '    8/18            1.35- 10.3                       NA        NO     NoSaaan
                          B5-48-7                                    4.81 J    1 3100           ugA.       Pt24              • / 18            10- 10.4          1.8E«02nc         '   YES       ASL              21           1.aE«02ne      YES             ASL         21
                                                                      4.1 J       4.48 J                  B&MP-1             2 / 18            10- 10.4          1.5E^1no               NO       BSL
           I              10847*
                          10844*                                       38        8700
                                                                                                ugAL
                                                                                                ugn.       PZ-24             3 / 18            10- 10.4          1.8E401flc            YES       ASL             387           1.aE«01no      YES             /WL        38T
                          100-51*     Bonzyl Alcctwl                  3.3 J         88          ugA.       PZ-24             4/18              10- 10.4          1.1E403no              NO       BSL
                          111-»1-1                                   4.09J        4.08 J        ugA.      BC4MP-1            1 / 18            10- 10.4                       NA        NO     NoScraan
                          117*1-7                                    1.28 J        1*0          ugA.       PZ*1              2 / 18            10- 10.4          4.8E«O0ca             YES       ASL              40           4.8E«01ca      YES            ASU          4
                          85*8-7                                     1.84 J         IB          ugA.       PZ*1              2 / 18            10- 10.4          7.3E*a2ne              NO       BSL
                                                                     1.38 J         88          ugA.       PZ-34             8 / 18            10- 10.4          2.8E*0Snc              NO       BSL
                          131-11*                                     8.8 J         17          ugA.       PZ-24             2 / 18            10- 10.4          •.•E*04ne              NO       BSL
                          84-74-2                                    2.24 J        180          ugA.       PZ41             11 / 18            10- 10.3          S.OE'Kane              NO       BSL
                          87-88*                                      ».7J       12.48          ugA.      B&MW-8             S / 18            10- 10.4           • . • 6 * 1 ca       YES       ASL              14           8.8E400ca      YES            ASU          1
                          78-5»-1                                    230         1800           ugA.       PZ-24             2 / 18           10- 10.4           7.1E*01ca             YES       ASL              23           7.1E«02ea      YES            ASU          2
                          •1-20*                                    14.14          IN           ugA.       PZ*1             12 / 18           10- 10.3            e2E*1ne              YES       ASL             242           8 2 6 * 1 ne   YES            ASL         242
                          88^08                                        12         180           ugAL       PZ*1              8 / 18           10- 10.4           1.4E4«1ea             YES       ASL              13           1.4E«02ea      YES            ASU          1
                          108-982     Plwnol                           13        1800           ugA.       PZ^4              4 / 18           10- 10.4           I.IEtOSnc             YES       ASL              2            1.1E««Sno      YES            ASL          2
                                                   PllPCaa
                          72-84*      4,4'-IX)0                     0.11           0.11         ugA.       PZ*               1 / 8           0.02- 0.02        2.06«1ca                NO         BSL
                          S09O(U      Akkki                         0.08           0.11         ugA.       PZ*1              S / 8           a 0 2 - O.QZ      4.0E*3ca                YES        ASL             28       '   4.06*2 ca      YES            ASU          3
                          31»*4*      al|itw*HC                     0.15           0.18         ugA.       PZ*4              1 / •           0.02- 0.02        1.ie«2 ca               YES        ASL             14           1.1E*1 ea      YES            ASU          1
                         8103-71*     alpha-Clilofdana              0.03           0.03         ugA.       PZ*4              1 / 8           0.02- 0.02        1.86*1 ea               NO         BSL
                         33213*84     EnknuRM*                      0.08           0.08         ugA.       PZ*               1 f 8           0.02- 0.02      1 22E«01ne                NO         BSL
                          7^208       Emfcki                        a02J           0.11         ugA.       PZ*               2 / 8           0.02- 0.02        1.1E«00ne               NO         BSL
                          88-88-8                                   ao8            0.08         ugfl.      PZ41              1 / 8           0.02- 0.02        82E4)2ca                YES        ASL              2           82641 ca       NO             BSU
                          7844*       l^lllBlUlM                     0.1            0.1                    PZ*1              1 / 8           0.02- 0.02        1.8E-02ca                                                       1.SE*1ca
                                                                                                ugA.                                                                                   YES        ASL              7                          NO             BSU
                                      n^nacnnr
                         1024*7*                                    ao7            0.17         ugA.       PZ*               2 / 8           0.02- 0.02        7.46*3 ca               YES        ASL             23           7.4E*2ca       YES            ASU          2

                         7429-8M     Mmlnuii                         200          2100          ugA.       PZ-1S             8 / 8             20- 20            3.8E*08nc              NO       BSL
                         7440-38*    nnwnony                          S.1           3.1         ugA.       PZ-13             1 / 8            22- 22             LSEtOOnc              YES       ASL              2            1.8E*00ne      YES            ASL          2
                         744048-2    ATMnki                          zs              11         ugA.       PZ*1              8 / 8            NA- NA              4.86*2 ca            YES     ASUTOX            248           4.86*1 ca      YES            ASU          28
                         74404ft*    BMum                             2.3          140          ugA.        PZ*              • / •             NA- NA 1          2.8E4a2ne             NO        BSL
                         7440-7IV2   Cak*m                          8780         71000          u*L        PtSI              8 / 8             NA- NA                     NA           NO        NUT
     (»)                 744*47*     Ckmrnkm                         2.3            22          ugA.       PZ-24             8 / 8            NA- NA             1.1E«01 ne            YES       ASL              2            1.16«1no       YES            ASL          2
                         7440-80*    Cappar                           84            84          ugA.       n-u               1 / 1 8         848- 8              1.eE*02ne             NO        BSL                                                   :
                         74S«*»*     kon                            2100        140000          ugA.       PZ*               8 / 8            NA- NA             1.1E*03nc             YES       ASL             128           1.1E«03ne      YES            A8L         128       1
     (8)                 74S^-8M     Laed                            7.7            28          ugA.       PZ-13             S / 18         8.132- 2 2           I.OE'fOI (5)          YES       ASL              2            1.8E«01 (8)    YES            ASL          Z        1
                         7488*84     Ma^nack..                1     MOD          18000          "88. 1     PZ44     1        8/8        I     NA- NA 1                    NA           NO        NUT

01
o
o
00
-J



               H H R A _ T S H M snd AppO jds, W20/200S                                                                              aors

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                   TABLE!
                                                                                                                       I af Ctiawilcali Dalactad ki C
                                                                                                               Bag Craak Supachnd SHa - HawaS TerniaMp, I




                                                                                                 ^••"                                                     Tlarl        Tlarl                    Ralocr        •nari     liar*                 Raaacf
     Enpoaui.         CAS                    Cliarakal            Mk*num          Manknun          Unk     Loeakcn         DaMton          Range or    Scnanfcig       COPC     Raaonalaftir   MaxConCL     Scnaning    COPC    fMnrMnki     MaxConcL
      PokH           Number                                     Cancankaacn      ConoMMNwi                cfMaidmum       Fiaquaney        Datackon      VakM           Flag    SaMkncr         ki Tlarl      VkkM       Flag    SataOenor    toTlark
                                                                 (QuaMai)         (QuaMai)               Cancanka«on                        Lknk*       (nc/ea)        (Y/N)        DaMkm                    (nc/ea)    (Y/N)     DaMen
                                                                                     (1)                                                                  (2)                         (3)       VMM            (4)                  P)        VakM
                   743»-«8*                                          11            750            ugA.       PZ*                           NA- NA      »X*01 ne         YES          ASL           •       8.86*01 ne   YES        ASL          8
                   743S-B7*      Maruy                             ass             0.3S           ugA.       PZ-24                         0 2 - 82    1.1E*00iw        140          BSL
                   744042*       Mckal                               8.8              28          ugA.       PZ-24                            8- 8     7.36*01 nc       NO           BSL
                   7440-08-7     Pclasrium                         1700           7800 .          ugA.       PZ*1                          NA- NA              NA       NO           NUT
                   778248.2      Salartum                           22              2.2           ugA.       PZ-34                         2 2 - 22    1.86*01 nc       NO           BSL
                   744023-5      Sodkm                             4880          80000            ugA.       PZ41                          NA- NA              NA       NO           NUT
                                 Zkw                                  11         720.00           ugA.       PZ-24                        a04- 14.04   1.1E*0Sne        NO           BSL



          (1) Il4axlinwn dalactad oonoanlrallcn uaadtoraoraankig.                                                 DMnHlonK Nn * Not Avinbw
          (2) Scraanad agakiil g A Region k Pidiitiaiy RamadMen Oada (PROa)tortap walif, a#mak la                          nc * BcnMnlnQ ToncRy V M M H D M M on nonriieBf offMis
              cancer baoUmiaik • I B * and HQ • 0.1. h«p-Jlkn«r.opa.ge««lragion08NMiliMUndl^i^                             en « Scrvanlnff TaxfcNy VifcwtobMwl on cMcar •ftads
          (3) Rakenala CedaK                                                                                               COPC* Chomicol of PolontW Concofn
              Balicaen Reaaen:/KSL'Abova Tier I Scraankig LamI                                                             VOCs - VoMto organle oompoundo
                                  ASU • Afeeva Tier n Soaenkig LaMi                                                        B V Q C B ' ooniHraMno ofsonteconipoundB
                                  T O A * CiMfniCM n • Onup A cvdngoowinrpflVnMifflfiNVMiliBwin fiMdMn                     WPCBo - PoiBcMotflpdtytlilortrwIoil lil|itwiiyto
                 DaMcn Raaian: BSL • Balaw Tier I Senankig Laval
                                  BSU • Below Tier k Soraankig Laval                                                      J-EalnwMVMiio
                                  NUT'EaaankalNuMinl                                                                      D " RMUN npfMOfn dHAod MvnpN onolytls.
                                  No Scnan • No Soaenkig VMM AvakaMa
                                  WO * Inkaquanl^r adecled. Delaclad kitowMTthan 5% of OMiplae.
                Nola kial noncencer eeraenkig vekiee dM nol changetarTier k. Sea (eodtorraknamanlof neneaRkieganle COPCa.
          (4) Seraenad agakm ^ A . R ^ 8 ^ 8 Prakmkiaiy RamadWton Ooela (PROS) torlap wato, adMM«a
              canoor kenUenaik • 16**and HQ • a i . liHp/Ha«iw.epa.goWra(<eiiOg^»aileft*»id<|pig/
          (5) Soaenkig vekM torlbuavaieiii uiemkan m a coneeivakvalir opgkadtotakdlivuiiikan uunuenkaken.
              Talaichronikanuaiiiikiakuiie da not weeedkwecwenkigvakMtorkl»elenld»oiiik»ii (8.86*3 ugAj.
          (8) kiabaancaeraRaglanSPRO tor lead k i d i k W i i g i l a i . k i a Federal Acken Leveltorlead ki«kiMng«itirwaauaed.




Ol
o
o
00
•J
00




     H H R ^ T S H M snd AppOjds, WZOOOOS
                                                                                                                                   scri

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                     Table 4
                                                                                 Summaiy of Remedial Altemative Evaluation ResultB
                                                                                                Groundwater FFS
                                                                                   Bog Creek Superfund Site, Howell, New Jersey

                           1. Overall FiotccUoii of
     1    AltematiTe                                                                        3. Long-Term Effecthrocss                                         5. ShoiMerm Effedivcacas              ClmplemeatabiUly              7. Owl
                             Human Health aBd        2 CompUaace widi ARARs                                                      MobllIly,orVaIwne
                                                                                                 and Fennaaencc
                                EnrifDninciit                                                                                     tBrongll weatmcnt
      1. No Action        • Disdiargeof             • Chemical-specific ARABS                                                •   Would not reduce waste   •    RemediaUon woiken              •   Readily implementable,           90
                            contamjiiated                                                                                        TMV                           would not be exposed to
                            groundwater would          surface water quality                 permanence                      •   Overall: Low                  any exposure risks                 required
                             occur to Squankum         would not be met                 •    Groundwater                                                  •    There would be no impad        •   Overall: High
                             Brook and may          • There are no location-(»:              contamination will tend to                                        totfiecommunity, since no
                            significantly impact       actioivspedfte ARARs                  persist and discharge to                                          action is taken
                            water and sediment      • OvcralkLow                             Squankum Broidc                                              •    Overall: High
                            quality, vMA may                                            •    RAOs would not be met
                            pose unacceptable                                           •    Overall: Low
                            risks to human health
                            and the environment
                          • Brook discharges to
                            ttie Manasquan River,
                            irtiichlsusedfor

                          • OvcialtLow
     1 Z Groundwater      • Hydraulic control         • (3iemfcal-speclfic ARARs                                                                          •    Exposure risks to              •    CanbereadUy                 $6.4milli(m
         extractian and     would prevent               for treated groundwater              and treatment has been       WHI reduce nwbility.                 remediation woriceis               implemented using            (present    1
     1   trestiiteiijt      contaminated                may not be met wiOiin ttie           widely and effectively     a Exrihitreatment will                 during well installation           conventional construdion     value)      1
                            groundwater                 30 year timeframe.                   used to adiieve hydnuUc      provide limited                      will be managed by                 and wastewater treatment
                            disdiargeto               a WdlconstnicUoiv                      plume controL                reductions in taxk:ity               implementing standard              equipment/ servfces.
                            Squankum Brotnc             treatment plant            «         Based upon pore vohune       and vomme.                                                          •    Regulatory/permitting
                          • Effluent disdiaiges                                              fhidiing estimales, deamip • OvcnlL-Mediam                        healtti and safety practkes.       requirements for ttiis
                            from the ex (ifu              and groundwater effluent           time is estimated to take                                    •    No significant community           altemative are not
                                                          diadiarges from (he ex s<(K                                                                                                             administrativdy intensive.
                            would meet NJDEP              treatment system would             years to restore the aquifier                                     primarily borxicred by         •    NJDHPpermit
                            disdiarge criteria,           meet corresponding                 tomeet NJDEP                                                                                         equivalendes Ukdy
                          a Groundwater                   NJUEP action-and                                                                                •    Construdian and initial            required for well
                            extraction would              locatian*pedfic ARARs.             criteria assuming no                                              startup could be                   installatlan, treatment
                                                      .    OrtnlkMedUam                      residual contaminatian                                            conq>letedin4to6                   system construction, snd
                            flushing arui reduction                                          sources,                                                          monttis.                           groundwater and air
                            of contaminant                                              •     OvciaUMcAm                                                  e    OvoalkHigh                         disdiarge
                            concentrations.                                                                                                                                                   •   Overall: High
                          • OrcfaUHigh

     1                 1

o
o
00
-J
^o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                     Table 4
                                                                                 Summaiy of Remedial Altemative Evaluation Results
                                                                                                Groundwater FFS
                                                                                   Bog Creek Superfund Sitc^ Howell, New Jersey


     1    Alteniaiive        LOvCTsUrmtedioBaf            Z Onvliancc Witt ARARa            3. Long-Term EffecUvcneaa                                         S. ShokMetm ESectivcnesa                                         7.<iiet     ]
                              Human Health and                                                   and Permanence                   MobiUrr, or Vohune
                                Env uuBUMUt                                                                                        throuKhlVeatnienl
     1 3. Groundwater       • Hydraulic control       •    Itismpectedttuitfiie         •    Groundwater extraction          •   (Groundwater extractian •      C^mstmctfamwoikeiswill    •   Can be readily                 $8.2mll]ion
     1     extraction and                                  diendoatspedfic ARARs             and treatment has been              will reduce mobiUty.                                         Implemented using              (present
     1     treatment wiOi     containinated                                                  widely and tSecOvtif            •   Significant IMV               uponfileincreased drilling     conventional construction      vahie)
          inmlu               groundwater                  would be met wittdn file          used to adiieve hydraulic           reduction is expected         and pipe instsUatkm efibrt                                                  j
     1     trcsbncnt                                       30 year lime frame.               plume controL                       initiaUy as a result of m     however, added risk is
                              Squankum Brook.         •    Well construction.           •    Possibility for more                libt degradatian              considered minimal         •    Regulatory/permitting
                            • Effluent disdiarges          treatment plant                   aggressive contaminant              processes^ wzudi destroy •    Construction could be          requirements for fills
                              fromfileex n'hi              construcUoa and vapor             reduction and aquifer               contaminants.                 completed wittiin 6to9         altenutive are not
                                                           and groundwater effluent          restoration during fiie         .    /^5/5YB-Addlt^onal           monfiis                        administratively intenaive.
                              would meet NJDEP             disdiargesfromfiieex sitii        initial years oftfieremedy          contsminsnt mass vnU at •     Overall: High              •   NJDEP permit
                              disdiarge criteria.          treatment system would            via in situ treatment but                                                                        equivalendes likely
                            * More aggressive              meet corresponding                                                    Ouoog^ttieex rihi off-                                       required for well
                              ctmtaminant reduction        NJDEP action-and                  extractian and treatment            gs8 trefltanoit syBtem M                                     installation, treatment
                              and aquifer                  kxatioiMpnifk: ARARs.             still necessary to meet final       aresultofAS/SVE,                                             sjrstemconstnictlon, and
                              restoration during ttie •     EAB/I900-NIDEP                                                       resulting in toxidty and                                     groundwater and afr
                              Initial years of file        action-qMcific ARARs for          criteria.                           volume rcductioa                                             discharge
                              remedy via in ribi           amendment Injection          a    Pitot testing is required to    e   OvenrikHl^                                              •    Pflot-kcale testing
                              treatment.                   would be met                      determine the most                                                                               recommended to support
                            • OveraltHigh                                                    apptopiiate and effective                                                                        detailed design decisions
                                                                                             in siiii treatment                                                                               for in situ treatment and ex
                                                                                             technology.                                                                                      situ treatment system.
                                                                                                                                                                                          •   E M - m a y mobilize iron
                                                                                             wDQld w limited to                                                                               and ofiter inorganics,
                                                                                             CVOCs. Could be                                                                                  whidi may InqMd 0<cM
                                                                                             improved by using EAB in                                                                         requirementa and i^time
                                                                                             sequence wifii air                                                                               for file groundwater
                                                                                             sparge/SVE.                                                                                      extractton and treatment
                                                                                        a     OvcnIbHIgh                                                                                      systein.
                                                                                                                                                                                         •    Overall: HlKh




UI
o
o
00
00                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tlllt

o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                      Tables
                                    Present Value Cost Estimate for Altemative 3
                                                 Groundwater FFS
                                   Bog Creek Superfund Site, Howell, New Jersey


                                             PRESENT VALUE COSTS
                       LINE ITEM                                                                       Npy^
Constructiort                                            $2,272,000 LS               1   $2,272,000 $2,272,000
OM&M Years 1-2                                            $811,000 Year              2   $1,622,000 $1,466,000
OM&M Years 3-10                                            $543,000 Year             8   $4,344,000 $2,832,000
OM&M Years 11-30                                       |   $298.000 Year            20   $5,960,000 $1,605,000
 OTAL COST

1. Discount rate s 7%
2. Line item unit costs were rounded to the nearest $1000.
3. Total net present value was rounded to the nearest $100,000.



                                                                    iHiOkliZilMil
Project Administration                                      $69,000 LS                      $89,000
temporary Facilities                                        $23,000 LS                      $23,000
Surveying                                                   $20,000 LS                      $20,000
Constmction QA'QC                                           $22,000 LS                      $22,000
H&S and Engineering Controls                                $22,000 LS                      $22,000
RA Report/As-built Drawings                                 $32,000 LS                      $32,000
OM&M Manual                                                 $32,000 LS                      $32,000
                                            SUBTOTAL                                       $240,000

Treatabllltv Study
Pilot Study Design and Execution                            $40,000 LS                      $40,000
                                            SUBTOTAL                                        $40,000

Drilling and Well Installation
Mctol6emob                                                  $10,000 LS                      $10,000
Drilling and Well Installation                             $130,000 LS                     $130,000
                                            SUBTOTAL                                       $140,000

Slte/CMI Construction
Mobilization/Demobilization                                 $20,000 LS                      $20,000
Yard Trenching and Piping                                   $53,000 LS                      $53,000
Existing System Demolition and Building Modification       $200,000 LS                     $200,000
                                          SUBTOTAL!                                        $273,000

Treatment System Construction and Startup
Treatment System                                           $374,000 LS                     $374,000
Startup Verification Testing                                $60,000 LS                      $60,000
                                            SUBTOTAL                                       $434,000

  SUBTOTAL COST                                                                          $1,127,000
  Engineering                                                                              $300,000
  Construction Inspection (15%)                                                            $169,000
  Contrartor OH&P (30%)                                                                    $338,000
  Contingency (30%)                                                                        $338,000
llTOTALCOST




                                                                                                                 Pagelof2


                                                                                   500881

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        Tables
                                      Present Value Cost Estimate for Alternative 3
                                                   Groundwater FFS
                                     Bog Creek Superfund Site, HowelL New Jersey

                      Annual Operations and Maintenance Cost Estimate T Year 1 and 2               |
                           UNE ITEM                                                       COST'
      O&M Labor                                            $78,000 Year               1    $78,000
      Electric                                             $11,000 Mo                12   $132,000
      Chemicals/Consumbles                                   $1,000 Mo               12    $12,000
      LPGAC Changeout                                      $19,000 Year               1    $19,000
      VPGAC Changeout                                      $96,000 Year               1    $96,000
      PPZ Changeout                                        $48,000 Year               1    $48,000
      Miscellaneous Equipment Replacement                  $10,000 Year               1    $10,000
      CompUance Sampling                                     $4,000 Mo               12    $48,000
      System Performance Sampling/Analysis                 $10,000 Year               1    $10,000
      Environmental Monitoring                             $35,000 Event              4   $140,000
      OM&M Reports                                         $14,000 EA                 4    $56,000
      SUBTOTAL COST                                                                       $649,00C
      Contingency (25%)                                                                   $162,000
      TOTAL COST                                                                        •EHIEET]

                      Anntial Operations and Maintenance Cost Estimate - Years 3 to 10
                           LINE ITEM                                                         COST
      O&MUbor                                               $47,000 Year                1     $47,000
      Electric                                              $11,000 Mo                 12    $132,000
      Chemicals/Consumbles                                    $1,000 Mo                12     $12,000
      LPGAC Changeout                                       $10,000 Year                1     $10,000
      VPGAC Changeout                                       $48,000 Year                1     $48,000
      PPZ Changeout                                          $24,000 Year               1     $24,000
      Miscellaneous Equipment Replacement                   $10,000 Year                1     $10,000
      Compliance Sampling                                     $4,000 Mo                12     $48,000
      System Performance Monitorbig                           $5,000 Year               1      $5,000
      Enyironmental Monitoring                               $35,000 Event              2     $70,000
      OM&M Reports                                           $14.000 EA                 2     $28,000
      SUBTOTAL COST                                                                          $434,000
         ntlngency (25%)                                                                     $109,000
      rOTAL COST                                                                          •iWi^i'l'l'!

                      Annual Operations and Maintenance Cost Estimate • Years 11 to 30
                           LINE ITEM
       O&M Labor                                            $31,000 Year                1    $31,000
       Electric                                              $7,000 Mo                 12    $84,000
       Chemicals/Consumbles                                  $1,000 Mo                 12    $12,000
       LPGAC Changeout                                       $3,000 Year                1     $3,000
       VPGAC Changeout                                              Year                          $0
       PPZ Changeout                                                Year                          $0
       Miscellaneous Equipment Replacement                  $10,000 Year                1    $10,000
       Compliance Sampling                                   $4,000 Mo                 12    $48,000
       System Performance Mcmitoring                         $1,000 Year                1     $1,000
                                                            $35,000 Event               1    $35,000
       OM&M Reports                                         $14,000 EA                  1    $14,000
       SUBTOTAL COST                                                                        $238,000
       Contingency (25%)                                                                     $60,000
      ffrOTAL COST                                                                        •EMXKD
      1. SVE/AS system shutdown in Year 10. GWTS continues to operate to Year 30.
      2. Of^as treatment shutdown in Year 10, emissions bek)w NJDEP discharge limits.




CDM                                                                                                      Page2of2
                                                                                        500882

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         Table 6-1
                                                         Potential Chemical-specific ARAR^TBCs
                                                                    Groimdwater FFS
                                                      Bog Creek Superfund Site, Howell, New Jersey

     1 AcVAuthority              CriteriVIssues                atation                 Status   1             Brief Description              1      FS Considenition         |
     1 Federal Safe       National Prinuiry Drinking       40 CFR 141              Relevant and 1 Establishes health-and technology-         1 The M(3Ls will be considered 1
     1 Drinking Water Act Water Standards-Maximtun                                 Appropriate    based standards for public drinking         in developing preliminary
                          Continninant Levels (MCLs)                                              water sy.stpiiis. Also establishes          remediation goals.
                          and Maximum Contaminant                                                 drinking wato: quality goals set at
                          Level Ckials (MCLGs)                                                    levels at which no adverse health
                                                                                                  effects are anticipated, with an
                                                                                                  adequate margin of safety.
       Federal Safe       Natioiud Secondary Drinking      40 CFR 143              To Be          Establishes standards for public           The Secondary MCLs win be
     1 Drinking Water Act Water Standards-Secondary                                considered     diinkmg water systems fot those            considered in developing    1
                          MCLs                                                                    contamirumts which impact the              preliminary remediation     1
                                                                                                  aesthetic qualities of drinking water.     Roals.
     1 Federal Resource      Groundwater Protection        40 CFR 264,             To Be          Establishes standards for groimdwater      The promulgated values are 1
       Conservation and      Standards and Maximum         Subpart F               considered     protection.                                compared to the maximum     1
     1 Recovery Act          Concentration Limits                                                                                            levels to determine   tiie  1
                                                                                                                                             magnitude of contamination. 1
       State of New Jersey   Drinking Water Standards-     N.J.A.C 7:10 Safe       Relevant and   Establishes MCLs that are generally        The MCLs will be considered 1
     1 Statutes and Rules    Maximum Contaminant           Drinking Water          Appropriate    equal to or more stringent than Federal    in developing preliminaiy   1
                             Levels (MCLs)                 Act                                    MCLs.                                      remediation goals.           |
     1 State of New Jersey   National Secondary Drinking   N.J.A.C 7:10-7          Relevant and   Establishes standards for pubhc            The Secondary MCLs win be 1
     i Statutes and Rules    Water Standards-Secondary     Safe Drinking           Appropriate    drinkiitg water systems fior tiiose        considered in developing    1
                             MCLs                          Water Act                              contaminants which impact (he              prehminaiy remediation      1
U1
o
                                                                                                  aestiietic qualities of drinking water.    goals.                          1
o     State of New Jersey    Groundwater Quality           N.J.A.C7:9^             Applicable     Table 1 and Table 2 establish standards    Used as the primary basis for 1
00    Statutes and Rules     Standards                     (Groundwater                           for tiie protection of groundwater
00                                                                                                                                           setting numerical criteria for 1
U)                                                         Quality                                quality.                                   groundwater cleanups.          1
                                                           Standards           {
     1 State of New Jersey 1 Smface Water Quality          N.J.A.C7:9B             Relevant and   Establishes standards for the protection   Remedy must consider            1
       Statutes and Rules    Standards                     Surface Water           Appropriate    and enhancement of surface water           protection of Squankum          1
                                                           Quality                                resources.                                 Brook.                          1
                                                           Standards           |



                                                                                                                                                                  Fag«iofl

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        Table 6-2
                                                        Potential Location-specific ARARs/TBCs
                                                                  Groundwater FFS
                                                    Bog Creek Superfund Site, Howell, New Jersey

      1 AcVAufliority                 CriteriVIssnes                Citation        Status                Brief Description                           FS Consideration           |
      1 Federal National      Statement of Polity on            40 CFR 6,        Applicable   Establishes EPA policy and guidance for          The potential effects of any     1
       Environmental Policy   Floodplains/ Wetiands             AppendbcA                     canying out Executive Order 11988 -              action will be evaluated to
       Act(NEPA),             Assessments for CERCLA                                          Protection of Floodplains and Executive          ensure tiut die planning and
                              Actions                                                         Order. Action must avoid advose effects,         decision-making reflect
                                                                                              minimize potential harm and restore and
                                                                                              preserve natural and boieficial values of tiie  andfloodplainsmanagonait,       1
                                                                                              floodplain.                                     including restoration and       1
                                                                                                                                              preservaticm of natural,
                                                                                                                                              undeveloped       floodplains.  1
      Federal (Non-           Floodplains Management            EO 11988         To Be        Federal agencies are required to provide       The potential effects of aity
      Regulatoty)             Executive Order (EG 11988)                         Considered   leadership and take action to reduceflierisk action will be evaluated to        1
                                                                                              of flood loss, to minimize the impact of        ensure that the planning and    1
                                                                                              floods on human safety, healtii and welfare. decision-making reflect            1
                                                                                              and to restore and {seserve the natural and     consideration of flood hazards 1
                                                                                              beneficial values served by floodplains.       andfloodplainsmanagement,        1
                                                                                                                                              including restoration and       1
                                                                                                                                             preservation of natural,         1
                                                                                                                                             undeveloped        floodplains.  1
      Fednal (Non-            Wetiands Executive Order (EO      EO 11990         To Be        Federal agencies are required to minimi/e      Remedial altematives       tiiat 1
      Regulatoiy)             U990)                                              Considered   the destruction, loss, or degradation of       involve construction must        1
                                                                                              wetiands and to preserve and enhance           include all practicable means of 1
                                                                                              natural and beneficial values of wetiands.     minimizing harni to wetlands. 1
                                                                                                                                             Wetiands protection              1
                                                                                                                                             cmisiderations must be           1
                                                                                                                                             incorporated into tiie planning 1
                                                                                                                                             and decisicm-making about        1
(Jl                                                                                                                                          remedial altematives.            1
o     Federal Clean Water     Section 404(bXl) Guidelines for   40 CFR 230-233   Applicable   Restricts tile disposal of dredged or fill     Potentially q^licable      fin-  1
S     Act                     Specification of Disposal Sites                                 materials to wethmds or waters of the          constmction activities performed 1
00                            for Dredge or Fill Material;                                    United States, unless no ottier practicable    in the vicinity of a wetiand or  1
                              Section 404(c) Procedures; 404                                  altemative is available. Provides permit       waterway. Pomits may be          1
                              Program Definitions; 404 State                                  guidelines for situations where no other       required for certain ranedial 1
                              Program Regulations                                             attemative is available in order to mitigate   ahematives.                      1
                                                                                              wetiand unpacts.                             |

                                                                                                                                                                     Pagclof2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                 Table 6-2
                                                 Potential Location-specific ARARs/TBCs
                                     Groundwater FFS, Bog Greek Superfund Site, Howell, New Jersey

     1 Ac^Authority                   Criteria/bsuea                   atation            Status                   Brief Description               1        FS Consideration          |
      Federal Endangered     1 Protection oftiireatenedand        16 u s e 1531 et    1 Applicable   1 Statute regarding the special preservation  1  The  potential effects of any   1
      Species Act             endangered species                  seq.;40CFR400                       and protection oftiireatenedand endangered action will be evaluated to
                                                                                                      species of fish and wildlife.                  asure that any endangered or
                                                                                                                                                    threatened species would not be
                                                                                                                                                     affected.
      Federal Fish and        Statonent of Procedures for         16 u s e 2901 et     Applicable     Establishes EPA policy and guidance for       Applicable for constmction       1
      Wildlife                Non-game F i ^ and Wildlife         seq.                                promoting the conservation of non-game        activities which m ^ potentially 1
      Conservation Act        Protection                                                              fish and wildlife and their habitats. Action uiq>act non-game fish and         1
                                                                                                      must protect fish or wildlife.                wildlife and their habitats.

     Federal National         Procedures for preservation of      16 u s e 469 et.     Applicable    Establishes procedures to provide for           If historical or archeological data 1
     Historic Preservation    historical and archeological data   seq.; 40 CFR                       preservation of historical and archeological    could potmtially be encountered 1
     Act                                                          6301(c)                            data that might be destroyed tiirough           during remediation.                 1
                                                                                                     alteration of terrain as a resuh of a fedoal
                                                                                                     construction project or a federally licensed
                                                                                                     activity or program.
     New Jersey          Protection oftiireatenedand              N.J.S.A.23:2A-1     Applicable     Standards for tiie protection of endangered,    The potential effects of any     1
     Endangered and Ncm- endangered species                       to-13                              non-game and exotic wildlife.                   action will be evaluated to      1
     Game Species                                                                                                                                    ensuretiiatany endangered or     1
     Conservation Act                                                                                                                                threatened species would not be 1
                                                                                                                                                     affected.                       1
     New Jersey              Endangered Plant Species             N.J.SA. 13.1B-      Applicable     Standards for tiie protection of native plant   The potential effects of any    1
     Endanger^ Plant         Program                              15.151 to-15.158;                  species.                                        action will be evaluated to     1
     Species List Act                                             N.JA.C.7:5B                                                                        ensure that any endangered or   1
                                                                                                                                                     tiireatened species would not be 1
                                                                                                                                                     affected.                       1
     New Jersey Flood        Floodplain Use and Limitations       N. J. A. C. 7:13    Applicable     Stirte standards for activities witiiin flood   Floodplain use and limitations 1
in   Hazard Area Control                                                                             plains                                          must be considered during       1
     Act                                                                                                                                             remediation.                     |
00
00
cn   New Jersey              Freshwater Wetiands Protection       N.J.S.A.13:9B-      Applicable     Establish requirements for the protection of    Applicable for construction        1
     Freshwater Wetiand      Act Rules                            1;N.J.A.C.7:7A                     freshwater wetiands. Requires permits for       activities performed in the        1
     Protection Act                                                                                  construction witiiin wetiand areas.             vicinity of a wetiand or           1
                                                                                                                                                     waterway.                          |


                                                                                                                                                                            Pige2of2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                      Table 6-3
                                                       Potential Action-specific ARAR^TBCs
                                                              Groimdwater FFS
                                                Bog Creek Superfund Site, Howell, New Jersey

             Type        Ac^Authority           CriteriVIssues        atation       Statos              Brief Description         1          FS Consideration
          General      Federal Resource     Identification and     40 CFR 261    Applicable     Identifies solid wastes which      Generation of hazardous wastes
         1 Remediation Conservation and     Listing of Hazardous                                are subject to regulation as       possibly includes spent carbon or
                       Recovery Act         Waste                                               hazardous wastes.                  contaminated soil. Hazardous
                                                                                                                                   wastes must be handled and
                                                                                                                                   disposed of in accordance with
                                                                                                                                   RCRA. Chenucal testing and
                                                                                     .                                             characterization of waste required.
                       Federal Resource     Standards. Applicable 40 CFR 262     AppUcable      Establishes requirements (e.g..    Standards will be followed if any
                       Conservation and                                                         EPA ID numbers and                 hazardous wastes are generated on-
                       Recovery Act         Hazardous Waste                                     manifests) for generators of       site.
                                                                                                hazardous waste.
                       Federal Resource     Standards Applicable 40 CFR 264      Relevant and   Establishestiieminimum            Standards will befollowedif any
                       Conservation and     to Owners and                        Appropriate    national standards which          hazardous wastes are generated on^
                       Recovery Act         Operators of                                        define acceptable management      site.
                                            Treatment, Storage,                                 of hazardous waste and
                                            and Disposal                                        standards for hazardous waste
                                            Facilities                                          generators.
                       Federal              Worker Protection    29 CFR 1904     Applicable     Requirements for recording and    Under 40 CFR 300.38, requhements
                       Occupational                                                             reporting occupational irgunes    of OSHA apply to all activities
                       Safety and Healtii                                                       and illnesses                     which fall under jurisdiction of the
                       Act                                                                                                        National Contingency Flan.
                       Federal              Worker Protection      29 CFR 1910   Applicable     Specifies minimum                 Under 40 CFR 300.38, requhements
                       Occupational                                                             requirements to maintain          of OSHA apply to all activities
                       Safety and Healtii                                                       worker health and safety          whichfallunder jurisdiction of the
                       Act                                                                      during hazardous waste            National Contingency Plait
in                                                                                              operations. Includes training
o
o                                                                                               requirements and construction
00                                                                                              safety requirements.
o\                     Federal              Worker Protection      29 CFR 1926   Applicable     Safety and health regulations     Under 40 CFR 300.38, iBquirements
                       Occupatiotud                                                             for construction.                 of OSHA apply to all activities
                       Safety and Health                                                                                          which fall under /urisdiction of the
                       Act                                                                                                        Natioiud Contingency Plan.           1
     \
                                                                                                                                                           Page 1 of 5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                     Table 6-3
                                                      Potential Action-specific ARARs/TBCs
                                                             Groundwater FFS
                                               Bog Creek Superfund Site, Howell, New Jersey

          Type         AcVAuthority          CriteriVIssues          atation       Status              Brief Description      i        FS Consideration
     1 General       New Jersey Statutes Technical                N.J.A.C        Applicable   Established minimum regulatory Operation of the treatment facility 1
      Remediation    and Rules           Requirements for Site    7.26E                       requirements for investigation    must comply with the regulation.
     1 (continued)                       Remediation                                          and remediation of contaminated
                                                                                              sites in New Jersey.

                     New Jersey Statutes Hazardous Waste          N.J.A.C        Applicable   Establish hazardous waste            Altemative development must       1
                     and Rules           Regulations              7:26G-5,.8,-                regulations by adopting Federal      consider the regulatory           1
                                                                  11                          regulations on identification and    requirements.
                                                                                              listing of hazardous waste,
                                                                                              standards for owner and
                                                                                              operators of hazardous waste
                                                                                              treatment, storage and disposal
     1                                                                                        fadUties, and land disposal
                                                                                              restricUuns.
                     New Jersey Soil       Soil Erosion and       N.J.A.C        Applicable   Requires erosion mittgation          Requires erosion control          1
                     Erosion and           Sediment Contiml       16.25A                      during construction activities.      consideration during construction 1
                     Sediment Contix>l     Standards                                                                               activities.
                     New Jersey Noise      Noise Continl          N.JJV.C 7:29   Applicable   Limits the noise generated from      Limits the noise (hat can be       1
                     Control Act of 1971                                                      any industrial, commercial,          generated during remedial          1
                                                                                              public service or community          activities.                        1
Ol
o                                                                                             service facility.                                                       1
o                    New Jersey            New Construction and   N.J.A.C5:23    Applicable   Establishes tiie standards for all   This may be an ARAR to the         I
00
00                   Uniform               Renovation                                         new construction and renovation.     extent that new construction falls 1
                     Construction Code                                                                                             witiun tiie standards.             1




                                                                                                                                                          Pk«e2o(5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   Table 6-3
                                                    Potential Action-specific ARAR^TBCs
                                                           Groundwater FFS
                                             Bog Creek Superfund Site, Howell, New Jersey
                      AcVAuti^or
          Type               ity      CriteriVbanes            atation         Status                 Brief Description                        FS Consideration
     Discharge of     Federal      National Pollution      40 CFR 100,122   Relevant and 1 Issues penmts for discharge into              Water treatment will need to
     Groundwater,     Qean         Discharge               and 125          Appropriate   luiAdgable waters. Establishes criteria and    consider discharge
     Wastewater, or   Water Act    Elimination System                                     standards for imposing treatment               requirements.
     Surface Water                 (NPDHS^                                                requirements on permits.




                      Federal      Effluent Guidelines     40 CFR 414       Relevant and    Requires specific effiuent characteristics   Water treatment will need to
                      Qean         and Standards for the                    Appropriate     for discharge under NPDES jTennits.          consider discharge
                      Water Act    Point Source                                                                                          requirements.
                                   Category
                      Federal      Ambient Water           40 CFR 131.36    To Be           Establishes criteria for surface water       May take into consideration
                      Qean         Quality Criteria                         Considered      quality based on toxicity to aquatic         of the criteria when
                      Water Act                                                             organisms and human health.                  discharging treated
                                                                                                                                         groundwater to surface
                                                                                                                                         water.
                      Federal      Underground             40 CFR 144 and   Applicable     Establishes performance standards, well       Must con^ly with
                      Safe         Ii^ection Control       146                             requiremento, and permitting                  requirements for reinjection
                      Driiddng     Program                                                 requirementa for groundwater reinjection      of treated groundwater.
01                    Water Act                                                            wells.
0
00                    NewJeraey    The New Jersey          N.J.A.C7:14A     Applicable     Establishes standards for discharge of        Disposal of treated
00
00                    Stataites    Pollutant Discharge                                     pollutante to surface water and               groundwater to surface water
                      and Rules    Elimination System                                      groundwater                                   will requhe a NJPDES permit




                                                                                                                                                           Page 3 of S

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                Table 6-3
                                                 Potential Action-specific ARAR^TBCs
                                                        Groundwater FFS
                                          Bog Creek Superfund Site, Howell, New Jersey

     1      Type      AcVAutiiority       CriteriVIssaes      atation       Status             Brief Description                  FS Consideration          |
       Disposal of   Federal Resource Standards AppUcable   40 CFR 263    AppUcable   Establishes standards which         Any company contracted to 1
       Hazardous     Conservation and to Transporters of                              apply to persons transporting and   transport hazardous material     1
     1 Wastes        Recovery Act     Hazardous Waste                                 manifesting hazardous waste         from the site wiU be required to |
                                                                                      within the United States.           comply withtiiisregulation.
                     Federal Resource Land Disposal         40 CFR 268    AppUcable   Identifies hazardous wastes         Waste disposal must comply witii 1
                     Conservation and Restrictions                                    which are restricted from land      LDRs.
                     Recovery Act                                                     disposal. AU Usted and
                                                                                      characteristic hazardous waste or
                                                                                      soil or debris containinated by a
                                                                                      RCRA hazardous waste and
                                                                                      removedfroma CERCLA site
                                                                                      may not be land disposed until
                                                                                      treated as reqtured by LDRs.
                     Federal          Hazardous Materials   49 CFR 107,   AppUcable   Regulates transportation (rf        Transportation of hazardous     1
                     Hazardous        Transportation        171-177                   hazardous materials.                wastes must comply witii the    1
                     Material         Regulations                                                                         regulation.                     1
                     Transportation
                     Act
                     New Jersey       Transportation of     N.J.A.C.      AppUcable   Regulates shipping/transports of Must compty with requirements 1
                     Statutes and     Hazardous Materials   16:49                     hazardous materials.            j in off-site transport of hazardous 1
                     Rules                                                                                              materials.                         1




U1
o
o
00
00




                                                                                                                                               P»—4o£5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                Table 6-3
                                                 Potential Action-specific ARAR^TBCs
                                                        Groimdwater FFS
                                          Bog Creek Superfund Site, Howell, New Jersey

           Type    AcVAntfaority          CriteriVIsmies        atation        Status             Brief Description                    FS Consideration
     1 Off-Gas    Federal Qean Air    National Ambient Air   40 CFR 50       AppUcable    Provides standards for ambient       Need to meet requirements when
                  Act                 QuaUty Standards                                    air quaUty that is protective of     discharging off-gas.
                                                                                          human health

                  Federal Qean Air    Standards of           40 CFR 60       AppUcable    Provides emissions requirements      Need to meet requirements when
                  Act                 Perfonnance for New                                 for new stationary sources.          discharging off-gas.
                                      Stationary Sources

                  Federal Qean Air    National Emission      40 CFR 61       AppUcable    Provides emission standards for 8    Need to meet requirements when
                  Act                 Standards for                                       contaminants including benzene       discharging off-gas.
                                      Hazardous Air                                       and vinyl chloride. Identifies 25
                                      PoUutants                                           additional contaminants, as
                                                                                          having serious health effects but
                                                                                          does not provide emission
                                                                                          standards for these contaminants.
                  Federal Directive   Conbx>lof Air          OSWER           To Be        Provides guidance on the use of      AppUcable to remediation
                                      Emissions from         Directive       Considered   controls for Superfund site air      altematives which involve air
                                      Superfund Air          9355.0-28                    strippers as weU as other vapor      stripping and vapor extraction
                                      Strippers                                           extraction techniques in             process.
                                                                                          attainment and non-attainment
                                                                                          areas for ozone.
                  New Jersey Air      Air Permits and        N.J.A.C7:27-    AppUcable    Describes requirements and           AppUcable to remedfation
                  PoUution Control    Certificates           22                           procedures for obtainmg air          altematives which involve
cn                Act                                                                     permits and certificates.            discharge of vapor.
o
o
00
vo
o
                  New Jersey Air      Standards for          N.J.A.C. 7:27   AppUcable    Rule that govern the emitting of     Need to meet requirements when
                  PoUution Control    Hazardous Air                                       and such activities that result in   discharging off-gas.
                  Act                 PoUutants                                           the introduction of contaminants
                                                                                          into tiie ambient atmosphere.



                                                                                                                                                     PageSofS

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       Appendix III
Administrative Record Index




                              500891

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  BOG CREEK FABM SUPERFUND SITE
                         OPERABLE UNIT 2
                ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD FILE UPDATE
                        INDEX OF DOCUMENTS



5.0   RECORD OF DECISION

5.2   Amendment to the Record of Decision
P.    500001 - Letter to Mr. Ed Finnerty, Project Manager, U.S.
      500002   EPA, Region 2, from Ms. Jeanette Abels, State of
               New Jersey, Department of Environmental Protection,
               re: Boa Creek Farm Superfund Site. Howell. New
               Jersey. Review of Remediation System Evaluation
               Draft Report. July 18, 2002.
P.    500003 - Report: Remediation System Evaluation. Boa Creek
      500051   Farm Superfund Site. Howell Township. Monmouth
               County. New Jersev. Report of the Remediation
               System Evaluation, Site Visit Conducted at the Boa
               Creek Farm Superfund Site. April 16-17. 2002. Final
               Report, prepared by GeoTrans, Inc. and the U.S.
               Army Corps of Engineers, prepared for United States
               Environmental Protection Agency, September 30,
               2002.
P.    500052 - Letter to Mr. Ed Finnerty, Project Manager, U.S.
      500054   EPA, Region 2, from Ms. Jeanette Abels, State of
               New Jersey, Department of Environmental Protection,
               re: Boa Creek Farm Superfund Site. Howell. New
               Jersey. Selection of Remediation Technology for
               Additional Contamination Removal. October 29, 2002.

P.    500055 - Memorandum (w/attachment) for EC-ED (File), re:
      500058   Boa Creek Contaminant Reduction Recommendations.
               November 15, 2002.
P.    500059 - Report: Data Report. December. 2003. Boa Creek
      500190   Farm Superfund Site. Lona-term Groundwater
               Monitorina. Howell. New Jersey, prepared by U.S.
               Army Corps of Engineers, prepared for United States
               Environmental Protection Agency, Region II, March
               2004.

                                                      500892

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

p.   500191 - Memorandum (w/attachment) to PM-E (Daniels),from
     500198   EC-ED (Bales), re: Boa Creek Alternatives and
              Estimate Evaluations. May 4, 2004
P.   500199 - Memorandum (w/attachment) to Mr. Bill McCabe,
     500204   Acting Director, Emergency and Remedial Response
              Division, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
              Region II, from Ms. Carole Petersen, Chief, New
              Jersey Remediation Branch, U.S. Environmental
              Protection Agency, Region II, re: Explanation of
              Significant Differences (ESD) for the Boa Creek
              Farm Superfund Site. Howell Township. Monmouth
              County. New Jersey. January 3, 2005.

P.   500205 - Report: Final Groundwater Focused Feasibility Study
     500433   (FFS) Report. Boa Creek Superfund Site. Howell.
              New Jersey, prepared by CDM Federal Programs
              Corporation, prepared for U.S. Army Corps of
              Engineers, Kansas City District, June 2005.
P.   500434 - Report: Streamlined Human Health Risk Assessment.
     500559   Focused Feasibility Study. Boa Creek Farm Superfund
              Site, Howell Township. New Jersev, prepared by CDM
              Federal Programs Corporation, prepared for U.S.
              Airmy Corps of Engineers, Kansas City District, June
              2005.
P.   500560 - Report: Screening Level Ecological Risk Assessment.
     500693   Focused Feasibility Study. Bog Creek Farm Superfund
              Site. Howell Township. New Jersey, prepared by CDM
              Federal Programs Corporation, prepared for U.S.
              Army Corps of Engineers, Kansas City District, June
              2005.

P.   500694 - Report: Final Data Summary Report. Focused
     500818   Feasibility Study. Bog Creek Superfund Site. Howell
              Township New Jersey, prepared by CDM Federal
              Programs Corporation, prepared for U.S. Army Corps
              of Engineers, Kansas City District, August 2005.
P.   500819 - Report: Superfund Program Post-Decision Proposed
     500832   Plan, Bog Creek Farm Superfund Site, prepared by
              U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region II,
              August 2005.




                                                           500893

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      Appendix IV
State Concurrence Letter




                           500894

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APR-27-200S 17:17 FROM:REMEDIATION MGT & RE 609 984 6514                                  10:912126374393           P:5^10




                                              ^ t a t e xxi ^ z i a 3)era£g
Richurd J. (\xJcy                           Departmenl of Envinniiiienul Protection                          Bradley M. Camphdl
 Aautit CMtvemur                                                                                                Comnuisioncr


                                                      SEP 2 ^ '?nni;


              Honorable Alan J. Steinberg, Regional Admiiustralor
              United States Environmenial Prolection Agency Region 11
              290 Broadway
              New York, NY 10007-1866

               Re:    Record of Decision (ROD) Amendment for Operable Unit #2
                      Bog Creek Farm Superiund Site
                      Howe)] Tovvnship, Monmouth County, New Jersey


              Dear Mr. Steinberg:

               The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (Department) has completed its
              review of the September 2005 Draft Record of Decision (ROD) for Operable Unit #2
              (0U2) which addresses, the contaminated groundwater aquifer. We are pleased to concur
              with the chosen remedial alternative.

               Groundwater at the Site is contaminated with volatile organic compounds (VOCs). semi-
               volatilc organic compounds (SVOCs), pesticides, and metals. A groundwater extraction
               and treatment system has been in operation since August 1995 as an interim remedial
               mea.sure for 0U2. The system consists of extracting contaminated groundwater, treating it
               at an on-site ireaiment facility, and re-injecting the treated water at the up-gradienl end of
               the plume.

              The Amended Remedy, Allemaiive 3, described in this ROD Amendment calls for a
              modified groundwater extraction and treatment system, followed by re-injection of the
              treated water into the aquifer. Unlike the groundwater treatment system currently in place,
              the Amended Remedy allows for placement and pumping of the groundwater recovery
              wells to HMich the post-excavation Site conditions and to actively pump the most highly
              contaminated areas at the Site. In addition, ifit is determined that residual hot spots in soils
              remain after the cun-ent excavation phase is completed, the Amended Remedy allows for in
              situ treatment of the remaining hot spots. The Amended Remedy will treat and restore
              groundwater at the Site so that it meets New Jersey Groundwater Quality Standards for
              Class IIA Aquifers (see Appendix II, Table 1) and will reduce Site cleanup time and life-
              cycle costs compared with the 1989 ROD remedy.




                                                                                                         500895

                                           New Jeriey in an K^iuxl Opportunity Employer
                                                          Recycled Paper

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ftPR-27-5002 17:18   FROM:REMEDIATION MGT & RE 609 984 6514                   T0:91212S374393        P:6'10




          We appreciate Ac opportunity to participate in the remedial decision making process and
          the efforts of USEPA to address this contaminated site.

          If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to call me at (609) 292-1250.




                                                           boy, Assistant Commissioner
                                                    Remediation and Waste Management Program




          cc:    Edward Finnerty, USEPA
                 Ihomas K. O'Neill, NJDEP BOMM
                 Jeanette Abels, NJDEP BOMM
                 David Kaplan, NJDEP BGWPA
                 John Prendergast, NJDEP BEERA
                 Craig Wallace, NJDEP BDC
                 Frank Cardiello, DOL




                                                                                            500896

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Appendix V
Responsiveness Summary




                     500897

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         BOG CREEK FARM
                          SUPERFUND SETE
            HOWELL TOWNSmP, MONMOUTH COUNTY, NEW JERSEY
                              RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY


A. Overview
As a part of its public participation responsibilities, the U.S. Envirormiental Protection Agency
(EPA) held a public comment period from August 15,2005 to September 13,2005, for interested
parties to comment on EPA's Post-Decision Proposed Plan to amend the remedy which
addresses the contaminated groimdwater at the Bog Creek Farm Site in Howell Township, New
Jersey. In addition, on August 31,2005, EPA conducted a public meeting to receive oral
conmients on the Post-Decision Proposed Plan. The Post-Decision Proposed Plan described the
altematives that EPA considered, including EPA's Preferred Altemative 3: Groimdwater
Extraction and Treatment with In Situ Treatment. EPA did not receive any written comments
during the public comment period, but by judging by the comments received at the pubUc
meeting, the community supports EPA's preferred dtemative.
The responsiveness smnmary contains the following sections:
A. Overview
B. Background of Coirmiunity Involvement
C. Summary of Oral Comments Received During the Public Comment
  Period and Agency Responses
Appendix A contains the Post-Decision Proposed Plan that was distributed to the pubUc for
review and comment;
Appendix B contains the public notice which appeared in the Asburv Park Press: and
Appendix C contains the transcript of the public meeting.
B. Background of Community Involvement
Before the release of the Post-Decision Proposed Plan for the Operable Unit 2 (0U2) cleanup of
the contaminated groundwater at the Bog Creek Farm Site, EPA held a public meeting on Jime 1,
2005 to discuss the status ofwork at the Site including the on-going excavation of contaminated
soils, the development of the Focused Feasibility Study and the Post-Decision Proposed Plan
leading to the development of the ROD Amendment for contaminated groundwater.
The FFS Report, Post-Decision Proposed Plan and supporting documentation were made
available to the public in the Administrative Record file at the Superfund Document Center in
EPA-Region II, 290 Broadway, 18* floor. New York, New York 10007 and at the information
repository at the Howell Library, 318 Old Tavem Road, Howell, New Jersey 07731. The notice
of availability for the above-referenced documents were published in the Asburv Park Press on
August 16, 2005. On August 31,2005, EPA conducted a public meeting in Howell Township to
inform local officials and interested citizens about the Superfimd process, to review proposed
remedial activities at the Site and receive comments on the Post-Decision Proposed Plan, and to
respond to questions from area residents and other interested parties. The public meeting was
held at the Howell Township Municipal Building 251 Preventorium Road in Howell Township,
Comments on the preferred remedy were only received during the public meeting. No written
comments were submitted. The oral comments receivedfromthe pubUc and EPA's written
responses can be found in the next section of this summary.
                                                                                    500898

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

C. Summary of Oral Comment Received During the Public
  Comment Period and Agency Responses
1.     One attendee asked about the removal efficiency of therecommendedair stripper and
       carbon system.
»-     EPA explained that the details of the treatment system will be determined during the
       design phase, but that contaminants can be removed via air stripping, carbon polishing,
       or vapor treatment. Further evaluations are conducted to make the necessary design
       decisions. Air strippers usually have a removal efficiency ofgreater than 99 percent.
2.     The questioner also inquired about possible releases of contaminants to the atmosphere
       from the air stripper.
*•     EPA noted that before operation of the treatment system is initiated, ifit is determined to
       be necessary, an air permit will be obtainedfrom the New Jersey Department of
       Environmental Protection. Anything discharged will comply with the discharge permit.
       Discharge limits of the permit will not be determined until the design phase is completed.

Written Comments Received During the Public Comment Period
No written comments were received during the public comment period.




                                                                                 500899

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        APPENDIX A
Post-Decision Proposed Plan




                         500900


                                  •"r^-"- " - - ^ ^

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  Superfund Program                                              U.S. Environmental Protection
  Post-Decision Proposed Plan                                    Agency. Region II     <^<^^^%_
                                                                                                     i & ^ %
  Bog Creek Farm Superfund Site
  August 2005                                                                                                          ^
                                                                                                          ^ i p n O ^<!^


EPA ANNOUNCES POST-DECISION PROPOSED
PLAN                                                                                                          ^P^
This Post-Decision Proposed Plan identifies the proposed
change to the groundwater remedy selected in the 1989
Operable Unit 2 Record of Decision for the Bog Creek             onTmentsbn thelPost-Decisroh (proposed Plan during"flie
                                                                 ubliCCTrnmenljeflcfflf^^                --Sjt • - « ' ,
Farm Site (Site) located in Howell Township, New Jersey,
and provides the rationale for this modification. Described
below are the remedial (cleanup) altematives that the U.S.'        Cs.EPA'willSoldlTpubliGmeetingtoew)Ia!nthaPo^ :
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) considered to                 lecision^PfDposedJ^Jan and all of theTiitemative£3i^S|j. t
                                                                   resented In tlTe Focused Feasibility Study Oral'a'nbw^,
remediate containinated groundwater at the Site, and EPA's      f written comments will a'so be accppted at the meeting^'
preferred altemative with the rationale for this preference.    iThe meeting will be held at the Howell Townslii^ •>-'' . -'
The Preferred Altemative calls for a modified system for       '^f)runicipal Building Council Chambers located at.25]jrv
                                                                 ^Vventonum Road, HoAeil Townshipi.N'jij£i^St&^' • '•
the extraction and treatment of contaminated groundwater,
followed by re-injection of the treated water into the                     Information, see the Administrative Record
aquifer. In addition, the preferred altemative includes a              foiiowi^^a !o"«on.^HgiyS|i'^7.^i..".'
provision for simultaneous in situ (in place) treatment of
the groimdwater to hasten removal of the contamination if                       Center, Reglon-Ut'i99e^V>^''.'^-'
                                                                  90 BrDadwgy.j18*Floog^-^^^k-|f.jfe*:^i.->„ " j -
it is determined to be necessary following monitoring of                         :;00P7-1
Site conditions after the completion of the contaminated
soil excavation cim«ntly underway. This Post-Decision
                                                                 4ew.
                                                                 loweirtjliialjfJ^^^^gg^^P^flpgii!^^^
                                                                                                                           'I
                                                                 318'Old TavemRoadj
Proposed Plan includes summaries of all cleanup                  Howell, l^JLO:
alternatives evaluated for use at this Site.                    |Z32} 938^2^1
                                                                 lours- Mori*.Wad: 10 00 A M : S : 0 0 PM;Tues;;
                                                                     : 9.00 PMiFri, 1:00 PMJ- 5.00' BM;SaLi
This document is issued by EPA, the lead agency for Site
activities, and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP), the stqqxnt agency for
this project EPA, in consultation with NJDEP, will select      review these documents to gain a more contprehensive
a final remedy for the Site groimdwater after reviewing and    understanding of die Site and Siqierfimd activities that have
considering all information submitted during the 30-day        been conducted at the Site.
public comment period. EPA, in consultation with the
NJDEP, may modify the Preferred Altemative or select           SITE mSTORY
another response action presented in this Plan based on new
information or pubhc comments. Therefore, the public is        The Bog Creek Farm Siq)erfimd Site is located in a rural,
encouraged to review and comment on all of the                 agricultural and recreational area of Howell Township,
altematives presented in this Post-Decision Proposed Plan.     Monmouth County, New Jersey at 579 County Road 547.
                                                               The Site is bordered by two residences to the west, open
EPA is issuing this Post-Decision Proposed Plan as part of     fields to the south and east, and the north branch of
its community relations program under section 117(a) of        Squankum Brook to the north. Several farms raising
the Comprehensive Environmental Response,                      horses, nursery stock, vegetables, grain, sod, and flowers
Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA or Supa-fimd).          are situated nearby. Allaire State Park, used by golfers,
This Post-Decision Proposed Plan summarizes information        fisherman, hunters, and equestrians, is located
that can be found in greater detail in the Bog Creek Farm      approximately one half mile east of the Site. There are
Superfund Site Focused Feasibility Study (FFS) report and      approximately 900 people living within one mile of the
other documents contained in the Administrative Record         Site.
file for this Site. EPA and NJDEP encourage the public to
                                                                                                          500901                 J

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Initial cleanup action (1984)          The Site owner partially excavated contaminated wastesfix)mthe Site for
                                        disposal at an EPA-approved landfill.

 Record of Decision (ROD) -             Containinated soils and sediments were excavated and incinerated on-site in
 Operable Unit (OU) 1 (1985)            1989 and 1990 in accordance with the 1985 ROD. Contaminated water fit)m a
                                        former pond and bog were collected and treated in an aqueous waste treatment
                                        system.
 ROD - 0U2 (1989)                       A slurry wall was constmcted along Squankum Brook to protect against a
                                        contaminated groundwater discharge to the Brook's northem branch. A
                                        groundwater pump and treat system was constrocted to extract and treat
                                        contaminated groundwater. Full operation of die treatment system began in
                                        1995 and remains ongoing.
 Explanation of Significant              EPA is currently removing additional VOC-contaminated soil. The excavation,
 Differences (ESD) (2005)                off-site shipment of contaminated soil, backfilling and final restoration of
                                         contaminated areas are scheduled to be completed by May 2006.


  ROD - modification of 0U2 ROD          Expedited remediation of remaining groundwater contamination. Preferred
  (2005, the subject of this Post-       remedy includes a modified groundwater pump and treat system, along with an
  Decision Proposed Plan)                in situ (in place) groundwater treatment technology if needed.


The Site soil and groundwater are containinated with            operations. During 1973 and 1974, various wastes,
volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and a variety of other        including organic solvents, paintresidues, lacquer thinners,
contaminants, hi addition, nearby Squankum Brook is             animal carcasses, and residential debris, were dumped in
designated as a New Jersey Department of Environmental          open areas and excavated pits on the eastem part of die 12-
Protection Category 1 (CI) Surface Water body, which            acre farmland property.            Subsequent remedial
eventually discharges to the Manasquan River (also              investigations (RI) revealed two primary waste areas at die
Category 1). Category I is a special level of protection that   Site. The major area was a Former Waste Trench located
targets water bodies that provide drinking water, habitat for   approximately 300 feet south of Squankum Brook in the
Endangered and Threatened species, and popular                  center of the Site. The trench, filled with chemicals and
recreational and/or commercial ^>ecies, such as trout or        debris, was ajqifoximately 150 feet long, 40 feet wide and
shellfish. Waterways can be designated Category 1                10 feet deep. A smaller waste area, containing several
because ofexceptional ecological significance, excq)tional      buried drums, was found approximately 130 feet east of die
water supply significance, exceptional recreational             trench in the Former Disposal Area.
significance, exceptional shellfish resource, or exceptional
fisheries resource. The Category 1 designation provides          The Site was added to the National Priorities List (NPL) in
additional protections that help prevent water quality           1983. In 1984, EPA conducted field investigations at the
degradation and discourage development where it would            Site, hi 1985, EPA issued a Record of Decision (ROD) for
impair or destroy natural resources and environmental            the Site to address these verified sources of contamination.
quality.                                                         In 1989 and 1990, contaminated soils and sediments were
                                                                 excavated and incinerated on-site in accordance with die
An existing groundwater treatment building and plant are         1985 ROD. In addition, contaminated waterfroma former
currently located on the Site, as part of an ongoing EPA         pond and bog were collected and treated in an aqueous
remediation. See Figures 1 and 2 for Site maps.                  waste treatment system at tiie Site.

VOC contamination in Site soil and groundwater reportedly        A second ROD was issued in 1989 in which EPA selected
resultedfiromthe dumping of chemical wastes associated           a remedy to address the remaining groundwater
with the former property owner's paint manufacturing             contamination.  To protect against contaminated


                                                                                                           500902

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     ^Sl^^^s




Ol
o
o
vo
o
U)
                                                                           Oflfa layers source: www.nj.gov\dep\gls

                                                                                           Figure 1-1
                              •^jh•                                                Site Location Map
                                                                                 Bog Creelt Farm Site
                                               IFM*
               0   6001,000   2,000   3,000   4,000
                                                      Howeil Township, iMonmoutli County, New Jersey

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                     / ^ .


                                                         \.y

                •x..^




         County
        Route 547


1/1
o
o
<o
o
ilk




      Atop btatd on dtt» Ihm USACE




                                 •

                              • — "
                                      Squankum Brook

                                      Fence

                                      Extraction Wells

                                      ShJnyWall
                                                                 •-f-         I Feet
                                                                                                                          Figure 1-2
                                                                                                                           Site Map
                                                                                                                Bog Creek Farm Site
                                                                                       Howeil Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey
                                                         0   25 50    100    150

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

groundwater discharge to the north branch of Squankum                          WHAT IS A "PRINCIPAL THREAT?
Brook, a slurry wall was constmcted along the brook. In
                                                                   The National Contingency Plan (NCP) establishes an
addition, a pump and treat system was constmcted to                expectation that EPA will use treatment to address the principal
extract and treat the contaminated groundwater before re-          threats posed by a site wherever practicable (NCP Section
injecting it back into the groundwater. This treatment             300.430(a)(1 )(iii)(A)). The "principal threat" concept is applied
system began full operation in August 1995, and is                 to the characterization of 'source materials' at a Superfund
                                                                   site. A source material is material that includes or contains
currenflyinits 10*year of operation. However, despite the          hazardous substances, pollutants or contaminants that act as
source control excavation and ongoing groundwater                  a reservoir for migration of contamination to groundwater,
treatment, chemicals of concem in the groundwater persist          surface water or air, or acts as a source for direct exposure.
at concentrations exceeding current maximum contaminant            Contaminated groundwater generally is not considered to be a
                                                                   source material; however, Non-Aqueous Phase Liquids
levels (MCLs).                                                     (NAPLs) in groundwater may be viewed as source material.
                                                                   Principal threat wastes are ttiose source materials considered
                                                                   to t>e highly toxic or highly mot>ile that generally cannot be
EPA has conducted numerous tests and investigations to              reliably contained, or would present a significant risk to human
determine the most effective method of extracting                   health or the environment stiould exposure occur. Ttie decision
additional contaminants fipom the contaminated aquifer.            to treat these wastes Is made on a site-specific basis through
The objective ofthetestsand investigations was to evaluate          a detailed analysis of the altematives using the nine remedy
                                                                    selection criteria This analysis provides a basis for making a
methods for attaining the groundwater cleanup goals                 statutory finding that the remedy employs treatment as a
(estaWished in die Operable Unit (OU) 2 ROD, 1989)                  principal element
thereby reducing the number of years the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection would have to
operate the pump and treatment system after assuming
operation and maintenance responsibilities for the Site.
Based upon the results of the tests and investigations, EPA        SITE CHARACTERISTICS
confirmed that the existing treatment plant (which is
performing iq> to design specifications) would have to             As part of the Focused Feasibility Study, groundwater
operate for many years to attain the cleanup goals because         modeling was performed to better understand the existing
significant sub-surface soil contamination remains at the          hydrogeologic conditions at the Site. A conceptual site
Site.                                                              model was also developed to summarize the contamination
                                                                   sources, contaminant transport and fate, and exposure
In May 2004, EPA and the U.S. Army Corp. of Engineers              pathways. EPA recently completed additional soil and
(COE) completed an analysis which provided six                     groundwater sampling.        Soil sanqiling around and
alternatives/cost estimates for additional containinated soils -   underneath the existing groundwater treatment buildings
cleanup, including both on-site and off-site soil treatment        was conducted to delineate the extent of remaining soil
and disposal options. The May 2004 analysis also included          contamination. Groimdwater sampling was performed to
optimization altematives for the groundwater treatment             determine the magnitude of remaining groundwater
plant, and in situ cleanup altematives for the groundwater         contamination. The following sections are based on all of
contaminant plume.                                                 this recent sampling and the modeling completed as part of
                                                                   tiie FFS.
In response to the COE's report and other groundwater and
soil investigations, EPA issued an Explanation of                  Groundwater
Significant Differences (ESD) in January 2005. The ESD
established that an estimated 21,000 cubic yards of VOC-           The Site is underlain by the Kirkwood formation, which is
contaminated soil would need to be excavated in order for          subdivided into the Upper Kirkwood and Lower Kirkwood.
the groundwater treatment remedy to reach its cleanup              Site contamination has only been identified in the Upper
objectives within a reasonable period of time. EPA began           Kirkwood, and it is beheved that the Lower Kirkwood
implementing the scope of work outlined in flie ESD in             behaves as an aquitard, bounding the depth of, and
May 2005. Full implementation includes the excavation              preventing downward migration of, contamination. The
and off-site shipment of contaminated soils, backfilling,          depth to water across the Site ranges from 0 feet at the
and final restoration of the excavated areas. These activities     Squankum Brook to approximately 10 feet. The hydraulic
are scheduled for completion prior to May 2006.                    conductivity is estimated at approximately 1 to 6 ft/day
                                                                   within the contaminated area.

                                                                   Beneath the Kirkwood formation is the Manasquan
                                                                   formation, which is predominantiy clayey silt and acts as a

                               500905

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

confining layer. Previous investigations have found that          to the saturation concentrations, primarily for benzene and
contamination is limitedtothe Upper Kirkwood; therefore,          toluene.
the stratigraphy of the Manasquan formation is not
discussed.                                                        In addition, some sample results have identified
                                                                  contamination in the vicinity of Squankum Brook, nortii of
Upper Kirkwood                                                    the existing slurry wall that was installed as part of tiie
                                                                  ongoing groundwater remediation selected in the 1989
The thickness of the Upper Kirkwood unit varies,                  ROD to protect discharge to the Brook. It is believed tiiat
increasing from 10 feet thick near the north branch of            this contamination was already present priortoconstmction
Squankum Brook to approximately 30 feet thick near the            of the slurry wall.
former disposal areas. The upper unit is predominantly
very fine to fine sand with some silty sands and coarser          Existing Groundwater Remedy
materials. The predominant flow of groundwater in the
Upper Kirkwood is in a northeasterly direction in the area        The existing groundwater remedy is a pump and treat
of contamination of the Bog Creek Sitetowardthe previous          system that is a modification of the plant originally used to
waste trenches and then toward the north branch of                treat water generated during the excavation of the trench,
Squankum Brook. The groundwater then discharges into              pond, and bog in 1990. The system consists of an
the north branch of Squankum Brook, which serves as a             extraction system, treatment plant (ex situ treatment), and
barrier for groundwater in the Upper Kirkwood. Any                re-injection gallery. The extraction system operates
groundwater contaminants derived from the Site will flow          continuously at arateof 25 to 30 gallons per minute (gpm),
into the north branch of the Squankum Brook. This is              and the treatment plant is operated in batoh mode on
confirmed by groundwater sampling data.                           weekdays when operators are present

Lower Kirkwood                                                    The extraction system is comprised of:

The Lower Kirkwood is relatively uniform in thickness,            •     Slurry wall aligned along the Squankum Brook's
and is estimated to be approximately 30 feet thick across               southem bank
the entire Site. The lower unit consists of silty sands, silts,   •     33 extraction wells aligned inside (upgradient) of die
and clays. Groimdwater flow in the Lower Kirkwood is to                 slurry wall
the east with discharge into the Manasquan River (over a          •     One common manifold attached to all wells
mile to the northeast).                                           •     Vacuum extraction pump
                                                                  •     Influent tank
Nature and Extent of Groundwater Contamination
                                                                  The treatment plant is comprised of:
Based on recent groundwater sampling, the Site remains
significantly contaminated witii a variety of VOCs,               •     pH adjustment
including chlorinated VOC and petroleum hydrocarbon               •     Metals removal
contaminants. Select semi-volatile organic conqjounds             •     Sand filtration
(SVCX^s), metals, and pesticides have also been detected at       •     Two packed-tower air strippers in series
some sampling locations.                                          •     Liquid-phase and vapor-phase granular activated
                                                                        carbon (LPGAC and VPGAC)
The groundwater contamination within the Upper                    •     Eflluent tank
Kirkwood appears to be centralized in two "lobes." The
west lobe is centered approximately 120 feet south of the         Sou
Former Waste Trench. TTiis lobe is roughly 150 feet across
and extends north to the brook. The east lobe is located          EPA recently completed soil sampling around and
northeast of the Former Disposal Area. This lobe is               underneath the existing treatment buildings and former
roughly 120 feet across and is more elongated than the west       disposal areas to delineate the extent of remaining soil
lobe. Sample results also indicate there are a few smaller        contamination. Based on these investigations, EPA has
hot spots present in addition to the primary lobes. The           undertaken the removal of up to 21,000 cubic yards of
presence of light non-aqueous-phase liquid (LNAPL)                VOC-contaminated soil. This activity is scheduled for
appears likely in some areas. This is based on a                  completion by May 2006.
comparison ofVOC concentrations in groundwater relative


                                                                                                       500906

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

WHAT IS RISK AND HOW IS f f CALCULATED?
                                                                  The Site background information and remedial altemative
Superfund baseline human health risk assessment Is an             analyses contained in this Post-Decision Proposed Plan are
analysis of the potential adverse health effects caused by        based on the Site conditions prior to the soil removal action
hazardous substance releases from a site in the absence of        currentiy underway. Because this action will result in
any actions to control or mitigate these releases under           significant removal of groundwater contaminant source
cun«nt and future land uses. A four-step process is utilized
for assessing site-related human health risks for reasonable      materials fixim the Site, future investigations will be
maximum exposure scenarios.                                       necessary before full inqilementation of an altemative to
                                                                  expedite cleanup of the remaining groundwater
Hazard Identification: In this step, the contaminants of          contamination.
concem at the site in various media (i.e., soil, groundwater,
surface water, and air) are identified based on such factors as
toxicity, frequency of occurrence, and fate and transport of      SCOPE AND ROLE OF TfflS ACTION
the contaminants in the environment concentrattons of the
contaminants in specific media, mobility, persistence, and
bk>accumulatk>n.                                                  The contaminated groundwater at the Bog Creek Farm Site
                                                                  has been the focus of an ongoing groundwater extraction
Exposure Assessment: In this step, the different exposure         and treatment remedy since 1995. However, recent
pathways through which people might be exposed to the
contaminants kientified in the prevtous step are evaluated.       monitoring data and evaluations suggest that the existing
Examples of exposure pathways include incidental ingestbn         remedy will not reach groundwater cleanup standards in the
of and dermal contact with contaminated soil. Factors             ten-year time fitime predicted in the 1989 ROD.
relating to the exposure assessment include, but are not          Accordingly, a FFS was performed to develop a better
limited to, the concentrations that people might be exposed
to and the potential frequency and duratton of exposure.          understanding of current Site conditions arid groundwater
Using these factors, a 'reasonable maximum exposure'              contamination, and to evaluate alternative remedies for Site
scenario, wrhich portrays the highest level of human exposure     cleanup. This Post-Decision Proposed Plan focuses aa the
that could reasonably be expected to occur, is calculated.
                                                                  persisting groundwater contamination and describes the
Toxicity Assessment: In this step, the types of adverse health    cleanup altematives evaluated as part of the FFS, as well as
effects associated with chemical exposures, and the               EPA's preferred altemative. The preferred remedy will use
relatfonship between magnitude of exposure (dose) and             a groundwater pump and treat system, and, if determined to
severity of adverse effects (response) are determined.
Potential health effects are chemkal-specific and may include
                                                                  be beneficial, in situ groundwater treatment to expedite tiie
the risk of developing cancer over a lifetime or other non-       removal of contaminants.
cancer tiealth effects, such as ctianges in ttie normal
functions of organs within the tx>dy (e.g., changes in the
effectiveness of the immune system). Some chemicals are
                                                                  SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS
capable of causing both cancer and non-cancer health
effects.                                                          Human Health Risk
Risk Characterization: This step summarizes and combines
outputs of the exposure and toxicity assessments to provide
                                                                  Baseline Risk Assessment
a quantitative assessment of site risks. Exposures are
evaluated based on the potential risk of developing cancer        A baselineriskassessment was prepared for the Bog Creek
and the potential for non-cancer health hazards. The              Farm Site in 1988 to estimate the risks associated with
likelihood of an individual developing cancer is expressed as
a probability. For example, a 10^ cancer risk means a             current and future Site conditions. Informationfit>mthe
'one-in-ten-thousand excess cancer risk'; or one additional       baseline risk assessment was used to develop the 1989
cancer may be seen in a populatkm of 10,000 people as a           ROD. A baseline risk assessment is an analysis of tiie
result of exposure to site contaminants under the conditions      potential adverse human health and ecological effects
explained in the Exposure Assessment Current Superfund
guidelines for acceptable exposures are an individual lifetime    caused by hazardous substance releases from a site in the
excess cancer risk in the range of 10"* to 10* (con-esponding     absence of any actions to control or mitigate these releases
to a one-in-ten-thousand to a one-ln-a-million excess cancer      under current and fiiture land uses.
risk). For non-cancer health effects, a 'hazard inde/* (HI) is
calculated. An HI represents the sum of the individual
exposure levels compared to their corresponding reference         An evaluation was made of all potential exposure routes
doses. The key concept for a non-cancer HI is that a              which could cause exposure to chemicals of potential
threshold lever (measured as an HI of less than 1) exists         concern at the Site for people living or working in the area.
 below which non-cancer health effects are not expected to
 occur.                                                           The following exposure pathways were considered to be of
                                                                  potential significance in the 1988 baseline risk assessment:

                                                                   •   direct dermal contact with On-site soil,
                                                                   •   ingestion of on-site soil,
                                                                   •   inhalation of on-site soil as particulates,
                             500907

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

•   inhalation of volatile organics released to the            sediment, and 4 COPCs in surface water. These are
    atmosphere from on-site soil,                              chemicals that were detected at least once at a
•   ingestion of fish caught in the Manasaquan River, and      concentration above the EPA Region 9 PRGs for tap water
•   ingestion of surface water from the Manasquan River.       or residential soil, adjusted to a cancer risk of IxlO"* and a
                                                               hazard quotient of 0.1. Tier n considered the fi^uency of
The baselineriskassessment concluded that none of the six      detection, background concentrations, and screening levels
pathways was considered significant at the Bog Creek Farm      adjusted to a cancer risk of 1x10"'. Tier n identified 43
Site. It was determined that the pathways do not present       COPCs in groundwater and no COPCs in sediment or
significant health threats, because the maximum detected       surface water.
concentrations of contaminants on-site did not exceed the
acceptable soil concentrations.                                Of the COPCs determined to be the risk drivers (those that
                                                               trigger the need for cleanup) for groundwater in the 1989
Since tiie Bog Creek Farm Site is underlain by tiie            ROD, trans-l,2-dichloroetiiene, copper and zinc are no
Kirkwood aquifer, there was initial concem that nearby         longer chemicals of potential concem for human health.
residents coidd be exposed to groimdwater contamination        While most ofthe COPCs identified by the streamlined risk
via local wells. However, upon fiirther analysis, the          assessment are VOCs, several SVOCs, pesticides, and
pathway was not considered to be significant, because the      metals have also been selected. The VOCs determined to
contaminated portion of the aquifer is not used for drinking   be of greatest concem in the 2005 streamlined HHRA are:
purposes, and Site conditions indicate that the groundwater     1,2-dichloroethane (DCA), vinyl chloride, benzene,
contamination is confined by the Lower Kirkwood and the        trichloroethene (TCE), cis-1,2-dichloroetiiene (DCE),
north branch of Squankum Brook, as described in the Site        1,2,4-trimethylbenzcne,toluene,tetrachloroethene(PCE),
Conditions section above.                                      and 1,1,2-trichloroethane (TCA). Also identified as risk
                                                               drivers in the streamlined HHRA are: 1,1,1 -trichloroethane,
Streamlined Human Health Risk Assessment                       2,4-methylphenol, phenol, and lead.

A streamlined Human Health Risk Assessment (HHRA)              Environmental Rislcs
was performed as part of the recent FFS and supplements
the baseline risk assessment. The intent of the streamlined    Groundwater is not a drinking water threat because it is not
HHRA was to assess whether chemicals other than the            being used a drinking water source. However, tiw
compounds identified in the 1989 ROD are a potential           contaminant levels in groundwater are above applicable or
threat to human health and need to be addressed by the         relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs), and die
cleanup remedy, hi the years since the baseline risk           NJDEP Groundwater Protection Strategy requires tihc
assessment was performed, EPA has developed additional         protection of this natural resource against adverse impacts
information on the toxicity of chemicals and additional        to the environment as well as to potential fiiture usos. hi
guidance regarding exposure evaluation. Therefore,             addition, historic discharge of the Upper Kirkwood to the
chemicals may be present at the Site that contribute to        north branch of tiie Squankum Brook is partially
human health risk that were not identified in the baseline     responsible for environmental degradation. The conqilete
risk assessment                                                restoration of groundwater is the primary objective of tiie
                                                               proposed remedy presented in this Post-Decision Proposed
As part of the streamlined risk assessment, chemicals of       Plan.
potential concem (COPCs) for human health were selected
through a tiered screening process. In the first tier of       REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES
screening, maximum detected concentrations in recent
sanqiles (2005) from Site groundwater, surface water, and      Section 121 (d) of CERCLA, as amended by the Superfund
sediment were compared to risk-based screening values.         Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA) requires
Therisk-basedscreening values used (Region 9 Preliminary       that, at a minimum, any remedial action inqilemented at a
Remediation Goals) are health protective and are equivalent    site achieve overall protection of human health and tiie
to a cancer risk of 1x10"* or a hazard index of 0.1.           environment and comply with ARARs. ARARs at a site
Chemicals retained as COPCs from Tier I were evaluated         may include both Federal and State regulations. Other
further in Tier 11 with refmed assumptions to reduce           criteria that do not meet the definition of an ARAR, but
uncertainty in the screening process and help prioritize       may also be considered when developing cleanup
COPCs to address in the cleanup remedy.                        altematives are known as to-be-considered criteria (TBCs).
                                                               Before developing remedial action (cleanup) altematives
Tier I identified 52 COPCs in groundwater, 5 COPCs in          for a Superfund site, EPA establishes both Remedial Action

                                                                                                        500908
                                                                                                                           "J-

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Objectives (RAOs) and Preliminary Remedial Goals                 pumping rates of the groundwater recovery wells to matoh
(PRGs). RAOs are media-specific goals for protecting             the expected, post-excavation Site conditions and to
human health and the environment. PRGs are chemical-             actively pump in the most highly contaminated areas at the
specific cleanup goals, which are used as benchmarks in the      Site. If it is determined that residual hot spots in soils
screening, development and evaluation of cleanup                 remain after the current excavation phase is completed the
altematives. RAOs and PRGs are based on the ARARs and            Post-Decision remedy allows for insitu treatment of tiie
TBCs that have been identified as applicable to the site.        remaining hot spots. In addition, tiie Post-Decision
The RAOs estabhshed for groundwater at the Bog Creek             remedy will treat and restore groundwater at the Site so
Site include:                                                    that it meets New Jersey Groundwater Quality Standards
                                                                 for Class HA Aquifers. The Post-Decision Remedy will
•   Prevent exposure to contaminated groundwater.                reduce Site cleanup time and life-cycle costs compared with
                                                                 the 1989 ROD remedy.
•   Prevent/minimize contaminated groundwater discharge
    to the north branch of Squankum Brook.                       SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

•   Reduce Site cleanup time and life cycle costs.               Based upon the results of the Focused Feasibility Study,
                                                                 EPA evaluated three cleanup alternatives tiiat address the
•   Restore contaminated groundwater to drinking water           groundwater contamination at the Bog Creek Farm
    standards within a reasonable time-fi-ame.                   Superfimd Site. These altematives are summarized below
                                                                 and described in detail in the Focused Feasibihty Study
The PRGs used in the recent FFS are the New Jersey               report. The screening process through which tiiese
Groundwater Quahty Standards for Class HA Aquifers.              altematives were developed is also described in the FFS
The designated use of all Class n groundwater is to provide      report. The time fi-ames below for constmction do not
potable water using conventional treatment Both existing         include the time for remedial design or the time to procure
and potential potable water uses are included. Class n           contractors.
criteria specify the levels of constituents above which the
water would pose an unacceptable risk for drinking water.        Altemative 1 : No Action
These drinking water standards are appropriate cleaniqi
goals since Squankum Brook flows into the Manasquan              Estimated Capital Cost:                                  $0
River, which is designated as a drinking water supply.           Estimated Annual Operation and Maintenance
                                                                 (O&M) Cost:                                              $0
BASIS FOR REMEDY MODIFICATION                                    Total Estimated Present Wortii:                          $0

Based on recent groundwater sampling, the Site remains           CERCLA and the National Contingency Plan require tiie
significantiy contaminated with a variety of VOCs,               evaluation of No Action as a baseline to which otiier
including chlorinated VOCs and petroleum hydrocarbon             altematives are compared. No remedial actions or
contaminants. Select SVOCs, metals, and pesticides have          institutional controls would be inq)lemented as part of tills
also been detected at some sanpling locations. The               remedy. While there is an on-going EPA remediation at the
groundwater contamination appearstobe centralized in two         Site, tiie No Action alternative evaluated in the FFS
areas on the Site with a few smaller hot spots present The       assumes tiie existing groundwater remedy would be
presence of light non-aqueous-phase Hquid appears likely         terminated.
in some areas.
                                                                 Because this altemative would result in hazardous
The existing groundwater remecfy is a pump and treat             substances, pollutants, or contaminants remaining at tte
system. The remedy consists of an extraction system,             Site above levels that allow for unlimited use and
treatment plant (ex situ treatment), and re-injection gallery.   unrestricted exposure, EPA would review such action at
The design and configuration of the pumping wells does           least every five years.
not allow for flexibility in pumping rates or pumping
selected wells, and therefore does not address tiie
centralized areas of groundwater contamination efficientiy.
This will extend the need for treatment for a significant
period of time and increase overall life-cycle costs.

The Post-Decision remedy will allow for placement and

                                                                                                    500909

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 2: Groundwater Extraction and
Treatment

Estimated Capital Costs:                       $1,612,000
Estimated Annual O&M Years 1-2               $613,000/year
Estimated Annual O&M Years 3-10              $403,000/year
Estimated Annual O&M Years 11-30             $298,000/year
Total Estimated Present Worth Cost              $6,400,000

Altemative 2 relies on hydraulic control of the
contaminated groundwater, ex situ treatment of the
extracted groundwater, and subsequent re-
injection/recharge of the treated groundwatertothe aquifer
via the existing re-injection trenches upgradient of the
contaminant areas. This configuration relies on a continual
flushing of the contaminated zone to achieve Site cleanup
levels.

                                   SUMMARY OF REMEDLU. ALTERNATIVES                                                                |

       Medium             FFS Designation                                      Description

                             Altemative 1      No Action
                                               Groundwater Extraction and Treatment - Includes groundwater extraction and
  Site Groundwater                             treatment to maintain hydraulic plume control and to facilitate contaminant
                             Alternative 2
                                               mass removal and aquifer flusWng via focused pumping and effluent re-
                                               injection/recharge within plume areas. Also includes long-term monitoring.
                                               Groundwater Extraction and Treatment with In Situ Treatment - hicludes
                                               groundwater extraction and treatment as described under Altemative 2. It
                                               may also include one of the following in situ technologies: soil vapor
                             Altemative 3      extraction/air sparging (SVE/AS), enhanced anaerobic bioremediation (EAB),
                                               or in situ chemical oxidation (ISCO), ifit is determmed that residual hot spots
                                               remain after the current excavation phase is completed. Also includes long-
                                               term monitoring

Groundwater extraction would be acconqilished by the             permanganate zeolite; and 5) groundwater polish for
installation of 17 new extraction wells within the               SVOCs by liquid-phase carbon treatment The purpose of
contaminated plume areas, upgradient of the existing             each of these steps is summarized below. It is estimated
extraction wells and Squankum Brook. Due to the extent of        that constmction and initial startup of Alternative 2 could
contamination and presence of BTEX (benzene, toluene,            be completed within two years.
ethylbenzene, and xylenes), chlorinated VOC, and SVOC
contaminants, the extracted groundwater would be subject         The equalization tank would servetostabilize the combined
to a variety of treatment options prior to re-injection. The     influent flow rate and water quality to the treatment plant
exact components of the new treatment train would be             so that consistent operational settings can be generally
finalized during the remedial design, based on the results of    maintained for treatment The green sand filter unit would
pilot testing and treatability study data collected at that      serve to remove dissolved and suspended metals and total
time. For the purposes ofthis Post-Decision Proposed Plan,       suspended solids via filtration and oxidation. This
it was assumed that the groundwater treatment system             pretreatment step would reduce O&M requirements
would consist of the following steps,fromstart to finish: 1)     associated with air stripping. Air strippers would serve to
influent flow equalization; 2) metals and particulate            reduce the groundwater VOC concentrations to levels
treatment by green sand filtration; 3) air stripping; 4) off-    acceptable for groundwater discharge. Off-gas treatment of
gas treatment by vapor-phase carbon and potassium                the air stripper effluent would be required until total off-gas

                                                                                                            500910

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

VOC emissions from all components decrease below 2.2             feasibility. Such testing is often performed during the
lbs per day, based on guidance provided by NJDEP.                remedial design phase and is used to support detailed
Liquid-phase granular activated carbon (LPGAC) would be          design decisions for fidl-scale inqilementation. The ex situ
used to remove SVOC contaminantsfitimtiiegroundwater             punq} and treat system implemented under Alternative 3
efQuent after the air stripper, prior to discharge back into     may differ slightiy depending upon which in situ
the aquifer via the existing upgradient re-injection trench.     technology is selected since each may alter the chemistry
LPGAC treatment would eventually become unnecessary              of the groundwater in different ways. Long-term
during the course of remediation as the SVOC                     monitoring will be performed semi-annually for the first
concentrations drop off.                                         three years after the system is operating. After three years
                                                                 of semi-annual monitoring, EPA in consultation with
The remedy duration for this alternative is dependent on         NJDEP will conduct an evaluation to either continue with
influent groundwater quality concentrations at thetimethe        semi-annual monitoring or to develop another appropriate
remedy is implemented. As mentioned previously, an               routine monitoring schedule. The purpose ofthe monitoring
ongoing soil cleanup should significantly reduce                 will be to confirm achievement of RAOs and track
contaminant concentrations in groundwater. However,              progress of the remedial action until cleanup goals are
based on the initial concentrations assumed in the FFS, it is    achieved.
expected that Altemative 2 may take up to 30 years to
remediate the Site.                                              Multiple design configurations were developed in the FFS
                                                                 to illustrate how groundwater extraction and treatment may
Long-term monitoring will be performed semi-annually for         be combined with each in situ technology retained for
the first three years after the system is operating. After       consideration under this alternative. The cost analysis,
tiiree years of semi-annual monitoring, EPA in consultation      however, is based upon the assumption that SVE/AS would
with NJDEP will conduct an evaluation to either continue         be used alone for in situ treatment Under this assunqition,
with semi-annual monitoring or to develop another                it is estimated that construction of Alternative 3 could be
appropriate routine monitoring schedule. The purpose of          conqileted within two years. All of the retained
the monitoring will be to confirm achievement of RAOs            technologies are summarized below.
and track progress of the remedial action until cleanup
goals are achieved.                                              SVE/AS (Soil Vapor Extraction/Air Sparging)

Because this altemative would result in hazardous                SVE/AS would be used to expedite reduction of
substances, pollutants, or contaminants remaining at the         groundwater contaminants below cleanip criteria via
Site above levels that allow for unlimited use and               physical and aerobic biological processes. All VOC
unrestricted exposure, EPA would review such action at           contaminants would be subject to enhanced physical vapor-
least every five years.                                          phase extraction and recovery associated with SVE/AS.
                                                                 SVE would occur at the groundwater extraction wells to
Alternative 3 :  Groundwater Extraction and                      minimize constmction costs. Approximately 25 AS wells
Treatment with In Situ Treatment                                 would be installed within tiie plume area using a grid
                                                                 system. AS would be performed using an air compressor.
Estimated Capital Costs:                         $2,272,000      Contaminated vapors recovered by SVE wells would be
Estimated Annual O&M Years 1-2                $811,000/year      subjected to ex situ treatment to reduce VOC contaminant
Estimated Annual O&M Years 3-10               $543,000/year      concentrations below NJDEP air discharge criteria before
Estimated Annual O&M Years 11-30              $298,000/year      discharge to the atmosphere.
Total Estimated Present Wortii Cost             $8,200,000
                                                                 Groundwater monitoring would be performed prior to
Altemative 3 includes Groundwater Extraction and                 initiating SVE/AS treatment to establish the baseline
Treatment, as described under Altemative 2, along wifli in       conditions for comparison.        Subsequent rounds of
situ treatment to augment contaminant mass removal.              groundwater monitoring would be performed to assess the
Multiple in situ technologies were retained during the           performance and progress of the technology and to support
screening process for this altemative based upon their           ftiture decisions regarding SVE/AS system operation and
potential to facilitate achievement of remedial action           optimization.
objectives when appUed individually or in sequential
combination.     Bench and/or pilot testing of these
technologies are required to better assess their site-specific


                                                                                                           500911

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

EAB (Enhanced Anaerobic Bioremediation)                                unrestricted exposure, EPA would review such action at
                                                                       least every five years.
EAB would be used to expedite tiie reduction of
groundwater contaminants below cleanup criteria via                    EVALUATING REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES
anaerobic biodegradation processes. This technology
would predominantly target chlorinated ethane and ethene               In selecting its preferred alternative, EPA uses the nine
contaminants, including l,l,l-TCA,TCE,cis-l,2-DCE, 1,1-                NC3* criteria below to evaluate the viable remedial
DCE, and vinyl chloride. Implementation of EAB would                   alternatives developed for a site. CER(XA requires tiiat
involve multiple injections of amendments (e.g., electron              each selected site remedy be protective ofhuman health and
donor, nutrients, and/or microbes) into the contaminated               the environment, be cost effective, comply with other
aquifer. The initial injection event would use a grid system           statutory laws, and utilize permanent solutions and alterna-
with approximately 44 injection points. Subsequent                     tive treatment technologies and resource recovery
injection events would roughly occur every 0.5 to 3 years,             altemativestothe maximum extentpracticable. In addition,
depending upon the type of substrate used, and would target            the statute includes a preference for the use of treatment as
areas where groundwater contaminants persist above                     a principal element for the reduction of toxicity, mobility,
cleanup goals.                                                         or volume of the hazardous substances.

Groundwater monitoring would be performed prior to the
initial EAB injection to establish the baseline conditions for          EVALUATION CRITERIA FOR SUPERFUND REMEDIAL
                                                                        ALTERNATIVES
comparison. Subsequent rounds of groundwater monitoring
would be performed after each EAB injection to assess the               Overall Protectiveness of Human Health and the
performance and progress of the technology and to support               Env/ronment determines whether an altemative eliminates,
decisions regarding subsequent EAB injection events.                    reduces, or controls threats to public health and ttie
                                                                        environment through institutfonal controls, engineering
                                                                        controls, or treatment
ISCO (In situ Chemical Oxidation)
                                                                        Compliance with ARARs evaluates whether the altemative
                                                                        meets Federal and State environmental statutes, regulatkins,
ISCO would be used to expedite reduction of groundwater                 and other requirements that pertain to the site, or whether a
contaminants below cleanup criteria. This technology                    waiver Is justified.
would primarily target dissolved-phase chlorinated VOCs
                                                                        Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence considers ttie
and petroleum hydrocarbon contaminants. ISCO would                      ability of an altemative to maintain protectton of human health
involve multiple injections of Modified Fenton's Reagent,               and ttie environment over time.
which consists of an iron catalyst and hydrogen peroxide
solution, into the contaminated aquifer. This reagent has               Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume of
                                                                        Contaminants through Treafmenfevaluates an aKemative's
been shown to be effective for oxidation of the                         use of treatment to reduce the harmful effects of principal
contaminants present at this Site. The initial inj ection event         contaminants, their ability to move in the environment and
would be conpleted using a grid system with                             the amount of contamination present -
approximately 155 injection points. It is expected that                  Short-term Effectiveness considers the length of time
subsequent injection events would occur every 6 to 12                    needed to implement an altemative and the risks the
months and would target areas where groundwater                          altemative poses to woriters, residents, and the environment
contaminants persist above cleanip goals.                                during impiementatk>n.

                                                                        Implementability considers the technical and administrative
Groundwater monitoring would be performed prior to the                  feasibility of implementing tiie attemative, including factors
initial ISCO injection to establish the baseline conditions             such as the relative availability of goods and services.
for conparison. Subsequent rounds of groundwater                         Cost includes estimated capital and annual operations and
monitoring would be performed after each ISCO injection                  maintenance costs, as well as present worth cost Present
to assess the performance and progress of the technology                 worth cost Is ttie total cost of an altemative over time in terms
                                                                         of today's dollar value.
and to support decisions regarding subsequent ISCO
injection events.                                                        State/Support Agency Acceptance considers whettier the
                                                                         State agrees with EPA's analyses and recommendations, as
                                                                         described in the RI/FS and Proposed Plan.
Because this altemative would result in hazardous
substances, pollutants, or contaminants remaining at the                 Community Acceptance considers whettier the local
Site above levels that allow for unlimited use and                       community agrees witti EPA's analyses and preferred
                                                                         altemative. Comments received on the Proposed Plan are an
                                                                         important indicator of community acceptance.

                                                                  10
                                                                                                                          500912

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

COlVffARATIVE ANALYSIS                                                treatment conponent, which is a proven technology, to
                                                                      maintain hydraulic control of the groundwater
This section ofthe Post-Decision Proposed Plan profiles the           contamination. Long-term groundwater monitoring would
relative performance of each altemative against the nine              be performed over the course ofthe remedy implementation
criteria described above.                                             to assess the degree of remedy effectiveness over time. The
                                                                      in situ component of Altemative 3 may provide fiirtiier
1. Overall Protection of Human Health and the                         rehability to the remedy, as it more aggressively targets
Environment                                                           contamination within the aquifer. However, due to
                                                                      uncertainty associated with in situ treatment, pilot testing
The No Action Altemative would not provide protection of              would be required priortoremedy installation to determine
human health or the environment, because contamination                the most appropriate treatment technologies/approach.
would persist intiiegroundwater, and potential exposure to
contaminated groundwater would not be restricted.                     4. Redaction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume (TMV) of
Altemative 2 would provide protection ofhuman health and              Contaminants Through Treatment
the environment, as the contaminated plume would be
under hydraulic control, contaminant concentrations would             Alternative 1 would not reduce TMV through treatment, as
reduce overtime,and aquiferflushingwould help to restore              no active treatment of contaminated groundwater occurs.
groundwater quality. Altemative 3 would also provide                  Altemative 2 would reduce contaminant mobility by
protection of human health and the environment. In                    providing hydraulic control. Some reduction intoxicityand
addition to providing hydraulic control and aquifer                   volume of contamination is expected through ex situ
flushing, concentrations of contaminants could be                     treatment Altemative 3 would also reduce contaminant
significantiy reduced during the initial years of operation if        mobility via hydraulic plume control. In addition, it could
in situ treatment proves appUcable. However, groundwater              significantly reduce contaminant toxicity and volume via in
extraction and treatment may still be required for up to 30           situ treatment if Site conditions prove favorable.
years of operation in ordertomeet the groundwater cleanup
criteria.                                                             5. Short-term Effectiveness

2. Compliance with ARARs                                              For Altemative 1, protection of the community and workers
                                                                      is not apphcable, since no remedial action occurs.
Altemative 1 will not meet chemical-specific ARARs for                Alternatives 2 and 3 would require well installation and
contaminated groundwater discharge to surface water or                treatment plant constmction, but impactstotiiecommunity
groundwater quality. Altematives 2 and 3 will comply                  would not be significant as the surrounding area is
with ARARs. However, there is some uncertainty                        predominantly rural. Workers would be protected through
regarding whether or not these alternatives will meet                 the use of air monitoring, engineering controls, and
chemical-specific ARARs for groundwater quality within                appropriate personal protective equipment
a 30-year time period. Altemative 3 can be expected to
achieve cleanup goals within a shorter time fmme than                 6. Implementability
Altemative 2 if the post-excavation conditions warrant i t
                                                                      Since it requires no action, Altemative 1 is technically and
3. Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence                             administratively the easiest to implement Altemative 2 is
                                                                      the second easiest to implement, as the technical feasibility
Altemative 1 would not reduce risk in tiie long term, since           of pump and treat systems is well established. Altemative
the contaminants would not be controlled or destroyed.                3 is implementable as well, as in situ treatment of
Since both Altematives 2 and 3 would be effective for                 groundwater has received widespread use. Altemative 3
hydraulic control, both mitigate risks of off-site migration          would require pilot studies to support detailed design
of contaminants. It is expected that Altemative 2 would               decisions.      Regulatory/permitting requirements for
provide a gradual reduction in contaminant concentrations             Altematives 2 and 3 are not expectedtobe administratively
and the associated residual risks. Altemative 3 would                 burdensome.
reduce contaminant concentrations and the associated risks
more significantly during the initial years of operation.             7. Cost

Both Altematives 2 and 3 are considered adequate and                  Altemative T has no cost, and Altemative 2 costs less than
reliable, since both consist of a groundwater extraction and          Altemative 3.

                                                                 11
                                                                                                                 500913

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

8. State/Support ^ e n c y Acceptance                                  published in local newspapers. EPA and the State
                                                                       encourage tiie public to gain a more conprehensive
The State of New Jersey agrees with the preferred                      understanding of the Site and the Siperfimd activities that
altemative in this Post-Decision Proposed Plan.                        have been conducted at the Site.

9. Community Acceptance                                                EPA and the State of New Jersey rely on pubhc input to
                                                                       ensure that the concerns of the community are considered
Community acceptance will be assessed in the ROD and                   in selecting an effective remedy for the Bog Creek Farm
will be based on comments received during the pubhc                    Site. To this end, the Post-Decision Proposed Plan and
comment period.                                                        other Site documents have been made available to tiie
                                                                       public for a public comment period. A public meeting will
SUMMARY OF THE PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE                                   be held during the public comment period to present the
                                                                       conclusions of the FFS, fiirther elaborate on the reasons for
Based ipon an evaluation of the various altematives, EPA               recommending the preferred alternative, and to receive
and the State of New Jersey recommend Altemative 3 -                   public comments. The dates for the public comment
Groundwater Extraction and Treatment with the potential                period, the date, location and time of tiie public meeting,
to use /n Situ Treatment as needed. Along with Altemative              and the locations of the Administrative Record files, are
2, Altemative 3 is protective of human health and the                  provided on the front page of this Post-Decision Proposed
environment while the in situ option holds the advantage of            Plan.
more significantiy reducing contaminant levels during the
initial years of operation. Altemative 3 provides long-term            EPA Region 2 has designated a Regional Public Liaison
effectiveness and reliability by maintaining hydraulic                 Manager as a point-of-contact for community concerns and
control. Altemative 3 also conplies with all ARARs and                 questions about the federal Superfimd program in New
TBCs for the Site. TTie primary advantage of Altemative 3              York, New Jersey, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
is its flexibility. If the pre-design investigation after the          To support this effort, the Agency has established a 24-
excavation is completed determines that in situ treatment,             hour, toll-free number that the public can call to request
such as SVE/AS, will appreciably shorten the cleanup time              information, express their concerns or register conpldnts
 for the pump and treat, tiat option will be available witiiout        about Superfimd.
 the need for an ESD or ROD amendment At the
 conclusion of the remedy, EPA will evaluate the need for
                                                                         For further infonmation on the Bog Creek Farm
 an institutional control such as a Qassification Exception
                                                                         Superfund Site, please contact:
 Area, Deed Notice, or designation of a Well Restriction
 Area.                                                                       Edward J. Finnerty          PatSeppi
                                                                             Remedial Project            Community Relations
                                                                             Manager                     Coordinator
Based on information currently available, EPA believes the                   (212)637-4367               (212)637-3679
Preferred Alternative meets the threshold criteria and
provides the best balance of tradeoffs among the other                                           U.S. EPA
altematives with respect to the balancing and modifying                                 290 Broadway 19* Fkxw.
                                                                                     New Yortc, New Yoric 10007-1866
criteria. EPA expects the Preferred Altemative to satisfy
the following statutory requirements of CERCLA § 121(b):                 The Regfonal Public Liaison Manager for EPA's Regkm 2
1) be protective ofhuman health and the environment; 2)                  office is:
comply with ARARs; 3) be cost-effective; 4) utilize
                                                                             George H. Zachos
permanent solutions and altemative treatment technologies                    Accelerated Cleanup Manager
or resource recovery technologies to tiie maximum extent                     Toll-free (888) 283-7626 or (732) 321-6621
practicable; and 5) satisfy the preference for treatment as a
principal element                                                                          U.S. EPA Region 2
                                                                                    2890 Woodbridge Avenues, MS-211
                                                                                        Edison, New Jersey 08837
 COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

EPA and the State of New Jersey provide information
regarding the cleanup of the Bog Creek Farm Superfimd
Site to the public through public meetings, the
Administrative Record file for the Site, and announcements

                                                                  12
                                                                                                                    500914

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        APPENDIX B
Piiblic Availability Notices




                               500915

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         <tD STJ,                  UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL
      <: r^ ^^ ^ ^^««
                  '<^j»              PROTECTION AGENCY
                               INVITES PUBLIC COMMENT ON THE
                             POST-DECISION PROPOSED PLAN FOR THE
                               BOG CREEK FARM SUPERFUND SITE
                                HOWELL TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY
                              The U.S. Enviromnental Protection Agency (EPA) invites you to attend
                              a public meeting to discuss the Post-Decision Proposed Plan to amend
                              the groundwater remedy selected in the 1989 Operable Unit 2 Record of
Decision for the Bog Creek Farm Site (Site). EPA's preferred altemative calls for the extraction and
treatment of containinated groimdwater, followed by reinjection of the treated water into the aquifer.
In addition, the preferred altemative includes a provision for simultaneous in situ (in place)
treatment of the groimdwater to hasten removal of the contamination ifit is determined to be
necessary following monitoring of the Site conditions after the completion of the contaminated soil
excavation currently underway. During the public meeting, EPA representatives will address all of
the altematives, present additional information supporting the recommendation of the preferred
altemative and receive public comments. There will also be an update on the progress of the
ongoing soil removal work.
The public meeting will be held on Wednesday, August 31 st at 7:00 p.m. at the Howell Township
Municipal Building Council Chambers located at 251 Preventorium Road.
To request a copy of the Proposed Plan you can:
                      email Pat Seppi, Community Involvement Coordinator at
                                          seppi.pat(g),epa.gov
                       call Pat at (212) 637-3679 or 1-800-346-5009
                                       or visit EPA's website at
            http://www.epa.gov/Region2/superfimd/npl/bogcreekfarmproposal2005.htm
Site-related documents are available for public review at the information repositories established for
the Site at the following locations:
Township Clerk's OfiBce, 251 Preventorium Road, (732) 938-4500 ex 2150
Howell Library, 318 Old Tavem Road, Howell Township (732) 938-2300
USEPA Region 2, Records Center, 290 Broadway, New York, NY 10007 (212) 637-4308
The public comment period for this Proposed Plan runs from August 15 to September 13,2005.
All written comments or questions should be address to:
                             Edward J. Finnerty, EPA Project Manager
                              U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
                                    290 Broadway, 19* Floor
                                   New York, New York 10007
                          Telephone (212) 637-4367 Fax (212) 637-4393
                                 e-mail: Finnerty.Ed(gEPA.GOV




                                                                                             500916

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         APPENDIX C
Transcript of Public Meeting




                               500917

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

i                      HOWELL TOWNSHIP HDNICZPAL BUILDING
                       251 PREVENTORIUM ROAD
                       HOWELL TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY
                       PUBLIC MEETING
                       AUGUST 31, 2005




          REt BOG CREEK FARM                  TRANSCRIPT
              SUPERFUND SITE                      OF
                                              PROCEEDINGS
     X




     A P P E A R A N C E S !


         INTRODUCTION                     PAT SEPPI, EPA
         SUPERFUND OVERVIEW               JEFF JOSEFKSON, EPA
         ONGOING SOIL EXCAVATION          DON GRAHAM, EPA
         GROUNDWATER STUDY                FRANK TSANG, CDM
         PROPOSED PLAN                    ED FINNERTY, EPA




                               DEBRA-ANN BALSAMO
                               Certified Shorthand Reporter



tf
                        JerseyShore Reporting, LLC
                                                                500918

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                2
                                                                                1
     1                          MS. SEPPIt Why don't tre get
     2   started.     Themk you for coining tonight. My name is
     3   Pat Seppi.     I'm a community involvement coordinator
 4       with the EPA and I'd like to ask the rest of the
 5       people here tonight who are a part of this
 6       presentation to introduce themselves, please.            C.
 7                              MR. GRAHAMx Ky^ name is Don
 8       Graheua.    I'm the on-scene coordinator.    I'm the
 9       person involved with the activities that eure ongoing
10       right now at the site.
11                              MR. FINNERTY:     I'm Ed Finnerty.
12       I'm the project manager on Bog Creek Faim.
13                              MS. HcPHEARSONt Julie
14       NcPhearson.    I'm the health risk assessor at the
15       site.
16                              MR. TSANGt I'm Frank Tsang.            I'm
17       from CIM.    I'm the project meinager.
18                              MR. JOSEPHSONi 1^ name is Jeff
19       Josephson.    I'm the team leader for the New Jersey
20       project state coordination team.
21                              MR. BRENNANt     My name is John
22       Brennan.    I work for Weston Solutions.
23                              MS. SEPPI:     We also have two
24       gentlemen here from the Corps of Engineers who are
25       involved in the project.

                                                       saem^siascaaa

                            JerseyShore Reporting, LLC

                                                                       500919

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 1                             MR. KOLB:    My name is Neal Kolb.           J
 2   I work for the Army Corps of Engineers for the

 3   envirormiental resident office in East Brunswick and

 4   we're overseeing the operation and maintenance of the

 5   plant.

 6                             MR. AWAD:    My name is Gamal,
 7   G-A^M-A-L, last name Awad, A-W-A-D.          I'm with the
 8   Corps of Engineers, same office.
 9                             MS. SEPPI: Okay.    Thank you.
10   Well, the reason that we're here tonight is to talk a
11   little bit more about the Bog Creek Farm site.           We

12   were here in Hay.       We had a meeting to talk about the

13   work that Don would be doing at the site and he's
                                                                            u
14   going to update us on that in a couple of minutes,

15   but now we're talking about a change to a grovindwater

16   remedy that we originally chose, I believe, in 1989.

17   We have proposed a cheuige to that remedy and that's

18   what the proposed plan if you haven't received one in

19   the mail, they are up there.          Very interesting

20   reading.

21                             We want to talk a little bit

22   tonight eQ>out our reasoning euid rationale for our

23   preferred altemative.        There were a few different

24   altematives that we considered, we chose the one

25   that we thought was most appropriate and we're in the

              aaassESSEs
                                                                            J
                           JerseyShore Reporting, LLC
                                                                   500920

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 1   middle, in the public comment period now.       It will
 2   end on September 13th.    So any comments that you make
 3   tonight regarding this plan will be part of that
 4   permanent record.    And, also, if you think of any
 5   comments after you leave, you certainly have until
 6   the closing bid on September 13th to get that
 7   information into Ed.    Now Ed's name, phone number and
 8   address is at the back of the proposed plan and I
 9   don't believe that his E-mail address is on there,
10   I'm not sure, but I put it on the agenda.
11                          MR. FINNERTY: It doesn't have
12   the E-mail.
13                          MS. SEPPI: You can certainly
14   always E-mail it, too.
15                          MR. TSANG: On the agenda you
16   said the comment period ends on September 15th.
17                          MS. SEPPI: I said the 15th.    You
18   know why, because that's my daughter's birthday.          I'm
19   very sorry.   It's the 13th.   Right, it is the 13th.
20   Thank you.
21                          So moving on, we have a few
22   presentations tonight.    I would like your indulgence,
23   if you wouldn't mind, with your questions until the
24   end of the presentation which we're going to try to
25   keep them short.    We already told everybody ten


                        JerseyShore Reporting, LLC

                                                         500921

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 1   minutes is it, ten, 12 minutes.   Not for everybody,
 2   but for the major presentation.
 3                         First person I would like to
 4   bring up is Jeff Josephson and he's just going to
 5   talk to you a little bit about the Superfund
 6   overview.
 7                        MR. JOSEPHSON: I am just going
 8   to provide a brief stumnary of the Superfimd process.
 9   In 1980, Congress passed the Comprehensive
10   Environmental Response , Compensation and Liedsility
11   Act, which is more comnoonly known as Superfund.    The
12   Superfund law provides for the ability of federal
13   funds to be used for the cleanup of uncontrolled and
14   abandoned hazardous waste sites and for responding to           J
15   emergencies that involve hazardous substances.
16                  Upon discovery of a potential abandoned
17   hazardous waste site, EPA will conduct one or more
18   inspections and meike a determination if the site
19   should be placed onto the National Priorities List,
20   which is the list of the nations' s worst hazeurdous
21   waste sites.
22                  Once a site is place on the National
23   Priorities List, selection of a remedy usually
24   requires the conduct of a remedial investigation and
25   feasibility study.   The work necessary to cleanup a


                      JerseyShore Reporting, LLC            500922

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        6
                                                                        1
     1   hazardous waste site is often complex and is
  2      frequently conducted in stages. EPA often calls the
 3       stages operable units. An operable site or unit
 4       determines the nature and extent of the contamination
 5       as well as the risks to the human health the
 6       environment posed by the contamination.
 7                      The purpose of the feasibility study is
 8       to identify and evaluate remedial altematives to
 9       address the site contamination.    Once the feasibility
10       study is completed, EPA develops a proposed plan emd
11       presents EPA's preferred cleeuiup alternative to the
12       public. Tonight's meeting will summarize the results
13       of a feasibility study and proposed remedy. After
14       consideration of the public comments EPA will
15       document the selected cleanup altemative in the
16       Record of Decision.
17                      Once that Record of decision is final,
18       the remedial design process begins where the
19       specifications and plans for the selected remedy are
20       developed.   Remedial action is initiated after the
21       design is completed and in the stage where
22       construction and cleanup activity occur at the site.
23       To the degree that is necessary post cleemup
24       monitoring is conducted, and once the site no longer
25 '     poses a threat to h\uneui health or the environiaent it


                          JerseyShore Reporting, LLC

                                                               500923

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

I    1   is removed from the Superfund National Priorities
     2   List.
     3                                    Tonight's public will review the
     4   k-esults of the focused Feasibility Study for the
     5   modification to the groundwater remedy, and we will
     6   discuss remedial altematives evaluated in the
     7   proposed plan.                    We will provide EPA's preferred
     8   altemative for the modified groundwater remedy for
     9   the Bog Creek Superfund site.
    10                                          MS. SEPPI: Thank you, Jeff.      If
    11   anybody is interested in researching or looking at
    12   any of the documents related to the site, they are in
    13   your library, the Howell library.                     I believe it's Old
    14   T a v e m Road.              They're also in our office in New York.
    15   Or, you know, if you go there and they're not there,
    16   give one of us a call and we'll certainly make sure
    17   that you have copies of whatever it is you'd like.
    18                                So there's been a lot of work going on
    19   at the site.                 Hopefully, it's been real quiet there.
    20   We haven't heard any complaints or anything.                        Don's
    21   done a very good job.                    I think Don has a few slides
    22   juid a little expleuiation.
    23                                          MR. GRAHAM: As I said before, ny
    24   name is Don Graham.                    I'm the on-scene coordinator for
    25   the site.             I'm the person responsible right now for

              5^!ri?wi5SS5SrB365SRt?Byg                 BBSS


                                            JerseyShore Reporting, LLC               500924

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                              8

 1    the activities that we're undertaking under this
 2    operable unit which essentially necessitates us
 3    removing a certain volume of soil.   We estimated up
 4    to twenty thousemd ciibic yards of contaminated soil
 5    would have to be removed.   We started that work in
 6    May right aroxind the time of the last public meeting
 7    here and as it says up here, the site's been on the
 8    NPL since '83. There was some previous work done at
 9    the site.    This additional work that we're
10    undertaking now is intended to augment whatever has
11    been done.   We completed approximately one-half of
12    the work and we're on schedule to be done with
13    everything under this portion of the process by the
14    spring of 2006.
15                   That's just an aerial photograph
16    showing you the relative location of the site. As
17    you can see the red and the yellow, that' s the area
18    we've already excavated.    Route 547 is off to the
19    left and you can't see it on the map, but a little
20    bit north of here would be where 549 comes in.
21"                  Okay.   As I said before, we started
22    work in May, but we didn't actually start excavating
23    until late June because the soil that we were
24    excavating was actually underneath the water table.
25    We had to draw down the water table approximately

                                                     iii^m w n i I

                        JerseyShore Reporting, LLC

                                                                     500925

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                     9
                                                                                     1
 1   ten feet.                  When everything was said and done, it was                _y
 2   the middle of August a n d we removed approximately

 3   3200 yards of contaminated soil.                   That's on site

 4   right now.                   It's under cover euid we'll be shipping

 5   that off-site for disposal within the next week.

 6                                 You can see the piping that outlines
 7   where the guys are working, that's the dewatering
 8   systems.                   It's just a system of well points where we
 9   extract the groundwater.                   The groundwater in that
10   area is typically at six feet and our excavation
11   proceeded somewhere around 14 feet in depth.                    This

12   excavation represents probably about the halfway

13   point.             So this, it averages about 14 feet in depth.
                                                                                         ^
14   To give you a perspective, those teuiks behind the

15   excavation, they're about 30 feet high.

16                                 That's what we call technical

17   difficulty.                  One weekend we came back and there was a

18   couple of these in the water.

19                                         MS. SEPPI: Did you see how big

20   they were?

21                                        MR. GRAHAM: They were big.      THE

22   size of a garbage can.                   This is what we were chasing.

23   Once we drew the water table down you can see the

24   staining of the soils.

25                                 When the dumping occurred back in

        <-»,..,,.;.,j.<,..jaa
                                                                                         J
                                      JerseyShore Reporting, LLC
                                                                            500926

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                      10

 1   1973-'74, from what I understand the farmer that
 2   owned the property at the time was dumping basically
 3   ainything that people were bringing ini paints,
 4   gasoline products.    Based on an analysis that we've
 5   been riznning, there seems to be large gasoline
 6   components: Xylene, benzzne, ojUiVlne. 'Shia whole time
 7   we were out there John and the people that he's
 8   working with they've been doing constant air
 9   monitoring on the parameter of the site to make sure
10   that a number of the neighbors haven't been impacted.
11   We've had one owner complain recently which I think
12   had nothing to do with the site because we haven't
13   had any smells at all on-site for probably close to
14   two months.
15                   At this point, like I said, John's
16   people, they've been aninning instriimentation
17   constaoitly throughout the process.   This picture here
18   depicts what we've already taken out.    You see the
19   blue outline and the lighter color, that's the soils
20   we've removed so far.    That's currently stocIq>iled
21   just south of the access road coming into the site
22   and that's going to be shipped off the site starting
23   next week.    It will probably be gone within two
24   weeks.   We're getting ready to excavate the second
25   area which is denoted in the red hash marks.     That's


                       JerseyShore Reporting, LLC

                                                             500927

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                11
                                                                                                                —I
 1   on line for being completed by the end of this year
 2   and once that' s completed, we' 11 backfill that area
 3   and finish everything in the spring of the 2006.
 4                                  This picture here denotes a fence that
 5   we'll install when everything is said and done
 6   largely due to the fact that the Township is going to
 7   be constructing a soccer complex right nearby.                                                  This
 8   way we ceui eliminate access to any of the kids
 9   getting into the site itself.                               Everywhere you see in
10   that yellow line that's currently unfenced, but it
11   will be fenced when we leave.
12                                  That's pretty much it. Any questions
13   you cem ask me at the end of the meeting or I'm
14   on-site most of the time Monday through Friday.                                                    I
15   would be glad to give anybody my telephone number if
16   they would like if any problems eurise.
17                                                     MS. SEPPI: Thank you, Don.
18   Okay.            Frank Tsang from CDM, our contractor, is going
19   to tell you about the groundwater se^^felfigs that were
20   conducted.
21
                                                       MR. TSANG: In the next few
22
     minutes I will give you a summairy of the focus study
23
     that we've performed during the past several months.
24
     Before getting into the feasibility study, I would
25
     like to give you some background information.

     SC5S!^SSyt^tTOn!r?S?:5'^^^Bi   • w.4g>..»».^.m.»iU^,UU»    ^BSffTySPTBBSWjWSSvSBB   ^55S«W>ISB!1j8i8
                                                                                                                     y
                                         JerseyShore Reporting, LLC
                                                                                                            500928

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                12

 1                  As Don pointed out earlier, the primary
 2   contaminants include BTEX and CVOCs. There are two
 3   primary plumes on site referred to as the "east and
 4   west lobes". Contamination, however, is confined to
 5   the Upper Kirkwood aquifer, which extends up to 30
 6   feet below ground surface.   The groundwater and the
 7   plume flow to the north-northeast toward the Squankum
 8   Brook.
 9                  As Patty and Jeff mentioned eaxlier, we
10   have an existing groundwater remedy on site.     The
11   remiedy includes a slurry wall emd construction wells.
12   We'll talk more ed>out that a little bit later.
13                  And you probably ask, okay, if we also
14   have a treatment system on-site, why do we need to do
15   another focus feasibility study.   Basically, we want
16   to have a better iinderstanding of the current site
17   conditions and then EPA c a n come up with a remedy to
18   speed up the groundwater remediation.   In the s a r l y
19   stage of the focus feasibility study, EPA, the Army
20   Corps of Engineers and CDM got together and developed
21   remedial action objectives and preliminary remedial
22   goals.   The remedial action objective is for
23   protection of human health and the environment.
24   Among the many goals listed here, goal number one is
25   to prevent contaminated groundwater from discheurging


                      JerseyShore Reporting, LLC

                                                       500929

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                     13

 1   into the Squemkum Brook and then the second objective

 2   is to reduce the site cleemup time and the cost.

 3                   Preliminary remediation goals we use to
 4   measure whether we have achieved the objective or how
 5   far are we away from the objective, we selected the
 6   New Jersey groundwater quality stetadairds as our
 7   cleanup goals we call it.   The groundwater quality
 8   stemdard is designed for protection of humeui health
 9   mainly.    CDM performed several major activities under

10   the focus feasibility study.   At the beginning we

11   performed a supplemental field investigation of the

12   groundwater surface water and sediment to have a

13   better understeuiding of the current site conditions.
                                                                          J
14   Using information from CDM, we completed a

15   strecutilined human health emd ecological risk

16   assessment to identify the risks on-site euod, also,

17   to identify emy additional we call it contaminants

18   concerns that have not been included during the very

19   first risk assessment that was done in the eighties.

20                  CDM also developed a numerical
21   groundwater flow model for the site to give us a
22   better understemding of the groundwater conditions
23   on-site.   Using the groundwater flow model, COM
24   simulated various extraction scenarios for the
25   remedial action altematives that we developed later



                       JerseyShore Reporting, LLC
                                                            500930

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                     14

 1   on.   C I ^ then identified emd screened the RA

 2   technologies emd developed emd evaluated RA

 3   altematives.      We developed three altematives:

 4   Altemative number one is the no action altemative.

 5   As the name implies, no further treat:ment will be

 6   implemented on-site under that altemative.        No

 7   action altemative required by law that we have to

 8   develop it emd retain it as a baseline for comparison

 9   to the other more active treatment altematives.

10                   Altemative number two is groundwater
11   extraction emd treatment.    Under this alternative
12   we'll put in multiple extraction wells within the
13   contaminant pliimes to expedite the cleemup of the
14   groxindwater.   You're going to ask, you know, what is
15   the difference between alteimative two euid the
16   existing remedy.    I'm going to show you in the next
17   slide.
18                   As I mentioned earlier, there are two
19   primary contaminemt plximes here euid under the
20   existing remedy we have a slurry wall here emd a line
              S
21   of a well here represented by these two lines.
              /\
22   Because the formation in the ground it teikes a long
23   time for the groimdwater to flow from this point over
24   to the plume to the extraction well to be captured by
25   the extraction wells.    Using the groundwater model we


                        JerseyShore Reporting, LLC

                                                            500931

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                       15

 1   pleoi to put multiple extraction wells within the
 2   plume emd because of the placement of the well, it
 3   will capture the plume much faster.
 4                  In addition, we're going to put
 5   extraction well /piume^(into each w^Zlj[^to enable the
 6   operator on-site to concentrate the pumping on the
 7   most contaminemt eurea. And, again, that will speed
 8   up the remediation.
 9                  This is a schematic flow diagram for
10   altemative two. Groundwater is captured by the
11   extraction well here emd then pumped through the
12   treatment train.    The main treat:ment <ip^BB is here
13   through the air stripper.    The air stripper will
14   extract the contamineunt into the vapor phase of the
15   treatiment train/ ^ f o r e it's discharged into the
16   atmosphere^ lihe treated groundwater is further
17   polished by the carbon before it is injected into the
18   ground eaid the process is going to go through in a
19   close loop.
20                 Alternative three is very simileur to
21   altemative two.     Basically, altemative three is
22   groundwater extraction emd treatment with em in situ
23   treatment component.    The in situ treatment component
24   enables removal of a significemt portion of the
25   contaminemt in the early phase of the remedy.


                        JerseyShore Reporting, LLC
                                                              500932

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                               16
                                                                                  f
  1                   We have identified several in situ
  2    treatment. We selected this altemative as the
  3    representative process options for the altemative
  4    development euid the screening.    Soil vapor
  5    extraction, (SVE)/air sparging, you caxaprBBB air into
  6    the conteuninemt groundwater and air bubbles the
  7    conteuninemt out. We then apply a vacuum emd catch
  8    much of the vapor before it comes to the groimd
  9    surface so we then treat the vapor through the
 10    treatment train.
 11                     Soil vapor extraction emd air spaxging
 12    are very effective in stripping out the conteuninemt
 13    from the groundwater.     Additionally, because we're
 14    injecting air into groundwater, we're basically
 15    increasing the oxygen concentration in the
 16    groundwater emd to enhance aerobic bio<Segradation
. 17   activities to destroy the conteuninemt.
 18                     So there axe two mecheuiisms to destroy
 19    contamination.    Of course we still have the pumping
 20    treatment ongoing at the same time.     This is a
 21    conceptual site layout.     Multiple air speurging wells
 22    is represented by the circle emd the little dots here
 23    will be replaced within the treatm^^nt contaminemt
24     plumes.   The vapor will be captured by the extraction
25     well represented by the square emd the dotted circle

                                                           tsmsgfsmihiJk».. ..tLB— .

                          JerseyShore Reporting, LLC
                                                             500933

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                            17

 1    here before it escapes to the ground surface eoid then
 2    sent through the treatment train as I mentioned
 3    earlier.          That's basically the layout for altemative
 4    three.
                                                                             \
 5                         Again, this is a schematic flow diagram           I



 6    for altemative three.           It's very simileur to
 7    altemative two, the only difference is the soil
 8    extraction component here to the groiuid to capture
 9    the vapor.         That's now my presentation.
10                                MS. SEPPI: Last, but not least,
11    EPA project memager for Bog Creek, Ed Finnerty.
12                                MR. FINNERTY: I^ name is Ed
13    Finnerty emd I'm the project manager of Bog Creek
14    Farm.          I think you have heard the interesting things,
15    all I'm going to try to say to you now is to give you
16    some perspective of what we started with and what
17   we're trying to do at the present time.
18                         Back in 1985, we did the first record
19   of decision which said we would excavate the soil
20   where we believe the conteuoination was put down, the
21   waste material was put down, euid that took place
22   Tinder the first record of decision emd then the
23   second record of decision realized that we would have
24   to do something about the groundwater.            Normally,
25   speaking in projects like this, it's kind of a

     •tasssss^ss:^
                              JerseyShore Reporting, LLC           500934

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   18

 1   two-part deal.   You have to try to get as much as you
 2   cem of contamination out of the soil so that you
 3   don't put too much of a burden on the groundwater
 4   treatment emd if you don't get enough of the
 5   conteuoination out of the ground, the pump or the
 6   groundwater treatment operation will take a
 7   tremendously long time.
 8                 We usually use, for our purposes in
 9   doing a record of decision, we usually talk eJbout a
10   30-year period of time.   The first ten years the
11   goverzunent and the EPA operates that facility.   After
12   the ten years we turn it over to the state emd the
13   state operates it for as long as necesseury to achieve
14   the goals. As far as the first operation that we
15   had, emd we're now in September will be ten yeeurs of
16   operating the treatment plemt, that treatment plant
17   has been very successful.   It's always done what it
18   was designed to do.   The only problem is that we
19   didn't - - w e weren't able to get rid of enough soil
20   contamination so we put too much of a burden on the
21   pump and treatment plemt.   A burden in the sense that
22   it would have to operate, we believe, for a number of
23   decades just in order to reach the goals that we've
24   been given.
25                 Just to say what is probedaly pretty


                      JerseyShore Reporting, LLC
                                                          500935

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                       19

 1   obvious, when you design this treatjnent pleuat emd you
 2   have certain goals that are in a record of decision,
 3   we had eibout —   we had ed>out ten contaminemt s of
 4   c o n c e m that we were trying to remove in the
 5   groundwater treatment emd the new plemt.     From day
 6   one it will remove these contaminemts emd achieve the
 7   goals that are being asked for, but you have to do
 8   that situation day in euid day out for many years
 9   because you're not finished until the groundwater
10   that you're taking out through these extraction wells

11   and into a tank that's called an influent temk you're

12   only finished if finally what's going into that

13   influent tank doesn't need treat:ment.    It's as good

14   as what your requirements eure euid sometimes that

15   tedces a hellish long period of time.    So we fotind

16   maybe after five or so yeeurs after the current

17   operation that we really had a long time to go before

18   we would ever be edsle to have our influent teuik

19   showing up with water that didn't really have to be

20   treated.

21                  So we did, I meem in recent yeeurs we've
22   had the environmental response team do a lot of work
23   for us euid they did a large nuniber of borings emd
24   samplings so we know much better, we know much more
25   now, we know much more accurately where the



                       JerseyShore Reporting, LLC             500936

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                      20

 1   contamination is, how deep it is and the
 2   concentration of those contaminemts.
 3                 When we first did that excavation and
 4   so forth like that it was a much more limited thing.
 5   As a matter of fact, the record of decision is what
 6   we call it em interim remedy.     They realize that this
 7   may not be able to meJce it to;& complepf, but it was a
 8   very good try in trying to achieve the cleanup at a
 9   reasonable cost situation.
10                 So here we are now.    We're in a sense
11   redoing the work.     Don Graham is doing excavation in
12   a much more intensive way, a much more exacting way
13   because he knows much more accurately where the
14   conteuoinants eure so he will be removing those.       So
15   when he's finished we should be much closer to being
16   able to, with the groundwater operation, to achieve
17   the goals we weuit.    One problem I should mention to
18   you is the fact that nothing really steuids still.          In
19   the ten yeaxs that we've been operating Tinder the
20   existing system maybe five years into that the state
21   chemged some of the regulations so the groundwater
22   status that we're looking for now eure much more
23   stringent theui they were before.    Simileurly, the
24   requirements for Squankum Brook are much more higher
25   than they were before.    When we were working during



                      JerseyShore Reporting, LLC

                                                             500937

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                       21

 1   the first ten yeeurs there were ed>out ten contamineuits
                                                                                J
 2   of c o n c e m that we had to remove down to certain

 3   levels, now with this new one we have ed>out 43 emd so

 4   this really compounds the amoimt of work that we have

 5   to do after Don is finished.    And after we do this

 6   amended record of decision, we'll design a new

 7   treatment system and provide the system which will

 8   tedce us through —    we make the projects go through 30

 9   years, how memy years it's going to take we really

10   don't know.

11                 As far as, and, again, as soon as the
12   excavation is finished, what we're going to do is
13   t u m on our normal extraction wells.   We have 33
14   .extraction wells in the existing system euid because                  J
15   of all this excavation and removal of all this stuff,

16   we really don't know what hot spots will be left emd

17   what the concentration of these hot spots.

18                  So we'll start operating the original

19   extraction system, see what those contamineuits look

20   like in that groundwater emd based on that we'll

21   probeibly do some more modeling and so forth euid based

22   on that they would design in this case now a new

23   highly automated pleuit.

24                  One of your biggest expenses is

25   operating costs.     We have a high operating cost for


                                                                            J
                        JerseyShore Reporting, LLC            500938

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                     22

 1   the existing plant we have now.   We'll build a much
 2   smaller plemt which will operate continuously 24
 3   hours a day and won't require operators on the scene
 4   tedcing care of the situation.   So that is our
 5   objective in doing this l^pet^ amendment.   After we're
 6   finished with the excavation well study, we'll see
 7   what we have, see what we've accomplished with this
 8   excavation, find out where the new hot spots are, how
 9   concentrated they eure euid based on that data emd some
10   modeling, design a new pleuit that we'll use from here
11   on out trying to attain the goals. And as I'm saying
12   to you, the goals now eure much more stringent them
13   they were before euid that's basically our situation.
14                        MS. SEPPI: Themk you, Ed. So I'd
15   like to open up the floor to emy questions you may
16   have.   If I could just ask that before you ask your
17   question if you cem state your name for our
18   Stenographer, please, so we'll have it for the record
19   .emd she may ask you to spell it or if it's difficult
20   you might just weuit to spell it right from the start.
21   And you heeurd eibout the record of decision, that's a
22   document that will be our final, legally binding
23   document that will discuss what we eure planning to do
24   there and euiy of the comments that we receive,
25   whether written or tonight, will be included in that.


                      JerseyShore Reporting, LLC
                                                            500939

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 108 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                          23

I    1   Paxt of it is called a responsiveness summary.

     2                    So when you see the record of decision,

     3   you'll see all the comments addressed whether they

     4   were given here tonight or sent in through the mail.

     5   So I apologize for putting September 15th.      The

     6   correct date for the end of the public comment is

     7   September 13th.

     8                    Sir, you had a question?
     9                          MR. GHAFFRI: MY name is Mozafeur,
    10   H-O-Z-A-F-A-R.    Last name Ghaffri, 6-H-A-F-F-R-I. The
    11   question I have about the design of the system for, I
    12   guess, one of the recommendations is the air stripper

    13   emd carbon system.

    14                          MR. TSANG: Uh-huh.

    15                          MR. GHAFFRI: I want to know the

    16   removal efficiency as far as all these compoTinds and

    17   what will be the contaminemts going through the

    18   atmosphere?

    19                          MR. TSANG: Okay.     It's going to

    20   be compaefe specific in terms of removal efficiency

    21   for the carbon unit.     Basically, it will have to go

    22   through a design to get —    we'll design a goal to get

    23   to the most efficient because we either treat it

    24   through the air stripper emd treat it through the

    25   vapor treatment portion of the treatiment system or



                            JerseyShore Reporting, LLC               500940

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 109 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        24

 1   have it polished by the ceurbon and water.     So there
 2   is a design decision that will go through the
 3   evaluation emd usually the air stripper we're looking
 4   for 99 plus percent, you know.
 5                  In terms of the dischaxge into the
 6   at:mo8phere, we'll need to get eui air permit from New
 7   Jersey Department of Environment Protection before we
 8   can discharge euiything.   Anything discheurged will
 9   con^ly with the discharge permit.     I don't have a
10   specific number because we haven't gone through a
11   d..iBny.t.         (^e^.CI/^FFHI
12                         «IB WITNESS: Thank you.
13                         MS. SEPPI: Thank you.    Any other
14   questions?   It cem't be this easy.   There must be
15   more questions.
16                  Well, we're going to be here for
17   awhile.   If you have euiy other questions, you're
18   certainly welcome to come up emd ask us.
19                 Again, Ed's name, number and address is
20   in the proposed pleui. There is copies up there if
21   you don't have one.   If you haven't signed in, I
22   would appreciate it if you did.    We're trying to
23   compile a little more extensive mailing list them we
24   have now so we'll be eible to notify you in the
25   future.


                       JerseyShore Reporting, LLC              500941

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 110 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        25

 1                           I themk you very much for
 2   coming.   Don't hesitate to call emy of us if you have
 3   emy questions as the project moves on.       Themk you.
 4                           (Hearing is concluded.)
 5
 6
 7                          CERTIFICATE
 8
 9
10                    I, DEBRA-ANN BALSAMO, a Certified
11   Shorthand Reporter and Notary Public of the State of
12   New Jersey, certify that the foregoing is a true and
13   accurate Computerized Transcript of the proceedings
14   as taken before me stenographically on the date
15   hereinbefore mentioned.
16
17
18                      fiffi/m.U^n ^ ^"moiiaL
                                        i
                      DEBRA-ANN BALSAMO, C.S.R.
19
20
     Dated: September 7, 2005
21   My Connnission Expires on
     August 6, 2006
22   License No. X101161
23
24
25

                                                                             -V
                        JerseyShore Reporting, LLC             500942
