LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT FOR OU 1 FOR THE ELLIS PROPERTY SITE
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/218247
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 3db4382aaa85b0756da215fd1a0380975cf2f214205c999c00c2d9c33d7fa1fe
Source PDF pages: 160
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT


          Ellis Property Superfund Site

Evesham Township, Burlington County, New Jersey




      U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

                    Region 2

                September 2013




                                               218247
                                             niDiiiiiuii




                                                           R2-0004185

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            DECLARATION STATEMENT
                         RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT


SITE NAME AND LOCATION

Ellis Property Superfund Site (EPA ID# NJD980529085)
Evesham Township, Burlington County, New Jersey

STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

This decision document presents the Amended Remedy for the contaminated soil and
groundwater at the Ellis Property Superfund Site located in Evesham Township, Burlington
County, New Jersey (Site). The original Record of Decision (ROD) addressing contaminated
soil and groundwater at the Site was issued on September 30,1992.

The Amended Remedy was selected in accordance with the requirements of the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, as amended (CERCLA), 42
U.S.C. §9601 et seq., and, to the extent practicable, the National Oil and Hazardous Substances
Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 CFR Part 300. This decision is based on the
Administrative Record file for the Site, an index of which can be found in Appendix IV.

The State of New Jersey concurs with the ROD Amendment. A copy of the concurrence letter
can be found in Appendix V.

ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE

The response action selected in this ROD Amendment is necessary to protect the public health,
welfare, or the environment from actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from the
Site into the environment.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY

The response action described in this document modifies the soil and groundwater remedy
selected in the 1992 ROD. The soil cleanup called for in the 1992 ROD has been completed, and
the groundwater collection and treatment system has been in operation since 2000. The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency and New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection have
identified a source of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), primarily trichloroethylene (TCE) in
the subsurface soil at the Site. These VOCs are contributing to groundwater contamination and
are preventing the groundwater collection and treatment system from restoring the aquifer.

The major components of the Amended Remedy include the following:




                                                                                      R2-0004186

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   •    Excavation and off-site disposal of TCE contamination in the residual source area, and
        contaminated soil in the plume area;
   •    Implementation of in-situ treatment, where appropriate, to complement excavation;
   •    Continued operation of the existing collection and treatment system for a period of time
        (estimated to be one year) to evaluate the effectiveness of continued operation of the
        system to reduce residual groundwater contamination;
   •    Monitoring of groundwater; and
   •    Continuation of institutional controls to prevent exposure to contaminated groundwater
        until remediation goals are achieved.


DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

Part 1 - Statutory Requirements
The Amended Remedy is protective of human health and the environment, complies with federal
and state requirements that are applicable or relevant and appropriate to the remedial actions to
the extent practicable, and is cost-effective. EPA has determined that the Amended Remedy
represents the maximum extent to which permanent solutions and treatment technologies can be
utilized in a practicable manner at the Site.

Part 2 - Statutory Preference for Treatment
The Amended Remedy meets the statutory preference for the use of remedies that involve
treatment as a principal element.

Part 3 - Five-Year Review Requirements
Because the remedy will not result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants
remaining above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, EPA anticipates
that a statutory five-year review will not be required for the groundwater remedy. However,
because it may take more than five years to attain remedial action objectives and remediation
goals for the groundwater at the Site, policy reviews will be conducted until the remediation
goals are achieved to ensure that the groundwater remedy is, or will be, protective of human
health and the environment

ROD DATA CERTD7ICATION CHECKLIST

The following information is included in the Decision Summary section of this ROD
Amendment. Additional information can be found in the Administrative Record file for this Site.

    •   Chemicals of concern and their respective concentrations may be found in the "Site
        Characteristics" section.



                                                 2


                                                                                         R2-0004187

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   •   A discussion of source materials constituting principal threats may be found in the
       "Principal Threat Waste" section.
   •   A discussion of the baseline risk represented by the chemicals of concern may be found
       in the "Summary of Site Risks" section. This discussion is based on the baseline risk
       assessment from the 1992 ROD. Cleanup goals for groundwater contamination can be
       found in the "Remedial Action Objectives" section.
   •   Current and reasonably anticipated future land use assumptions and current and potential
       future uses of groundwater used m the baseline risk assessment and ROD can be found in
       the "Current and Potential Future Site and Resource Uses" section.
   •   Estimated capital, operation and maintenance (O&M), and total present worth costs,
       discount rate, and the number of years over which the remedy cost estimates are
       projected can be found in the "Description of Remedial Alternatives" section.
   •   Key factors that led to selecting the remedy may be found in the "Comparative Analysis
       of Alternatives" and "Statutory Determinations" sections.




Walter E. Mugdan, Director                                              Date
Emergency and Remedial Response Division
EPA Region 2




                                              3


                                                                                      R2-0004188

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT

           DECISION SUMMARY



         Ellis Property Superfund Site

Evesham Township, Burlington County, New Jersey




      U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
                    Region 2
             New York, New York
                 September 2013




                                                  R2-0004189

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table of Contents


SITE NAME, LOCATION AND BRIEF DESCRIPTION               1

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES                 1

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION                   8

CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES     9

BASIS FOR REMEDY MODIFICATION                           9

REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES                             11

DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES                   12

COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF 'ALTERNATIVES                  20

PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE                                 25

SELECTED REMEDY                                        25

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS                               27

DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES                   30


Appendices

APPENDIX      I     Figures
APPENDIX      II    Tables
APPENDIX      HJ    Responsiveness Summary
APPENDDC      IV    Administrative Record Index
APPENDDC      V     State Letter of Concurrence




                                      ii


                                                      R2-0004190

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE NAME. LOCATION AND BRIEF DESCRIPTION

The Ellis Property Site (Site) is located in Burlington County, east of Sharp Road and about
2,000 feet north of Evesboro-Medford Road in Evesham Township, New Jersey (see Figure 1).
The Site is surrounded by farmland and wooded lots, and is less than half of a mile from the
nearest residential area, across Sharp Road. The property was once used as a dairy farm and is
designated as Block 14, Lot 4 on the Evesham Township tax map. It comprises approximately 36
acres of land; 24 acres are located in Evesham Township and the remainder in Medford
Township. A groundwater treatment plant is operating on the Site. A fence surrounds the
treatment plant but the rest of the property is not fenced. The Site is overgrown with grasses and
weeds.

Land in the area immediately surrounding the Site is primarily agricultural, though it is
transitioning to residential. Cultivated fields bound the Site to the north and south. Another field
is found to the west, across Sharp Road. To the east of the Site lies a wetland area, classified by
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) as a palustrine ecological system with scrub/shrub
and emergent plant classes. Although the wetlands receive surface water runoff from the Site,
inundation and saturation of the wetland area is probably caused by discharge from the shallow
groundwater table. Consequently, periodic drying of the wetlands occurs when the elevation of
the groundwater table is reduced. The nearest free-flowing surface water is Sharps Run,
approximately one-quarter mile north of the Site. Drainage from the wetlands eventually leads to
Sharps Run. Sharps Run flows east through Medford Township to the southwestern branch of
Rancocas Creek, approximately six miles east of the Site. The northeastern corner of the Site,
which includes part of the wetlands, lies in the 100-year floodplain.

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITmS

Site History
In 1968, Irving and Reba Ellis purchased the property and used part of it as a drum storage and
reconditioning (drum cleaning) operation. Used drums and containers were brought onto the
Site, rinsed or cleaned, and then resold. The Site consisted of a two-story building, housing
several washing tanks with troughs, three sheds, a storage area, and a boiler. Approximately four
acres of the 36-acre tract were involved with this operation The reconditioning operation ceased
in 1978, after a fire damaged some of the buildings. However, storage of drums at the Site
continued into the 1980s.

Initial Activities
In September 1980, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP)
investigated the Site following an anonymous complaint. At the time, the building contained 50
to 75 drums, many of which were full of unknown liquids. The three sheds also contained




                                                                                          R2-0004191

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

various-sized drums and chemical containers, many of which contained unknown substances.
Stained soil was found in the area near the sheds, which was devoid of plant growth. About one
hundred 55-gallon plastic drums were located adjacent to the sheds. A natural swale and several
man-made ditches led into a wetland, located approximately 700 feet east of Sharp Road. The
troughs inside the larger building drained into one of these ditches. Sediments and surface water
runoff entered the wetlands from the drainage ways. Hundreds of drums and containers were
spread haphazardly around the Site. Some of these drums were later found to contain oils, grease,
acids, and various organic compounds. There was evidence of spills from past operations at the
Site. Several drums were corroded, with the contents leaking onto the ground.

Subsequent inspections by the NJDEP indicated that chemical spills onto the ground had
occurred in several areas. Soil sampling and analysis by the NJDEP revealed the presence of
hydrochloric acid, heavy metals, and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).

In April 1981, NJDEP issued a Directive Letter to Mr. Ellis, instructing him to remove and
dispose of the drums and contaminated soil from the Site. NJDEP made numerous attempts to
persuade Mr. Ellis to accept responsibility for the contamination on his property. In September
1982, the Evesham Municipal Utilities Authority (EMUA) filed a civil action in the Superior
Court of New Jersey against Mr. and Mrs. Ellis for the illegal storage of drums containing
hazardous substances. In December 1982, NJDEP filed a separate civil action in the Superior
Court of New Jersey due to Mr. Ellis's failure to comply with the Directive Letter and the
continued use of the Site for the storage of drums.

In January 1983, the Burlington County Health Department and the NJDEP conducted a survey
of potable wells within an approximate one-mile radius of the Site to determine if they were
affected by Site contamination. The survey tested ten potable wells, finding that the Site had not
contaminated these wells and was not affecting potable water wells in the area.

The two civil cases filed against Mr. and Mrs. Ellis were consolidated, and on February 10,
1983, an Order for Partial Summary Judgment was entered in the Superior Court against Mr.
Ellis in the consolidated cases in the amount of $49,084 98 The court also ordered Mr. Ellis to
pay $53,000 in penalties. On June 6,1984, in a Judgment Consent, the court ordered Mr Ellis to
pay the EMUA $4,000 and forbade him to store, discharge, or spill hazardous substances at the
Site.

The Site was included on the National Priorities List on September 1,1983. On October 19,
1984, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) issued a General Notice Letter to Mr.
Ellis, informing him of his potential liability under the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA), as amended by the Superfund Amendments
and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA), with respect to the contamination at the Site.



                                               2


                                                                                       R2-0004192

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

In May 1989, EPA initiated a search for other potentially responsible parties (PRPs). EPA has
not identified other PRPs for the Site besides the Ellises

Removal Actions
In March 1983, utilizing the New Jersey Spill Compensation Fund, NJDEP removed
approximately one hundred drums containing acids and disposed of them at an approved off-site
facility. Containerized solids and flammable liquids were also removed and disposed of, along
with contaminated soil and sludge. In an acid spill area, the highly acidic surface soils were
removed, and lime was tilled into the soil to neutralize the acid. Soils in the vicinity of a PCB
disposal area were removed to a depth of approximately two feet and disposed at an approved
off-site facility. The large building and sheds were demolished at that time because they were
structurally unsafe. Local private wells were sampled again and showed no contamination.

On February 22,1989, NJDEP requested that EPA conduct a drum removal action at the Site.
After a preliminary assessment, EPA through its removal authority began Site preparation, waste
sampling, and stabilization. EPA segregated, staged and labeled a total of 218 drums containing
hazardous waste material for off-site disposal. In addition, approximately 400 empty drums were
crushed for off-site disposal. Removal of the drums was completed on April 17,1990.

SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS

Site Geology and Hydrology
The Ellis Property Site is situated in the central portion of the Atlantic Coastal Plain, which
extends from the fall line located west of the Delaware River to the Atlantic Ocean. The Coastal
Plain regionally slopes gently to the southeast. Site topography is generally flat. The Site is
underlain by a shallow unconfined aquifer called the Hornerstown Sand, which is comprised of
silty sand and clay lenses. The water table is, on average, five feet below ground surface (bgs),
and the Hornerstown formation is typically no deeper than 30 feet bgs . Underlying this shallow
aquifer is the Navesink Sand, which is comprised of interbedded layers of glauconitic clay and
sand, and is generally about 30 feet thick. Thus, the combined formations extend, on average,
about 50 to 70 feet bgs.

The Hornerstown and Navesink formations collectively function as a confining layer, isolating
shallow groundwater from the deeper Wenonah-Mount Laurel Sand, a major source of potable
water for domestic wells in the vicinity of the Site. Site monitoring wells in the Wenonah-Mount
Laurel Sand are screened at 90 to 100 feet bgs, and this is a typical depth for local domestic wells
in the area. Deeper aquifers that underlie the Wenonah-Mount Laurel Sand, known as the
Magothy-Raritan, are confined from the shallow units described here by clay formations. The
Magothy-Raritan aquifers are a significant source of municipal water supply in the vicinity of the
Site.



                                                3


                                                                                          R2-0004193

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The water quality in the deeper aquifers (the Wenonah-Mount Laurel and Magothy-Raritan) are
not affected by the contaminants m the shallow groundwater. A Burlington County Health
Department survey found no private wells near the Site using the shallow
(Hornerstown/Navesink) aquifer. A Classification Exception Area is in place to restrict the
installation of wells in the~shallow aquifer. The shallow aquifer is not currently used as a source
of public water supply because of its low productivity; however, it is a potential source of
recharge for the underlying aquifers at the Site. Groundwater beneath the Site is located in the
New Jersey Coastal Plain Sole Source Aquifer, and is, therefore, classified as Class II potable
water (i e, drinking water).

Shallow groundwater flow at the Site is to the east or east-northeast. Hydraulic conductivity
values calculated for the shallow aquifer range from 0.41 to 1.63 feet per day.

Sharps Run is a tributary of the south branch of the Rancocas Creek. The NJDEP has classified
the south branch of the Rancocas Creek, from Vincentown to the Delaware River, and its
tributaries as FW2-NT, non-trout producing general surface waters.

Groundwater Contamination
The remedial investigation (RI) identified soils contaminated with metals, PCBs, and bis(2-
ethylhexyl)phthalate, and groundwater contaminated with volatile organic compounds (VOCs),
particularly tetrachloroethylene (PCE) and trichloroethylene (TCE). NJDEP completed the
remedial investigation and feasibility study (RI/FS) for the Site, and worked with EPA to issue a
Record of Decision (ROD) in 1992, requiring the excavation of contaminated soil and
installation of a groundwater collection, treatment and discharge system. The goal of the
groundwater action was to restore the groundwater to drinking water standards.

Original Remedy
The elements of the remedy selected in the original ROD included the following:

   •   Excavation of contaminated soil and treatment/disposal at an approved off-site facility;
   •   Extraction of contaminated groundwater from the shallow aquifer underlying the Site;
   •   Treatment of the contaminated groundwater in a facility to be constructed on Site;
   •   Disposal of the treated groundwater on the Site by reinjection; and
   •   Implementation of an environmental monitoring program to ensure the effectiveness of
       the remedy.

All these actions have been implemented, as discussed below.

Remedy Implementation
The remedy was implemented using public funds because viable PRPs could not be found.

                                                4


                                                                                        R2-0004194

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

With NJDEP as the lead agency, the remediation of contaminated soil was begun in 1998,
excavating soils that exceeded remediation goals established in the ROD for transportation and
off-site disposal. The NJDEP conducted quality assurance testing on post-excavation samples.
Several rounds of post-excavation sampling led to additional excavation before the soil
remediation was deemed complete. The ROD identified approximately 760 cubic yards of
surface soils (within thefirstfivefeet bgs) contaminated with metals, PCBs, and bis(2-
ethylhexyl)phthalate that exceeded the Site remediation goals. Site-specific, risk-based
remediation goals were selected based upon an assumption of eventual unrestricted Site use. A
total of 1,400 cubic yards of excavated soils were disposed of at an approved off-site facility.
Excavations were backfilled with cleanfillthat was tested prior to being brought on Site All
these excavations were performed above the water table, and all work was completed by 1999.

In addition to the soil actions identified in the ROD, an area of soil contaminated with PCE was
discovered during the design phase of the groundwater remedy, and was excavated down to
approximately 12 feet bgs. This work was performed in 2000.

Construction of the groundwater collection and treatment (C&T) system commenced on
September 28,1999 and was completed on June 5,2000. The C&T system started up on June
16,2000, and was determined to be operational and functional on August 31,2000. The system
consists of a collection trench installed near the eastern edge of the Site with two extraction
pomts (MH-1 and MH-2), two other extraction wells (PW-1 and PW-2), a treatment plant, and a
reinjection trench to the west. Groundwater is pumped from the extraction points and is then
treated and discharged to the reinjection trench and to wetlands to the east and downgradient of
the collection trench. The downgradient discharge is necessary because the reinjection trench
cannot accept all the discharge requirements of the treatment systems.

The treatment consists of solids settling by gravity, coagulation/flocculation and co-precipitation
for metals removal, sludge dewatering, and VOC removal via air stripping and carbon
adsorption. The system was designed to operate at approximatelyfivegallons per minute (gpm)
with a peak flow of 15 gpm. Currently the system functions at a maximum rate of approximately
seven gpm (including system recirculation) due to system flow-through limitations (e g., the
abundant presence of solids) and re-injection rate constraints (e.g., treated water cannot be
discharged as quickly as the system can extract/treat it).

System Operations/Operation and Maintenance (O&M)
O&M is being performed by NJDEP and includes the operation and maintenance of the
treatment facility, sampling and analysis of the monitoring wells, groundwater level
measurements, and wetland monitoring. A total of 38 monitoring wells and 14 piezometers are
currently used in the monitoring of local groundwater flow and contaminant migration. These
wells are screened in three distinct formations underlying the Site at the following intervals: 22
shallow wells in the Hornerstown Formation, approximately 10 to 20 feet bgs; six intermediate


                                               5


                                                                                        R2-0004195

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

wells in the Navesink Formation approximately 50 to 60 feet bgs; and 10 deep wells in the
Wenonah-Mount Laurel Formation approximately 90 to 100 feet bgs.

Four monitoring wells were installed in the wetland area to monitor the affect of the C&T system
on water levels in the wetland. An evaluation of the wetlands was performed in 2000 and 2001,
and concluded that the wetlands were not adversely affected by the groundwater treatment
system. As part of the evaluation, a baseline vegetative community survey was conducted to
provide an initial assessment of the vegetative communities prior to initiating groundwater
remediation activities. All of the characterized species at the Site during the baseline evaluation
were planted stock. Ten quadrants and six data points were established during the baseline
survey. Overall the vegetation appeared vigorous and healthy. Subsequent monitoring over the
next couple of years indicated that colonization of plant species native to the area had occurred.
The overall heights and stem densities documented suggests that the community is healthy and
experiencing vigorous growth patterns. Change other than successive growth has not occurred.
Minor wildlife browsing was noted in some areas.

New Information
While the removal and remedial response actions taken to date have eliminated drums and large
areas of contaminated soil, residual TCE in localized areas of the Site along the interface of the
Hornerstown Formation and Navesink Formation have been consistently identified in Site
monitoring wells during groundwater monitoring. TCE and other VOCs found in groundwater
today were not identified as soil contaminants at the time of the ROD because they were not
detected at significant concentrations.

In 2006, EPA performed a Remediation System Evaluation (RSE) of Site operations. An RSE
involves an independent team of expert hydrogeologists and engineers conducting a broad
evaluation of remedy performance. The recommendations are intended to help the Site team
identify opportunities for improvements. The September 2006 RSE report identified several
enhancements to improve the performance of the selected response action. In addition, the ROD
had called for studies of the Site to identify the presence of dense nonaqueous phase liquids
(DNAPLs), typically VOCs that might act as continuing sources of contamination to the
groundwater. In 2007, NJDEP conducted a Pre-Design Investigation (PDI) to further delineate
the residual source(s) and extent of contarnination in soil and groundwater, to evaluate the
presence of DNAPLs, and assess potential changes to the groundwater remedy.




                                               6


                                                                                       R2-0004196

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  Summary of PDI Results:

  •    A stratigraphy investigation was conducted in the vicinity of MW-2, MW-6, PW-1, and
       PW-2 (See Figure 2 for a map of monitoring well locations). Cone penetrometer
       technology (CPT) tests confirmed the existence of a "sand channel" that could act as a
       preferential pathway for contamination. The sand stratum was identified between one
       and nine feet thick at the Site and increased in thickness moving east to west from MW-6
       to MW-8.
  •     Source area delineation of chlorinated solvent contamination was conducted using a
       Membrane Interface Probe (MIP). The MIP results suggested that a residual
       contamination source appeared to be relatively shallow (approximately 10 feet bgs)
       around boring location P22 (see Figure 3), while it moved deeper (20 feet bgs) into the
       clay layer around boring locations P53 and P5.
   •    Investigation of groundwater quality was conducted along the sand channel and potential
        contamination source areas through collection of groundwater samples via direct push
        sampling points installed adjacent to selected MIP mvestigation locations. The PDI
        confirmed that there was no contamination in the sand channel prior to entering the
        extraction trench. Groundwater analytical results indicated TCE to be the primary
        contaminant of concern remaining at the Site and that the primary residual source areas
        were in the vicinity of boring location P22 and P53 and P56.
   •    TCE was detected in the groundwater in the residual source area up to 14,000,000
        micrograms per liter (ug/L) at depths between 10 and 26 feet bgs. This concentration is
        two orders of magnitude higher than the highest groundwater monitoring well sample
        results (15,500 ug/L) since 2003. Additionally, extraction well PW-2 has shown
        consistently elevated TCE levels above 23,000 ug/L in the last 2 years of sampling. (See
        Table 1 summarizing recent groundwater data.)
   •    Investigation along the suspected sand channel and contamination source areas was
        conducted through the collection of soil samples adjacent to selected MIP investigation
        locations. TCE was the only compound that exceeded NJDEP criteria, but was typically
        present at concentrations exceedmg one milligram per kilogram (1 mg/kg).

Overall, the PDI investigation identified TCE, found predominantly between 10 and 24 feet bgs,
as the primary remaining contaminant of concern (COC) at the Site, with more elevated
concentrations identified during the PDI than historical groundwater results. The significant
levels of TCE m the groundwater indicates the existence of a DNAPL source, but such a source
has not yet been found. The DNAPL source material constitutes a principal threat waste at the
Site. The influence of pumping wells PW-1 and PW-2 in extracting subsurface contamination
bound in the tight soil matrix is limited. Note that these two pumping wells are well placed
relative to the TCE source areas and pumping has been ongoing for more than 10 years, yet they
appear to have made little progress toward addressing these sources.



                                               7


                                                                                       R2-0004197

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The primary cause of persistent elevated levels of groundwater contamination in portions of the
Site appears to be residual deep soil contamination below the water table. These contaminants,
bound tightly in the soils, leach slowly out of the soils, serving as a continuing source of
groundwater contamination that is not easily addressed by the existing system.

Based on a review of the groundwater monitoring results from November 1999 to October 2010,
multiple residual source areas of TCE contamination appear likely at the Site. The primary
potential source area in the shallow zone is in the vicinity of monitoring wells MW-2 and MW-6,
continuing downgradient to the extraction trench, where relatively high TCE concentrations
persist. A statistical analysis of the TCE concentrations detected at MW-2 and MW-6 was
conducted for eight quarterly sampling events performed between October 2003 and September
2005. This analysis illustrated that TCE levels had not decreased at either MW-2 or MW-6
during this time period. Additionally, extraction well PW-2, which is located between MW-2
and MW-6, exhibited varying concentrations," which were persistently detected at elevated levels
for TCE in 2013, as high as 47,195 ug/L. Another potential source area, based on previous
investigations, is in the vicinity of extraction well PW-1, which has had elevated concentrations
of TCE in the influent to the treatment plant in 2009 and 2010, as high as 31,286 ug/L in 2013.

The RSE and PDI also identified several issues likely to affect overall system performance,
including the location of extraction wells in low-permeability soil formations and the presence of
the sand channel on the northern part of the Site. The sand channel was believed to limit the
effectiveness of the northern portion of the collection trench in adequately intercepting
contamination. A cutoff wall was installed in 2012 to isolate the contaminated groundwater
from the sand channel and direct it, instead, to the collection trench. This wall was also designed
to be used as a shoring protection for excavation in the vicinity of the plume area.

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICD7ATION

The Proposed Plan and supporting documentation for this ROD Amendment were released to the
public for comment on July 11,2013. These documents were made available to the public at the
                                                              th
EPA Region 2 Superfund Records Center, 290 Broadway, 18 Floor, New York, New York and
at the Evesham Library, 984 Tuckerton Road, Marlton, New Jersey.

On July 11,2013, the Central Record, a Burlington County newspaper, published a notice which
contained information relevant to the public comment period for the Site, including the duration
of the comment period, the date of the public meeting and availability of the aciministrative
record. Postcards, containing the same information were also mailed to individuals on a mailing
list maintained by EPA for the Site. The public comment period began on July 11,2013 and
ended on August 12,2013.




                                               8


                                                                                       R2-0004198

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

EPA held a public meeting on July 24,2013, to explain EPA's preferred remedy. The purpose of
the meeting was to inform local officials and interested citizens about the Superfund process, to
discuss the Proposed Plan for the ROD Amendment and receive comments on the Proposed Plan,
and to respond to questions from area residents and other interested parties. Responses to the
comments received at the public meeting and in writing during the public comment period are
included in the Responsiveness Summary, attached as Appendix HI to this ROD Amendment.

CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES

The Site was originally a dairy farm and then a drum recycling operation. Currently, the Site is
undeveloped and there are no building structures, except for the groundwater treatment plant.
There are a series of monitoring wells located throughout the Site which are used to monitor
groundwater.

The property is currently zoned IP, Industrial Park. There is potential for immediate
redevelopment of portions of the Site on either side of the treatment plant, or the entire Site upon
completion of the cleanup. As in the 1992 ROD, future land use scenario is assumed to be
unrestricted residential.

BASIS FOR REMEDY MODD7ICATION

This is an amendment to the September 30,1992, ROD for the Ellis Property Superfund Site.
The 1992 ROD selected excavation of contaminated soil and treatment/disposal at an approved
off-site facility and extraction of contaminated groundwater from the shallow aquifer underlying
the Site to address the threats posed by contamination at the Site.

Five-year reviews were conducted in 2005 and 2010, pursuant to CERCLA. The purpose of a
five-year review is to determine whether the remedies at the Site are protective of human health
and the environment and function as intended by the decision documents. Thefive-yearreviews
concluded that short-term protectiveness of human health and the environment was achieved as
there is no exposure to groundwater contamination and ongoing groundwater monitoring
continues to be performed. However, through this review process and subsequent investigations,
NJDEP and EPA concluded that the groundwater remedy was not performing as intended by the
ROD. Specifically, while the C&T system continues to perform as designed, the groundwater
contaminant concentrations in the shallow aquifer have not decreased as expected, and additional
remedial measures are needed to achieve the remedial action objectives. In addition, the PDI
found additional residual contamination that acts as an ongoing source to the groundwater. If
these source areas are not addressed, aquifer restoration cannot be achieved.




                                                 9


                                                                                           R2-0004199

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

A focused feasibility study (FFS) evaluated potential remedial technologies and remedial
scenarios was conducted by NJDEP and documented in "Technology Evaluation Report for the
Ellis Property Superfund Site," dated May 2009.

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS

A Baseline Human Health Risk Assessment (BHHRA), and Ecological Risk Assessment were
prepared as part of the RI/FS at the time of the 1992 ROD. The conclusions and assumptions of
these nsk assessments were most recently reassessed by EPA as part of a five-year review for the
Site in September 2010. EPA concluded that the current and future land use assumptions for the
Site are still valid, with an expectation of future unrestricted land use. The basis for taking an
action at the Site derived, primarily, from direct contact or groundwater exposure to a future
resident.

The soil remedial action called for in the 1992 ROD removed soil contamination within
approximately the first 10 feet of Site soils, alleviating the potential for direct contact. The soil
remediation goals at the time of the ROD were for the following contaminants of concern
(COCs), with the ROD criteria and NJDEP's current unrestricted use soil standards.

TCE was not selected as a COC for direct contact in the original ROD, and while contamination
remains at depth, the expected response action would remediate TCE to levels below NJDEP's
promulgated remediation goal for unrestricted use (7 mg/kg), so the original RAOs for soil
would not be affected by a change to the original remedy.

A comparison of the current groundwater standards with the standards used at the time of the
remedy selection indicate several changes, as shown in Table 2. None of these changes alter the
scope of the selected remedy, or this Amended ROD.

The groundwater exposure assumptions made at the time of the 1992 ROD are still valid. The
vapor intrusion pathway was not evaluated at the time of 1992 ROD; however, it is an
incomplete exposure pathway because there are no receptors. A comparison of the maximum
TCE and PCE concentrations with groundwater values provided in the OSWER Draft Guidance
for Evaluating the Vapor Intrusion to Indoor Air PathwayfromGroundwater and Soils
(November 2002) was conducted as part of the 2010 Five Year Review. The screening values
used in the draft guidance provide groundwater levels associated with an indoor air concentration
                                                                  6
that represents a cancerriskranging from 1x10^ and 1 x 10" or a noncancer hazard quotient of
 1 Concentrations higher than these screening values indicate the potential for vapor intrusion.
                                                                            4
TCE and PCE concentrations found in groundwater exceed the 1 x 10" vapor intrusion screening
values of 5.3 ug/L and 110 ug/L, respectively. For this reason, construction of any type of
building within the area of contarninated groundwater may create conditions for a future vapor
intrusion exposure if the groundwater is not remediated.


                                                 10


                                                                                            R2-0004200

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Previous soil testing at the Site (during the RI and remedial action) was for total chromium, not
for trivalent or the more hazardous hexavalent chromium. Based on new toxicity information on
hexavalent chromium, the cleanup goal for this chemical has been lowered significantly. EPA
and NJDEP do not have a residential risk-based screening level for total chromium; however,
EPA's screening value for tnvalent chromium is 120,000 mg/kg and for hexavalent chromium is
0.29 mg/kg. It is plausible that past Site operations resulted in hexavalent chromium impacts at
the Site; however, the highest soil concentration of total chromium was 493 mg/kg, and
chromium was not a remedy driver either as a consequence of the RI/FS testing or during the
subsequent remedial action for soils. It is highly unlikely that chromium in the soil could remain
when other soil contaminants were remediated. Thus, the direct-contact pathways for the COCs
identified in the 1992 ROD have been addressed by the already-implemented soil remedy;
however, because some of the current levels are more stringent, they will be used when
determining completeness of the remedy going forward. Corifirmation sampling will be
performed during the cleanup.

The 2010 five-year review also evaluated ecological risks and concluded that, while there have
been changes in how risk is calculated since originally assessed in 1992, the remediation goals
used for the upland portion of the Site appear to be protective of terrestrial receptors. There are
concentrations of TCE in the surface water, but the concentrations are below chronic aquatic
values. Therefore, there are no surface water contaminants of ecological concern.

REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES

Remedial action objectives are specific goals to protect human health and the environment.
These objectives are based on available information and standards, such as applicable or relevant
and appropriate requirements (ARARs) and risk-based levels established in the Baseline Human
Health Risk Assessment (BHHRA), prepared for the RI/FS at the time of the 1992 ROD.
Because the BHHRA established that the soil and groundwater at the Site poses an unacceptable
risk to human health and the environment, remedial action objectives (RAOs) were established in
the 1992 ROD. EPA and NJDEP have concluded that these RAOs are still appropriate. EPA has
added one additional RAO for groundwater, to address the potential for vapor intrusion
exposure.

Soil
    •   Prevent contact with contaminated soil, which represents an unacceptable risk, or reduce
        contaminant concentrations in the soil below risk-based levels,
    •   Prevent further migration of soil contaminants into the groundwater; and
    •   Prevent migration of contaminated soils off Site.




                                                 11


                                                                                           R2-0004201

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Groundwater
   • Prevent the migration of contaminated groundwater off Site,
   • Prevent the migration of contaminated groundwater into the underlying aquifers;
   • Prevent potential exposure by inhalation/vapor intrusion that presents unacceptable risk
      under a future land use scenario; and
   • Return the aquifer to its designated use as a source of drinking water by reducing
      contaminant concentrations in the shallow groundwater to drinking water quality.
It should be noted that the applicable New Jersey drinking water and groundwater quality
standard for the primary contaminant of concern, TCE, of 1 ug/L has not changed since the 1992
ROD. Based upon the 2007 PDI, the implemented remedy has only been partly successful in
achieving the RAOs for groundwater. The results of the 2007 PDI identified the following
additional areas (not known at the time of the ROD) that need to be addressed to meet the RAOs:

   •   Residual Source Area: The horizontal extent of TCE concentration s exceeding 11,000
       ug/L, representing likely DNAPL source material. This area covers approximately
       24,000 square feet of the Site. This area is typically found between 10 and 24 feet bgs
       and is estimated at approximately 22,500 cubic yards in volume.
   •   Plume Area: The area outside of the residual source area that represents the horizontal
       extent of TCE concentration greater than 100 ug/L. This area covers approximately
       61,000 square feet of the Site. This area is typically found between 10 and 20 feet bgs
       and is estimated at approximately 45,000 cubic yards in volume.

These volumes do not include shallow soils (down to approximately 10 feet bgs) previously
addressed under the original remedy. Combining the residual source area and the plume area,
the Full Area covers approximately 85,000 square feet of the Site (67,500 cubic yards).

Please refer to Figure 3 showing residual source area in dotted line and the plume area in shade.
The Full Area consists of the Residual Area and the plume area. The residual source area and
plume area were considered separately because, while the same remedial technologies could be
implemented in either area, certain technologies are more effective for higher concentration areas
and others more appropriate, from a cost and effectiveness standpoint, for lower concentration
areas. Within these designated areas the soil remediation goal for TCE will be 1 mg/kg, which is
expected to achieve the 1 ug/L remediation goal in groundwater.

DESCRD7TION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. §9601 et seq., requires that each remedial alternative be protective of
human health and the environment, be cost effective, comply with other statutory laws, and
utilize permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies to the maximum extent



                                               12


                                                                                       R2-0004202

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

practicable. In addition, CERCLA includes a preference for the use of treatment as a principal
element for the reduction of toxicity, mobility or volume of hazardous substances.

CERCLA requires that if a remedial action is selected that results in hazardous substances,
pollutants, or contaminants remaining at the Site above levels that allow for unlimited use and
unrestricted exposure, EPA must review the action no less than every five years after initiation of
the action. In addition, institutional controls (e.g., a deed notice, an easement or a covenant) to
limit the use of portions of the property may be required. These use restrictions are discussed in
each alternative as appropriate. Consistent with expectations set out in the National Oil and
Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), none of the remedies rely exclusively
on institutional controls to achieve protectiveness. The time frames below for achieving RAOs
do not include the tune for remedial design or the time to procure contracts.

Technologies were screened in the FFS to select a set of remedial technologies appropriate for
this site. Retained remedial technologies were then used to develop Remedial Alternatives to
address contamination and achieve RAOs at the site. These Alternatives consisted of either
individual or a combination of retained remedial technologies in order to best achieve the
remediation goals. The FFS considered two distinct in-situ chemical treatment methods
separately, but they have been combined (e g, Alternative 3 and Alternative 4 are now
Alternative 3/4) for the Proposed Plan and in this document.

Common Elements
Each of the remedial alternatives discussed below would continue the institutional controls that
currently prevent use of the contaminated groundwater—a component of the 1992 remedy. The
institutional control for groundwater is in the form of a classification exception area (CEA).
These controls need to be in place until the aquifer is restored. In addition, until the RAO of
aquifer restoration is achieved, each alternative would require engineering controls for vapor
mitigation (vapor barriers, vapor mitigation systems and/or monitoring), if buildings come to be
placed over any of the groundwater contamination zones identified for the Site.

With the exception of Alternative 1, Continuation of the Existing Collection and Treatment
(C&T) System, the alternatives are designed to address the newly defined Residual Source and
plume areas that need to be addressed to satisfy the RAOs.

During the implementation phase of the alternatives, the existing C&T system would remain in
place and operational, preventing further contaminant migration. After completion of the
remedial actions devised for each alternative, the groundwater C&T system would remain in
place for some period while the aquifer recovered. The anticipated length for this stage of each
alternative varies, as discussed below.




                                               13

                                                                                      R2-0004203

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 1: Continuation of the Existing C&T System
Capital Cost - Not Applicable (N/A)
Annual O&M- $374,000
Total Present Worth - $ 10,000,000
Implementation Period - N/A

This remedial alternative assumes that no new actions will be implemented at the Site and the
existing C&T system will continue to operate for a minimum of 30 years. For costing purposes,
30 years is assumed; however, the operation period of 30 years is considered to be mdefinite
considering the limited effectiveness of the system since operation began in 2000, and the period
required to reach the RAOs may be substantially longer than 30 years. Annual groundwater
monitoring would be conducted for approximately 30 years to track performance of the
remediation.

Alternative 2: Full Area Excavation with Off-Site Disposal

Capital Cost - $10,518,000
Annual O&M-$783,000
Total Present Worth - $13,600,000
Implementation Period -1 year

This remedial alternative involves excavation and off-site disposal of contaminated soil in the
Full Area, which comprises the residual source area and the plume area. This alternative would
provide the removal of the residual source area and contaminated soil in the plume area, reduce
contamination concentrations across the Site and result in a significantly shorter operation period
for the C&T system.

Contaminated soils would be excavated from an average depth interval of 10 to 20 feet bgs, and
as deep as 30 feet bgs in some limited areas. Approximately 67,500 cubic yards of soil would be
excavated from the Site. The upper soils (approximately 31,500 cubic yards) from zero to 10
feet bgs that are not contaminated would be excavated and stockpiled and used for backfill.
Contaminated soils would be disposed as hazardous waste at an RCRA-approved off-site
disposal facility. Dewatering would be necessary during the excavation of the saturated portion
of the soil.

Additional excavation may be conducted in some select areas based on field screening and
observation during the excavation activities. Approximately 15 new monitoring wells would be
installed to replace the existing wells that would be abandoned prior to the excavation activities.
Operation of the existing groundwater C&T system would be continued during the excavation;
the system would be limited to extracting groundwater from collection trench only, because the


                                                14


                                                                                          R2-0004204

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

extraction wells PW-1 and PW-2 are in the excavation area and would be abandoned prior to the
excavation activities.

Groundwater levels are expected to reach the remediation goals within a relatively short period
after completion of the soil excavation, without further remedial activities; however, the C&T
system would remain in place after completion of the excavation to evaluate the effectiveness of
continued operation of this system to further reduce the residual groundwater contaminants. For
the purpose of the FFS, the period of operation for the C&T system was assumed to be one year
after completion of the remedial action; quarterly groundwater monitoring was assumed to be
conducted for the first year, followed by annual groundwater monitoring for the next nine years
to monitor the remedial performance. Actual period of operation of the C&T system and
groundwater monitoring schedule will be determined by EPA after completion of the remedial
action and will be based on achieving the performance standards set during design.

Alternative 3/4: Full Area In-Situ Chemical Treatment
Capital Cost - $1,515,000- $2,185,000
Annual O&M-$783,000
Total Cost - 2,800,000-$3,600,000
Implementation Period-1 year

This alternative includes the use of in-situ chemical treatment, either in-situ chemical reduction
(ISCR) [Alternative 3] or in-situ chemical oxidation (ISCO) [Alternative 4] to remediate soil and
groundwater contamination at the Site. Final selection of the in-situ treatment technology would
be made after further studies m remedial design, and the Site may require a combination of
different in-situ technologies to address Site contamination.

ISCR uses chemical reductants such as zero-valent iron (ZVI). The ZVI donates electrons,
acting as the reductant in a reaction that removes chlorine atoms from chlorinated hydrocarbon
contaminants such as TCE.

The ZVI reaction is a rapid process and thus requires a short time frame to reach remedial goals.
The limiting factor for the technology is the delivery of the ZVI into the aquifer. It is anticipated
that ZVI would be injected through a total of approximately 100 locations based on a 30-foot
grid injection pattern. ZVI would be injected in a slurry using direct-push technology to the
target depth interval of 10 to 30 feet bgs. It is assumed that two injection events (assuming one to
two months apart) would be needed and a total of approximately 26,000 pounds of ZVI would be
injected.




                                                15


                                                                                          R2-0004205

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ISCO is a process that involves the injection of reactive chemical oxidants (such as Peroxide,
Fenton's Reagent, Permanganate) into the subsurface for rapid contaminant destruction.
Oxidation of organic compounds using ISCO is rapid and exothermic and results in the reduction
of contaminants to primarily carbon dioxide and oxygen.

Modified Fenton's Reagent was assumed to be the oxidant, for costing purposes. Modified
Fenton's process combines proprietary chelated iron complex catalysts, mobility control agents,
oxidizers, and stabilizers. The process generates powerful free radicals when the catalyst reacts
with hydrogen peroxide to promote co-existing oxidation-reduction (redox) conditions.

As with ISCR, ISCO is generally a rapid reaction, and the technology is limited by the ability to
deliver the oxidant to the aquifer. It is anticipated that the Modified Fenton's Reagent would be
injected through a total of approximately 300 points based on a 16-foot grid injection pattern
using direct-push technology to the target depth interval of 10 to 30 feet bgs. It is assumed that 3
injection events (one to two months apart) would be needed and a total of approximately 240,000
gallons of the Modified Fenton's Reagent would be injected.

Delivery of the selected chemical is critical to the success of this technology. Due to the
tightness of the soil matrix, results of the PDI suggest that uniform delivery of the selected
chemical would be difficult.

In Alternative 3 or Alternative 4, the groundwater will be monitored during treatment to prevent
the migration of reagents or free radicals.

The FFS assumes that groundwater would be extracted from the collection trench only and
                                                                          -
treated on Site through existing treatment system for one year to avoid 1) interference with the
chemical treatment in the target treatment area; and 2) impact of chemical reducing agents to the
existing C&T system. Treated groundwater would be discharged mostly to surface water, with a
portion being discharged via groundwater. For the purpose of the FFS, quarterly groundwater
monitoring was assumed to be conducted for the first year, followed by annual groundwater
monitoring for the next nine years to monitor the remedial performance. Actual period of
operation of the C&T system and groundwater monitoring schedule will be determined by EPA
after completion of the remedial action and will be based on achieving the performance standards
set during design.




                                                16


                                                                                         R2-0004206

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 5/6: Residual Source Area Excavation with Off-Site Disposal and Plume Area
In-Situ Chemical Treatment
Capital Cost - $6,3 71,000-S6,383,000
Annual O&M-$783,000
Present Worth - $8,600,000
Implementation Period - 3 years

This remedial alternative combines the use of Excavation with Off-Site Disposal (Alternative 2)
to address contamination in the residual source area followed by in-situ chemical treatment
(either ISCR or ISCO) to address contamination in the plume area. Alternative 5 utilizes ISCR,
while Alternative 6 utilizes ISCO.

In the residual source area, soils would be excavated as described in Alternative 2 from
approximately 10 to 20 feet bgs with the excavation as deep as 30 feet bgs in some limited areas.
Approximately 22,500 cubic yards of soil would be excavated. After excavation, contaminated
soils would be disposed of at RCRA-approved off-site disposal facilities.

In-situ chemical treatment would be then be used to address the contamination in the plume area.
If ISCR is used (Alternative 5), a slurry of ZVI would be injected through a total of
approximately 70 locations based on a 30-foot grid injection pattern. ZVI would be injected in a
slurry using direct-push technology. It is assumed that 2 injection events (assuming one to two
months apart) would be needed and a total of approximately 12,000 pounds of ZVI would be
injected.

ISCO is considered more implementable than ISCR, as the exposure of ZVI to air during the
mixing process would reduce its effectiveness. If ISCO is used (Alternative 6), Modified
Fenton's Reagent would be used to address the contamination in the plume area. The oxidant
would be injected through a total of approximately 240 points based on a 16-foot grid injection
pattern using direct-push technology. It is assumed that 3 injection events (assuming 1 to 2
months apart) would be needed and a total of approximately 144,000 gallons of the Modified
Fenton's Reagent would be injected.

In Alternative 5 or Alternative 6, the groundwater will be monitored during treatment to prevent
the migration of reagents or free radicals.

The FFS assumes that groundwater would be extracted from the collection trench only and
treated on Site through existing treatment system for one year to avoid: 1) interference with the
chemical treatment in the target treatment area; and 2) impact of chemical reducing agents to the
existing C&T system. Treated groundwater would be discharged mostly to surface water, with a
portion being discharged via groundwater. For the purpose of the FFS, quarterly groundwater


                                               17


                                                                                       R2-0004207

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

monitoring was assumed to be conducted for the first year, followed by annual groundwater
monitoring for the next nine years to monitor the remedial performance. Actual period of
operation of the C&T system and groundwater monitoring schedule will be determined by EPA
after completion of the remedial action and will be based on achieving the performance standards
set during design.

Alternative 7/8: Residual Source Area In-Situ Chemical Treatment via Soil Mixing and
Plume Area Enhanced Bioremediation
Capital Cost - $2,858,000-$3,298,000
Annual O&M-$872,000
Present Worth - $4,600,000-5,100,000
Implementation Period - 5 years

This remedial alternative mvolves the use of in-situ chemical treatment, with in-situ soil mixing
(rather than chemical injection used in Alternatives 3/4 and 5/6), to address contamination in the
residual source area, followed by the use of enhanced bioremediation to address contamination in
the plume area.

High TCE concentrations in the residual source area would be addressed by in-situ chemical
treatment (as described in Alternative 3/4). Alternative 7 utilizes ISCR, while Alternative 8
utilizes ISCO. Treatment chemicals would be applied in the residual source area using an in-situ .
soil mixing method. Prior to the soil mixing, steel sheet piles will be installed to an approximate
depth of 40 feet bgs to support stability of soil in the mixing area. The uncontaminated upper
soil, from zero to 10 feet bgs (approximately 9,000 cubic yards) would be excavated and
stockpiled. Treatment chemicals (approximately 11,200 pounds of ZVI or 144,000 gallons of
Modified Fenton's Reagent) would be mixed with contaminated soils using an excavator. Target
depth zones for in-situ mixing of contaminated soils are from 10 to 20 feet bgs, with mixing as
deep as 30 feet bgs in some limited areas. After the soil mixing is complete, the excavation area
would be backfilled with the stockpiled soils.

Approximately five new monitoring wells would be installed to replace the existing wells
abandoned and removed prior to the excavation and soil mixing activities.
Enhanced bioremediation would then be used to address the contamination in the plume area.
The following description assumes that an edible oil substrate (EOS) would be used as the
reducing agent for the treatment, though other means are used to augment biodegradation within
the aquifer.

It is anticipated that the EOS would be injected at a total of approximately 150 locations based
on a 20-foot grid injection pattern using direct-push technology.



                                                18


                                                                                         R2-0004208

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Depending on the ability of intrinsic microorganisms to completely reduce Site contaminants,
bioaugmentation (adding microorganisms to the aquifer) may also be used to stimulate complete
reductive dechlorination of TCE's breakdown products (dichloroethylene and vinyl chloride) to
ethane. The FFS assumed that one application of EOS would be required to address TCE
concentrations in the plume area.

In Alternative 7 or Alternative 8, the groundwater will be monitored during treatment to prevent
the migration of reagents or free radicals.

The FFS assumes that groundwater would be extracted from the collection trench only and
treated on Site through existing treatment system for one year to avoid: 1) interference with the
chemical treatment in the target treatment area, and 2) impact of chemical reducing agents to the
existing C&T system. Treated groundwater would be discharged mostly to surface water, with a
portion being discharged via groundwater. For the purpose of the FFS, quarterly groundwater
monitoring was assumed to be conducted for thefirstyear, followed by annual groundwater
monitoring for the next nine years to monitor the remedial performance. Actual period of
operation of the C&T system and groundwater monitoring schedule will be determined by EPA
after completion of the remedial action and will be based on achieving the performance standards
set during design.

Alternative 9: Full Area In-Situ Thermal Treatment

Capital Cost - $4,504,000
Annual O&M -$783,000
Total Cost - $6,400,000
Implementation Period - 2 years

Thermal Treatment is an in-situ physical treatment via subsurface heating to enhance the
volatilization and subsequent capture and treatment of VOCs. Heating can be achieved via
several options, including electrical-resistance heating (i.e., passing electricity through soil via
electrodes), steam injection, and thermal conduction (via electrical heaters).

The FFS assumed electrical resistance heating (ERH) as the treatment method for this
alternative. ERH is an in-situ thermal technology that passes electrical current among electrodes
placed in the subsurface. Electrical resistance generates heat that eventually causes water in the
subsurface to gently boil. Steam stripping, volatilization and other mechanisms, such as
hydrolysis and increased chemical reaction rates, rapidly remediate subsurface contaminants.
Approximately 200 electrodes would be installed to 30 feet bgs over the approximately 80,000
square feet of the Full Area. A total of 200 vapor recovery wells and 25 temperature monitoring



                                                  19

                                                                                            R2-0004209

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

points would also be installed. Operation of the existing groundwater C&T system was assumed
to continue for one year, extracting groundwater from collection trench only, because the
extraction wells PW-1 and PW-2 would need to be abandoned and removed prior to the
installation activities for the thermal treatment system.

It is estimated that total heating treatment would be conducted over an eight to 10-month period
and vapor and groundwater samples would be collected periodically to monitor system
performance. For the purpose of the FFS, quarterly groundwater monitoring would be conducted
for the first year, followed by annual groundwater monitoring for the next nine years to monitor
the remedial performance. Actual period of operation of the C&T system and groundwater
monitoring schedule will be determined by EPA after completion of the remedial action and will
be based on achieving the performance standards set during design.

COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES

In selecting a remedy, EPA considered the factors set out in CERCLA §121,42 U.S C. §9621,
by conducting a detailed analysis of the viable remedial response measures pursuant to the NCP,
40 CFR §300.430(e)(9) and OSWER Directive 9355.3-01. The detailed analysis consisted of an
assessment of the individual response measure against each of nine evaluation criteria described
below and a comparative analysis focusing upon the relative performance of each response
measure against the criteria.

Threshold Criteria - The first two criteria are known as Mhreshold criteria® because they are
the minimum requirements that each response measure must meet in order to be eligible for
selection as a remedy.

1.     Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment
Overall protection of human health and the environment addresses whether each alternative
provides adequate protection of human health and the environment and describes how risks
posed through each exposure pathway are eliminated, reduced, or controlled, through treatment,
engineering controls, and/or institutional controls

Alternative 1 (Continuation of the Existing C&T System) would not protect human health or the
environment because it would not address the residual soil and groundwater contamination. All
of the other alternatives would provide protection of human health and the environment by
addressing the residual soil and groundwater contamination remaining at the site, coupled with
engineering controls (including vapor mitigation, if needed, in the future), and institutional
controls.




                                              20


                                                                                       R2-0004210

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

2.     Compliance with applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs)
Section 121(d) of CERCLA andNCP §300 430(f)(l)(n)(B) require that remedial actions at
CERCLA sites at least attain legally applicable or relevant and appropriate Federal and State
requirements, standards, criteria, and limitations which are collectively referred to as "ARARs,"
unless such ARARs are waived under CERCLA section 121(d)(4)

The three broad categories of ARARs include chemical-specific, location-specific and action-
specific ARARs. ARARs have been established for groundwater as part of the OU1 remedial
action objective to restore the unconfined aquifer to drinking water standards. A listing of these
ARARs is provided in Table 3.

All of the remedial alternatives discussed for remediation of soil and groundwater contamination
would meet their respective ARARs and are consistent with all applicable Federal, State, and
local laws and regulations, in particular, the relevant parts of the New Jersey Technical
Requirements for Site Remediation (N.J.A.C. 7:26E).

All of the remedial alternatives would meet the NJDEP soil cleanup standard for unrestricted use
for TCE of 7 mg/kg. In addition, the active remedial alternatives are expected to achieve an
Impact-to-Groundwater remediation goal of 1 mg/kg, which EPA has developed for TCE at
similar sites using NJDEP's Impact to Groundwater Soil Screening guidance. While not an
ARAR, this guidance is "To-Be-Considered" criteria.

RCRA land-disposal requirements would govern the disposition of excavated material
designated for off-site disposal.

No other major ARARs considerations affect remedial decision-making. All the Alternatives
would be completed in compliance with chemical-, action- and location-specific ARARs.

Primary Balancing Criteria - The next five criteria, criteria 3 through 7, are known as "primary
balancing criteria " These criteria are factors with which tradeoffs between response measures
are assessed so that the best option will be chosen, given site-specific data and conditions

3.      Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence
A similar degree of long-term effectiveness and permanence refers to expected residual risk and
the ability of a remedy to maintain reliable protection of human health and the environment over
time, once clean-up levels have been met This criterion includes the consideration of residual
risk that will remain on-site following remediation and the adequacy and reliability of controls

All of the remedial alternatives are capable of removing, reducing, and/or mitigating the Site
contaminants. Alternatives 2 (Full Area Excavation with Off-Site Disposal) and 9 (Full Area Ln-



                                               21


                                                                                        R2-0004211

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Situ Thermal Treatment) are considered to be the most effective over the long term because the
technologies are more suitable for addressing contamination situated in the tight geological
conditions present at the Site.

The tight geologic formation, which has limited the effectiveness of the current remedy to extract
contaminantsfromthe subsurface, is expected to cause problems for some of the in-situ
treatment technologies (Alternatives 3/4 and 5/6) during injection of reagents and chemicals to
the contamination zones. Alternative 7/8 (Residual Source Area In-Situ Chemical Treatment via
Soil Mixing and plume area Enhanced Bioremediation) is more effective and reliable because
high contaminant concentrations in the residual source area would be effectively reached and
degraded by chemical reduction or chemical oxidation using soil mixing. Also, the enhanced
bioremediation technology introduces chemical amendments into the areas to be treated that stay
active for several months, and this extended contact time may overcome the low permeability of
the soil formation; thus it may be more effective at addressing low concentrations in the plume
area.

Alternative 5/6 (Residual Source Area Excavation with Off-Site Disposal and Plume Area In-
Situ Chemical Treatment) is deemed to be the next most effective and permanent alternative over
the long term. Soil excavation would effectively remove contaminants in the residual source
area. However, in-situ chemical treatments tend to involve quick-acting chemicals (relative to
the slower degradation processes involved in enhanced bioremedation), that do not stay active in
the ground for more than a few days Small portions of the relatively low contaminant
concentrations in the plume area may be untreated due to the tight formation that prevents quick
contact with the treatment agents. Multiple treatments may be required to effectively treat these
areas. Alternative 3/4 calls for the same in-situ chemical treatment, but throughout the whole
treatment zone. It is expected, along with Alternative 1 (Continuation of the Existing C&T
System) to have the most difficulty with effectiveness over the long term, due to untreated
residues not reached by the remedial action and the difficulty of treating DNAPLs.

Alternative 1 (Continuation of the Existing C&T System) would be the least effective over the
long term. Results from samples collected from monitoring wells and soil sampling locations
indicate that the groundwater extraction system has not effectively extracted contaminant from
the aquifer or reducing groundwater contamination.

4      Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume of contaminants through Treatment
Reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment refers to the anticipated
performance of the treatment technologies that may be included as part of a remedy

Alternatives 3/4, 5/6,7/8, and 9 satisfy CERCLA's preference for remedies that use treatment to
reduce the contaminant mass.



                                               22


                                                                                       R2-0004212

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 1 (Continuation of the Existing C&T System) has not demonstrated a capacity to
reduce the toxicity, mobility or volume of the residual source areas within tight soil matrix at the
Site.

Alternative 2 (Full Area Excavation with Off-Site Disposal) removes the residual source and
contaminated material from the Site, and while some of the excavated material may require
treatment before it can be land-disposed, it does not satisfy EPA's preference for remedies that
use treatment as a principal element.

5.     Short-term Effectiveness
Short-term effectiveness addresses the period of time needed to implement the remedy and any
adverse impacts that may be posed to workers, the community and the environment during
construction and operation of the remedy until cleanup levels are achieved

All of the proposed remedial alternatives except for Alternative 1 (Continuation of the Existing
C&T System) are expected to reduce TCE contamination and achieve the RAOs vrithin
approximately five years, which is considered a relatively short duration. Alternative 2 will
reduce TCE contamination in the shortest time, with the most certainty. Alternatives 3/4 and 9
are expected to reduce TCE contamination in a short amount of time (between one and two
years). However, there is higher uncertainty that these technologies will be effective in this
aquifer. Alternative 5/6 is expected to reduce contamination within three years. Alternative 7/8
is expected to reduce TCE contamination in about five years.

None of the remedial technologies pose insurmountable short-term risks. All the alternatives
pose short-term health risks to workers that need to handle hazardous substances and work at a
large-scale construction project, and these risks will need to be properly managed through
worker health and safety programs. These programs are standard practice at all Superfund sites,
as are health and safety measures to assure that no exposures to nearby properties occur during
remedial actions.

Soil excavation in Alternatives 2, and 5/ 6 would also create the most additional truck traffic, a
disruption for the nearby community. All the alternatives (with the exception of Alternative 1)
will increase truck traffic, but Alternative 2 would generate more than twice the number of trucks
on the road to the next nearest Alternative (Alternative 5/6, which also calls for extensive
excavation and off-site disposal). EPA would need to work with the community to mitigate the
traffic impacts as much as possible.

Although unlikely, Alternative 9 (Thermal Treatment) could potentially cause uncontrolled
migration of contaminants vaporized by the thermal heating and not captured by the vapor



                                                 23


                                                                                           R2-0004213

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

extraction/recovery system. The installation and operations of the electrical system involved
with the Thermal Treatment may also present significant physical hazards and would also require
specific safety precautions and training.

Remedial technologies in Alternatives 3/4, 5/6 and 7/8 pose some minor short-term health risks
to workers during the injection activities. Alternative 1 (Continuation of the Existing C&T
System) poses the least short-term health risks to workers.

6.     Implementability
Implementability addresses the technical and administrative feasibility of a remedy from design
through construction and operation Factors such as availability ofservices and materials,
administrative feasibility, and coordination with other governmental entities are also considered

The materials, system components, skills and labors are readily available for all of the
technologies and remedial alternatives proposed. Therefore, all alternatives are considered
implementable. Alternative 9 (Full Area In-Situ Thermal Treatment) may be more difficult to
implement due to the considerable system installation, startup and operations, including drilling,
wells installation, and mechanical, electrical, and vapor extraction and treatment systems.

Alternative 2 (Full Area Excavation with Off-Site Disposal) would require a considerable
amount of planning, heavy equipment, structural support (through steel sheet piles, etc.), staging
areas, and overall coordination of the excavation activities to depths of 20 feet bgs, with 30 feet
bgs in some limited areas. However, these deeper excavations require no specialized equipment
and are typical in standard construction practice. Alternatives involving Enhanced
Bioremediation, ISCR or ISCO (3/4, 5/6, and 7/8) would require a considerable number of
injection locations, but all the injection points are on the property, and relatively shallow, so not
difficult to implement. These in-situ response actions are also constrained by the ability to
effectively deliver the treatment reagents to the subsurface soil and in addressing DNAPLs. For
Alternative 7/8, which requires soil mixing, ISCO is considered more implementable than ISCR,
as the exposure of ZVI to air during the mixing process would reduce its effectiveness.

7.    Cost
Includes estimated capital and operation and maintenance costs, and net present-worth values.

Alternative 1 - Continuation of the Existing C&T System, has a comparable Total Present Worth
to the highest cost Alternative 2 - Full Area Excavation with Off-Site Disposal ($10,000,000 to
$13,600,000). Alternative 5/6 ($6,371,000-$6,383,000) - Residual Source Area Excavation with
Off-Site Disposal and Plume Area In-Situ Chemical Treatment, has the next highest Total
Present Worth, because it also relies on excavation and off-site disposal for part of the action.
Alternative 3/4 ($2,800,000-$3,600,000) Alternative 7/8 ($4,600,000-$5,100,000) and



                                                24



                                                                                           R2-0004214

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 9 ($6,400,000) rely primarily on in-situ treatment methods, with commensurate
lower cost estimates.

Modifying Criteria - The final two evaluation criteria, criteria 8 and 9, are called "modifying
criteria" because new information or comments from the state or the community on the
Proposed Plan may modify the preferred response measure or cause another response measure
to be considered

8.      State Acceptance
Indicates whether based on its review of the RI/FS reports and the Proposed Plan, the state
supports, opposes, and/or has identified any reservations with the selected response measure

The State of New Jersey concurs with EPA's Selected Remedy.

9.     Community Acceptance
Summarizes the public's general response to the response measures described in the Proposed
Plan and the RI/FS reports This assessment includes determining which of the response
measures the community supports, opposes, and/or has reservations about.

EPA solicited input from the community on the remedial alternatives proposed for the Site. The
community was generally supportive of EPA's Proposed Plan for the ROD Amendment.
Appendix III, The Responsiveness Summary, addresses the comments received at the public
meeting and written comments received during the public comment period.

PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE

Principal threat wastes are those source materials considered to be highly toxic or highly mobile
that generally cannot be reliably contained, or could present a significant risk to human health or
the environment should exposure occur. The DNAPL source material constitutes a principal
threat waste at the Site.

SELECTED REMEDY
Based upon consideration of the results of the recent PDI investigations at the Site, the
requirements of CERCLA, the detailed analysis of the remedial alternatives and public
comments, EPA has determined that Alternative 2 - Full Area Excavation with Off-Site Disposal
complemented with in-situ treatment is the appropriate remedy for addressing the contaminated
soil and groundwater at the Site. As explained below, EPA is incorporating as part of the
selected remedy the option to implement an in-situ technology on a portion of the Site.
Excavation will be the primary remedial action; however, in-situ treatment will be used to
complement excavation where appropriate (to be determined during the remedial design).


                                                 25


                                                                                           R2-0004215

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

This remedy best satisfies the requirements of CERCLA Section 121 and the NCP's nine
evaluation criteria for remedial alternatives, 40 CFR §300.430 (e) (9). This remedy includes the
following components:
   •   Excavation and off-site disposal of TCE contamination m the residual source area, and
       contaminated soil in the plume area;
   •   Implementation of in-situ treatment, where appropriate, to complement excavation;
   •   Continued operation of the existing C&T system for a period of time (estimated to be one
       year) to evaluate the effectiveness of continued operation of the system to reduce residual
       groundwater contamination;
   •   Monitoring of groundwater; and
   •   Continuation of institutional controls to prevent exposure to contaminated groundwater
       until remediation goals are achieved.
Within these designated areas the soil remediation goal for TCE will be 1 mg/kg, which is
expected to achieve the 1 ug/L remediation goal in groundwater.

The effectiveness of the remedy will be assessed by periodic groundwater sampling and analysis
Quarterly sampling is proposed initially; however, the monitoring frequency will be modified
based upon the data obtained during thefirstyear after completion of the remedial action. EPA
may change to annual groundwater monitoring for the next nine years to monitor the remedial
performance, if supported by data. The actual period of operation of the C&T system and
groundwater monitoring schedule will be determined by EPA after completion of the remedial
action and will be based on achieving the performance standards set during design.

Institutional controls, including a CEA, will also be implemented to prevent exposure to
contaminated groundwater until the cleanup standards have been achieved for all COCs.

This remedy is estimated to take less than 10 years to achieve the cleanup standards. Therefore,
as per EPA policy,five-yearreviews will be performed until remedial goals are achieved.

The remedy was selected over other remedies because it is expected to achieve substantial and
long-termriskreduction through treatment in the most efficient and timely manner.

Consistent with EPA Region 2's Clean and Green policy, EPA will evaluate the use of
sustainable technologies and practices with respect to implementation of the selected remedy.

Use of In-Situ Treatment
After hearing from the community and other interested stakeholders, EPA reconsidered the
approach of relying on a single technology that is the most costly and results in the most truck
traffic on local roads. The cost drivers for Alternative 2 are the expense of off-site transportation


                                               26


                                                                                        R2-0004216

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

and disposal and the need to dewater, and keep dry, the deep excavation areas prior to
commencing work. Using an in-situ technology for even a small portion of the contaminated soil
would reduce soil volumes for off-site transportation and disposal and decrease the volume of
groundwater that needs to be extracted and treated.

EPA has included the option of combining of in-situ treatment with the selected Alternative 2,
(excavation and off-site disposal) if, during the remedial design, it can be determined that in-situ
treatment can be demonstrated to be equally effective for limited areas of the Site, while
providing cost savings and lessening truck traffic on local roads. In-situ chemical oxidation
(ISCO) appears to be the best fit for this application, though this preference does not exclude the
consideration of other technologies. The Agency considers components of Alternative 7/8,
which uses in-situ chemical treatment with mixing, to have the highest potential to complement
Alternative 2. For example, a combined approach could excavate the majority of the wastes, but
then mix in treatment chemicals to address TCE at the extremities of the excavation. This may
achieve a cost savings and reduced truck traffic while achieving the same outcome. In-situ
chemical treatment is expected to be less effective in treating clay lenses, and more effective for
sandy zones of the subsurface; thus for this combined approach to be effective, EPA expects that
clay lenses, which have been the primary impediment to the effective implementation of the
original C&T remedy, to be excavated, but that more permeable sectors of the aquifer may be
effectively treated with in-situ treatment via mixing.

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

As previously noted, CERCLA Section 121(b)(1) mandates that a remedial action must be
protective of human health and the environment, cost-effective, and utilize permanent solutions
and alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery technologies to the maximum extent
practicable. CERCLA Section 121(b)(1) also establishes a preference for remedial actions that
employ treatment to permanently and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity, or mobility of the
hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants at a site. CERCLA Section 121(d) further
specifies that a remedial action must attain a degree of cleanup that satisfies ARARs under
federal and state laws, unless a waiver can be justified pursuant to CERCLA Section 121(d)(4).
For the reasons discussed below, EPA has determined that the Selected Remedy meets the
requirements of CERCLA Section 121.

Protection of Human Health and the Environment

The Selected Remedy will adequately protect human health and the environment through
excavation or in-situ treatment of the residual source area and the plume area, and continued
operation of the C&T system. This process will reduce TCE concentrations in groundwater to
levels that meet the NJGWQS. Institutional controls that have been implemented will continue



                                                27


                                                                                         R2-0004217

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

to prevent exposure to contaminated groundwater by restricting its use until the cleanup goals are
achieved for all COCs. Implementation of the Selected Remedy will not pose unacceptable
short-term risks or adverse cross-media impacts.

Compliance with ARARs

The Selected Remedy is compliant with all ARARs. With respect to the primary contarninant of
concern, TCE, the New Jersey drinking water and groundwater quality standard of 1 ug/L has
not changed since the 1992 ROD.

The National Historic Preservation Act requires federal agencies to examine the potential
impacts of their actions to these places. As part of the RI/FS activities, a Stage LA Cultural
Resources Survey was conducted, focusing on a three acre portion of the Site that would be
disturbed by the implementation of a planned remedial action, to identify whether any cultural
resources on, or eligible for inclusion on, the National Register of Historic Places. The survey
concluded that relatively undisturbed areas within 300 feet of the wetlands have a high potential
for the presence of prehistoric archaeological resources; areas between 300 and 1,000 feet from
the wetlands have a moderate potential for prehistoric archaeological resources, and
recommended that a Stage IB survey be conducted, consisting of test pits and shovel tests, for
any such area that could be impacted by implementation of the remedy.

In 1996, a Stage IB Cultural Resources Survey was completed for the three-acre project impact
area, consisting of four one square meter test unit, and six shovel test pits. All tests came up
negative for prehistoric artifacts, and no archeological sites were discovered. The Stage IB
survey concluded that the proposed remedy would have no effect on potentially significant
archeological resources; therefore, no additional cultural resource investigations were
recommended.

EPA has reviewed the potential impact area of remedial action against the areas that were
surveyed in the 1996 Stage IB Cultural Resources Survey. The review indicates that the project
impact area of the planned remedial activities is substantially the same as for the previous
remedial activities. Accordingly, EPA concluded that the determination noted m the 1996 Stage
IB remains valid, and no additional archeological investigations will be needed for the project
impact area as currently proposed and delmeated. Should project plans change, and the project
impact area expand or encompass areas beyond what is currently delineated, a revised
determination would be necessary.

The ARARs for the Selected Remedy are summarized in Table 3.




                                               28


                                                                                        R2-0004218

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Cost-Effectiveness

In EPA's judgment, the Selected Remedy is cost-effective and represents reasonable value for
the money to be spent. Overall effectiveness was evaluated by assessing three of the five
balancing criteria in combination (long-term effectiveness and permanence; reduction in toxicity,
mobility and volume through treatment; and short-term effectiveness). Overall effectiveness was
then compared to costs to determine cost-effectiveness. The overall effectiveness of the Selected
Remedy has been determined to be proportional to the costs, and the Selected Remedy, therefore,
represents reasonable value for the money to be spent. The estimated present net worth cost of
the Selected Remedy is expected to be $13,600,000. Cost savings is expected to be achieved
through the use of in-situ treatment, which is cheaper to implement than excavation.

Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment Technologies to the
Maximum Extent Practicable

EPA has determined that the Selected Remedy represents the maximum extent to which
permanent solutions and treatment technologies can be utilized in a practicable manner at the
Site. EPA has determined that the Selected Remedy provides the better balance of trade-offs
with respect to the five balancing criteria. The Selected Remedy satisfies the criteria for long-
term effectiveness and permanence by removing the primary COCs, TCE, by excavation or in-
situ treatment. The Selected Remedy, coupled with ongoing natural attenuation processes, is
expected to meet cleanup standards for all COCs in the contaminated shallow aquifer.

There are no significant short-term risks associated with the implementation of the remedy.
However, with respect to exposure to contaminated groundwater, institutional controls will
assure short-term protectiveness by preventing or minimizing potential current and future human
exposures to the contaminated groundwater until the groundwater cleanup standards are
achieved.

The Selected Remedy is implementable since it employs standard technologies that are readily
available.

Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element

By a combination of excavation and in-situ treatment, the Selected Remedy meets, to the extent
practicable, the statutory preference for the use of remedies that employ treatment that reduces
toxicity, mobility or volume as a principal element to address the principal threats at the Site.




                                                29

                                                                                        R2-0004219

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Five-Year Review Requirements

Because the remedy will not result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants
remaining above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure in groundwater,
EPA anticipates that a five-year review will not be required for the soil and groundwater remedy
However, because it may take more than five years to attain remedial action objectives and
cleanup levels for the groundwater at the Site, policy reviews will be conducted until the
remediation goals are achieved to ensure that the groundwater remedy is, or will be, protective of
human health and the environment.

DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES

The Proposed Plan for this ROD Amendment for the Site was released for public comment on
July 11,2013. The comment period closed on August 12,2013. All verbal and written
comments submitted during the public comment period were reviewed by EPA. Upon review of
the comments, EPA concluded that selecting a combined remedy of excavation and off-site
disposal (as the primary remedial approach) with an in-situ treatment technology (as a secondary,
polishing step for limited areas of the Site) provided an opportunity to be responsive to these
comments. No other significant changes to the remedy, as was originally identified in the
Proposed Plan, were necessary.




                                               30


                                                                                         R2-0004220

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX I - FIGURES




                       R2-0004221

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

FIGURE 1




           R2-0004222

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                           T

                                                                                                                            LEGEWDl

                                                                                                                   • • • " ^               ramruc
                                                                                                                    |        |         ammo
                                                                                          TOWNSHP OF MEDFORD




                                                                                                                        •»~-"<w-» 1SSE UKE




                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                               •        V        r    UKOERDROIM) WTO! U!C
                                                                                                                                 r    UNDEROROUM) UECTHC UIC
                                                                                                                            -co       IMOBROIMD CONTROL CMLE




                                                                                                                                     SOLE IN FEET
                                                                                                                                       1 " - 120"

                                ELUS PROPERTY SUPERFUND SHE. EVE5HMI TOWNSHIP. BURLMQTON COUNTY. NEW JERSEY        H M Loud 9mgtr Group, tno.
        HJ Ofipoitnwflt


    0                                                   GENERAL SITE PLAN                                           | M 411 Mount Karnbta An FIGURE 2
        of Emrfronnwrtol                                                                                                          HJ
                                                       NJDEP CONTRACT No. A-04fl78




FIGURE 2 - Monitoring Well Locations



                                                                                                                                               R2-0004223

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                               —i —. A — .   V
                                                                                                                                             L o c ID                POO
                                                                                                                                            Fvttbgs       10-12 1 10-20 I              20-27
                                                                                                                                            T«rjrpb)      * 1 0 D 1 7100 D |            NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LEGEM Pi
                                                                                                                                              L o c ID                 P12
              Leo. ID                      PQ3                                                                                               F.Mba*       12 14     | 10-20 | 24-20
             FMtbg*     19-10 |           204?      |   2«9                                                                                 TCC[ppb)      MOD       IMOOOD 1   NC                                       >.^— meant LOOT.
             TCBCPPSI I M H O I            NC 1 HC                                                                                                                                                              |         |         BUUWS

                                                                                                                                            F—Ibpi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ..,   W O

    L a c ID                  P04                                                                                                             LocID        PU                                               "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                —   «°        ^     TOPO LP.91
   Feet b a t t M l 1 i s M 1 4a4d I                    iKt                                                                                  FfMtbgs       10-10
   TCFJ(ppbl S O W D I I U O D 1 M O M D 1               NC                                                                                 TCfiJppo]       NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                            v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                — * -          J    TREE LVE

             L O B . 10                   P03                                                                                                                                                                       ^ W - 2         UC9IT0EH O     MIL
                                                                                                                                              L o c ID
             FMIbn          i i i 4 I !«-(* I ta-ls             '                                                                            Fo*lbgs       10-10    |    2LV22
                           S509D I T D D            |    NC                                                                                                                                                         •               K r o B MM I E o n i .
                                                                                                                                            leatppoj        NC      |     NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               J

                                     i.'r'ji;jWf-3EM                                                                                         Lee. ID                      P17                                       •°»-            DEEP«IILL
                                                                                                                                             FMbOl         12 14         10-16     1   22-24
                                                                                                                                            tce(ppb>      4*66            NC
                                                                                                                                                                                   1 Md                             O               MMMDU
    Leclo                        Pl»
   FMIBQS       14-IS I t s - t b I 1 9 - i o       |   20J2                                                                                 L o c 10      P54
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ©               PUHP   Vli.
  »CB|pp.|     1N0D | < W O 1 4980                  |   420D                                                                                F«Hbg»    14-10 1 W-10
                                                                                                                                            TCCCPPM 10000 D |  NC                                                    O               GHmjK   g LooaaM
                                     ).'!ill'1BtaM                                                                                                                                                                  •                S W I M I M O V N MTLVTED
                                                                                                                                             L o t . 10                   024                                                       BUT NO B9MPLC RETREWTJ
                                                                                                                                            FMtbflO        14 1«         .440      |   20-32
                           LocID                P14                                                                                         Tceippb)      900 D           NC       |    NC                          »         »     UMXKO)   BUND anra u c
                                          10-12     14-10
                          TCCtepb]       STOOD     1400 D                                                                                    LocID         P2S                                              —<-               1      u M x mnan      ELECTRC L K
                                                                                                                                            FMtbg*         10-18
                                                                                                                                            TCE(pi*l        NC                                                      06        OE     I H E H ID U W CONTROL   O H I
                                     F—t bg»

             LocID


            ICBIOBM
                               A          p »
                            l i o o 1 U K 1 19-io
                             NC      I I 7 M 6 |         NC
                                                                                                                                             LocID
                                                                                                                                            Foot bos          14-18
                                                                                                                                            T C E u t p b ) 11000 D

                                                                                                                                             LocID
                                                                                                                                                                    P33




                                                                                                                                                                   P57
                                                                                                                                                                        18-20
                                                                                                                                                                         NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1       tOLDED VALUE MNCWO 1HO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0()WFL)4Tr*AKM EXCEEDS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                UETHCO DETECTDN LMT

                          L e e ID                 P21                                                                                      Fcetbas        16-10         20-22                          2. BWDED UHUE DODOES THAT
                          Fe*tbn          (2 14     | 19-19                                                                                 TC6(ppb)|       NC            NC                                    coNcormuiuN MEETS OR
                                      »l»O0 6 1         tto                                                                                                                                                 EXCEEDS OWOS. 9MCH S 1
                                                                                                                                             LocID                 PU                                       PPB FDR TCE.
                                                                                                                                            F—lbfl»        10-20         20-22
                                                                                                                                                                                                        J . NO    _ ^
    leclo                                                                                                                                   TCI.ppb,        NO            NC                                VMS AIILWILV. BUT NO
  F w f bat   10-12 1 14-19 | 1B-18                 |   20-22                                                                                                                                               SAMPLE WAS RFTRBCD.
  TCBfepb) l u o o o a d 3200O | M O D              |    ISO                                                                                 LocID                 M                           j m m,           RESOUAL SOURCE MSA -
                                                                                                                                            F*Mbe*         12-14         1040          20J2
                                                                                                                                            Tcetppb)      aooo            NC            79                      MVfBAQMTE EXTENT OF AREA
             LAC ID                     POO                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                aim TCE • is soujEajrr OR
             Fmtboi         12*14    1 19-20        I   20-22                                                                                Loc ib        W.                                                   11400 PPB (•24*000 FT*)
            T c e            IS)     I  NC          |    NC                                                                                 FMIbg*         10-20
                     m


                                                                                                                                            Tce(ppb)        110
                                                                                                                                                                                               (        i       FULL MBA - M'TTOIIMATE
                                                                                                                                                                                               **   *           EXTENT OF MSA WITH TCE >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                100 PPS (aCAOOO FT")
                                                                                                                                             LocID                        psa
                         7wi                                                                                                                FMIDV*         10-12         14-10         It-it
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PLUUE AREA - MSA LOCATED
                                                                                                                                            TCBtppb)      UOOD          H I 09 D        Mi                      WTMN THE FULL AREA BUT
             Loo. ID                       t i i                                                                                              L o c lO             P*0             J                            uursne or THE RESBUAL
             FMtbfit        12-14    |    19-20     |   20-22                                                                                Fr»*ibas      10-18         20-22                                  SOURCE MSA ( » S I « » FT*)
                             44      1      NC      |    NC                                                                                 i c e (ppb)     NC




                                                                                                                                                 -ft
                                                                                                                                            Fe«1bg>
                                                                                                                                                 no
                                                                                                                                            TCE (ppb)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SCALE IN FEET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      r - SO*
                                                                               ELUS PROPERTY SUPERFUND SITE, EVESHAM TOWNSHB*. BUTUMTTON COUNTY. NEW JERSEY
         NJ.    .
         of El^rannMntfll                                           HYDROPUNCH GROUNDWATER ANALYTICAL TCE RESULTS AND TARGET TREATMENT AREA                                                                                                           n a u u is
                                                                                                       HJOEP CONTRACT No. A-M6TO



FIGURE 3 - Residual Source Area and Plume Area




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      R2-0004224

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX II - TABLES




                       R2-0004225

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 Table 1 - Groundwater Monitoring Well Data (Results in ug/L)
                                 Samples Taken 4/24/2013


                         GWQS      MW-2        MW-       MW-5R      MW-6R     MW-7     MW-8      MW-9

1,1-Dichloroethene         20        ND         ND         ND         06       ND       ND         ND
C-1,2-Dichloroethene      70 0       ND         ND         04         53      323 8     ND         ND
Tnchloroethene             10      3,307 0      ND         104       517 2     32       02         ND
Tetrachloroethene          10        ND         ND         ND         03       44       ND         ND
T-1,2-Dichloroethene      100 0      ND         ND         ND         ND       30       ND         ND
Vinyl chloride             10        ND         ND         ND         ND       63       ND         ND




                        GWQS      MW-18      MW-19      MW-20      MW-23     MW-24    MW-25    MW-26

1,1-Dichloroethene       20        ND          ND         ND        ND        ND       ND        ND
C-1,2-Dichloroethene     70 0     74 6         06         ND        ND        02       31        35 9
Tnchloroethene            10      197          08         ND       1,351 7    58      250 8    21,246 9
Tetrachloroethene         10       ND          ND         ND         ND       ND       ND         ND
T-1,2-Dichloroethene     100 0     ND          ND         ND         ND       ND       ND         ND
Vinyl chlonde             10       07          ND         ND         ND       ND       ND        ND




                        GWQS      MW-27       PW-1       PW-2       DW-2      DW-6     MH-2     MH-1R


1,1-Dichloroethene       20        ND          ND         ND         ND        ND       06        15
C-1,2-Dichloroethene     70 0      ND         256 4       ND         ND        ND      169 6     379 8
Tnchloroethene            10       11        31,286 3   47,195 5     ND        ND      690 2    1,916 5
Tetrachloroethene         10       ND           ND         ND        ND        ND      51 7       06
T-1,2-Dichloroethene     100 0     ND          ND         ND         ND        ND       05        09
Vinyl chlonde             10       ND          ND         ND         ND        ND       08        70




                                                                                               R2-0004226

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     Table 1 - Groundwater Monitoring Well Data (Results in ug/L)
                                     Samples Taken 11/4/2011

                            GWQS      MW-2     MW-3       MW-5R    MW-6R    MW-7      MW-8     MW-!

1,1-Dichloroethene            20       ND       ND    -     ND      ND       0 49      ND       ND
C-1,2-Dichloroethene          70 0      ND      ND         0 57     62       490       ND       ND
Tnchloroethene                10       6200     ND          23      780      72       0 39      ND
Tetrachloroethene             10        ND      ND          ND      ND        12       ND       ND
T-1,2-Dichloroethene         100 0      ND      ND          ND      ND       27        ND       ND
Vinyl chlonde                  10      ND       ND          ND       ND      ND        ND       ND



                            GWQS      MW-18   MW-1        MW-20    MW-23    MW-24    MW-25    MW-26

1,1-Dichloroethene            20       0 66     ND          ND       ND      ND       064      ND
C-1,2-Dichloroethene         70 0      240      16          ND       ND      ND        19       31
Tnchloroethene   v
                              10        31      11          ND      5400     52       180     14,000
Tetrachloroethene             10        ND      ND          ND       ND      ND       ND        ND
T-1,2-Dichloroethene         100 0      ND      ND          ND       ND      ND       ND        ND
Vinyl chloride                10        3       ND          ND      ND       ND       ND        ND




                           GWQS      MW-27    ET-2        ET-6    ET-10    ET-11    PW-1     PW-2      DW-;

 1,1-Dichloroethene          20       ND      0 28        0 98     ND       ND       ND       ND        ND
C-1,2-Dichloroethene        70 0      ND        3         310     0 48      ND        63       30       ND
Tnchloroethene               10       22        7         46       05       05      18,000   46,000     ND
Tetrachloroethene            10       ND      43          ND       ND       12       ND       ND        ND
T-1,2-Dichloroethene        100 0     ND      ND          44       ND       ND       ND       ND        ND
Vinyl chlonde                10       ND      ND          38       ND       ND       ND       ND        ND




                           GWQS      DW-6     MH-1    MH-2


C-1,2-Dichloroethene         20       ND      ND          ND
                            70 0      ND       21         500
Tnchloroethene
                             10       ND      85          1200
Tetrachloroethene                             ND           20
                             10       ND
T-1,2-Dichloroethene        100 0     ND      ND          ND
Vinyl chlonde                10       ND      03          ND




                                                                                             R2-0004227

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

          Table 2-Comparison of Groundwater Standards at Time of 1992 ROD
                                vs. Current Standards


       Contaminant of Concern            Groundwater
                                                            Current New Jersey
             (in ug/L)                  Cleanup Goal at
                                                           Groundwater Standard
                                       Time of 1992 ROD

Antimony                                       20                     6
Arsenic                      1
                                                8                      3
Beryllium                                      20                      1
Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate                     30                      3
1,2-dichloroethylene                            2                      1
Methylene chloride                                                     3
Nickel                                                               100
Tetrachloroethylene (PCE)                      1                     0.4
Trichloroethylene (TCE)                        1                       1
1,1,2-trichloroethane                          5                       3
Vinyl chloride                                                       0 08
Total chromium                                 100                    70
Lead (total)                                   100                     5
Zinc                                          5,000                 2,000




                                          3


                                                                            R2-0004228

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       Table 3 - List of Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements (ARARs)

Chemical Specific ARARs

Federal
   •      Clean Water Act. Water Quality Criteria
   •      RCRA Ground Water Protection Standards (40 CFR Part 264.94)
   •      Federal Water Quality Criteria (51 Federal Register 436665)
   •      Federal MCLs

State
    • New Jersey Ground Water Quality Standards (NJGWQS) (NJAC7:9-6)

   •      New Jersey MCLs

Action Specific ARARs

Federal
   • RCRA Groundwater Monitoring and Protection Standards (40 CFR 264, Subpart F)
   • EPA Action Level for Lead in DrniJdng Water
State
    • New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Regulations (NJPDES) and Effluent Limitations
      (NJAC7:14Aetseq.)

   •      New Jersey Well Construction and Maintenance; Sealing of Abandon Wells N.J.A.C. 7:9D

Location Specific ARARs

Federal
    •     Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act (16 USC 661 et seq.)
    •     National Environmental Policy Act (42 USC 4341 et seq.)
    •     Endangered Species Act
    •     Coastal Zone Management Act
    •     Farmland Protection Policy Act
State
    •     New Jersey Rules on Coastal Resources and Development (7:7E-1.1 et seq.)
    •     New Jersey Freshwater Wetlands Regulation




                                                                                           R2-0004229

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX IH - RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY




                                   R2-0004230

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                     APPENDIX III

                           RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

                              Ellis Property Superfund Site

INTRODUCTION

This Responsiveness Summary provides a summary of the public's comments and concerns
regarding the Proposed Plan for the Ellis Property Superfund Site, and EPA's responses to
those comments. All comments summarized in this document have been considered in
EPA's final decision for the selection of the remedy for the Site.

This Responsiveness Summary is divided into the following sections:

   I.       BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS -
            This section provides the history of community involvement and concerns
            regarding the Site.

   II.      COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY OF MAJOR QUESTIONS, COMMENTS,
            CONCERNS AND RESPONSES - This section includes summaries of oral
            comments received by EPA at the July 24,2013 public meeting, EPA's
            responses to these comments, as well as responses to written comments
            received during the public comment period.

The Responsiveness Summary includes attachments which document public participation
in the remedy selection process for the Site. The attachments are as follows:

   •     Attachment A - July 2013 Proposed Plan for the Site;

    •    Attachment B - Public Notice published in the Central Record;

    •    Attachment C - July 24,2013 Public Meeting Attendance Sheet; and

    •    Attachment D - Transcript of the July 24,2013 Public Meeting.

BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS

Prior to the selection of the original Site remedy in 1992 through the implementation of
the remedy, community interest in the Site was high. A local environmental group, the

                                            1



                                                                                     R2-0004231

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Ellis Site Task Force, met regularly with NJDEP and EPA about the Site. After the
remedy implementation was complete, NJDEP, the lead agency for the OU1 remedy, has
had few inquiries from the community

EPA's Proposed Plan for the OU1 groundwater remedial action was released to the
public on July 11,2013. A copy of the Proposed Plan, Focused Feasibility Study for
Groundwater Remediation (FFS) and other documents that comprise the administrative
record file were made available to the public in the information repository located at the
Evesham Library as well as the EPA Region 2 Record Center. A public notice was
published in the Central Record, a Burlington County newspaper, on July 11,2013,
advising the public of the availability of the Proposed Plan. This notice also announced
the opening of a 30-day public comment period, from July 11 to August 12,2013, and
invited the interested parties to attend an upcoming public meeting. This public meeting,
during which EPA presented the preferred alternative for the OU1 groundwater remedy,
answered questions regarding the Site, and accepted oral comments regarding the
Proposed Plan, was held on July 24,2013, at the Evesham Township Municipal
Courtroom located at 984 Tuckerton Road, Marlton, New Jersey.

I.     COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY OF MAJOR QUESTIONS, COMMENTS,
       CONCERNS AND RESPONSES

Part 1 - Oral Comments. The following is a summary of comments received during the
July 11,2013 public meeting.

1.1: A commenter asked what is the time line from the beginning of this project until the
completion for the removal of the contaminated soils?

       EPA Response: After the remedy is selected, EPA expects to hire an
       environmental consultant to prepare the remedial design, in addition to other plans
       associated with the cleanup. The design phase typically takes 12 to 18 months,
       pendmg the availability of funding. Because there are no potentially responsible
       parties at this Site that can fund the cleanup, EPA will seek funding through its
       regular budgeting process, which is subject to Congressional approval. The
       remedial action will require a separate funding approval process. Once funded,
       EPA estimates that the active cleanup would take approximately 12 months to
       complete

1.2: A commenter asked if EPA had looked at the Sharp Road access for equipment.
There is concern for the safety and the integrity of Sharp Road, as to whether it can meet



                                            2




                                                                                     R2-0004232

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

the demands of an increase in traffic carrying heavy loads due to implementation of the
proposed remedy.

       EPA Response: As a small change from the Proposed Plan, EPA has selected
       excavation and off-site disposal as the primary action for the Site, but includes in-
       situ treatment for some component of the contaminated soil. This offers the
       potential to reduce the amount of soil to be trucked off Site for disposal. As part
       of the remedial design, a transportation plan will be prepared that will evaluate the
       current infrastructure to ensure that it can support remedial activities. During the
       remedial design, EPA will evaluate using smaller trucks to reduce the load on
       Sharp Road, and how that would increase the number of trucks, the cost and time
       to implement the remedy.

1.3: A community member noted that there are not any extraction wells on the west side
of Sharp Road, and asked if the contamination plume extended that far.

       EPA Response: There are no monitoring wells on the west side of Sharp Road
       because the contamination does not extend beyond Sharp Road. The direction of
       groundwater flow is to the east, away from Sharp Road.

1.4: A community member asked how many trucks would be required to transport
67,500 cubic yards of contaminated soil.

       EPA Response: Dump trucks come in a variety of hauling capacities. Atypical
       dump truck has a 10 cubic yard capacity (about 15 tons), and a large haul truck,
       typically usedforthis type of project, can carry as much as 20 tons. At the public
       meeting, EPA approximated 5,000 truck loads would be required to remove the
       contaminated soil to implement the Preferred Alternative (Alternative 2, Full Area
       Excavation with Off-site Disposal). Because EPA's selected remedy will include
       in-situ treatment as a complement to excavation, fewer truck loads of soil will be
       required for disposal. The number of truck loads of soil will be estimated during
       design, when the soil volume to be excavated is refined.

1.5: A commenter representing a treatment technology vendor indicated that Alternative
9 (Full Area In-Situ Thermal Treatment) in the Proposed Plan has some significant
advantages-primarily in reduced truck loads and reduced expense, and argued that this
technology has been used extensively in New Jersey.

        EPA Response: After reviewing comments on the Proposed Plan, EPA remains
        unconvinced that thermal treatment alone is likely to be a successful treatment

                                             3



                                                                                      R2-0004233

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       technology for this Site. EPA has selected a remedy that relies primarily on
       excavation, but allows for the option of in-situ treatment that may reduce the cost
       and truck congestion in the community. During the remedial design, several in-
      • situ treatment technologies, including thermal treatment and chemical oxidation
       will be evaluated further.

1.6: The same commenter stated that the Proposed Plan was incorrect in stating that in-
situ thermal treatment may have difficulty treating nonaqueous phase liquids (DNAPLs).
The commenter stated that DNAPLs are easier for this technology to treat than aqueous-
phase contaminants.

       EPA Response: While in-situ thermal treatment can be effective in treating
       DNAPLs, EPA did not consider it to be appropriate at this Site because of the
       complex heterogeneity of the subsurface and uncertainties associated with the
       specific groundwater flow channels. Field evidence indicates that there is a wide
       range in sensitivity to groundwater flow rates at the Site. In some areas,
       groundwater flow can remove heat faster than it is added, which reduces the
       efficiency and effectiveness of this technology.

1.7: A nearby resident stated a concern with airborne contaminants during the
excavation. What would EPA do to control the dust?

       EPA Response: Routine operating procedures will be established to minimize
       dust generation during the cleanup. In addition, air monitoring will be
       implemented at the perimeter of the work zone or site, wherever is deemed to be
       most appropriate. Work will be halted temporarily if dust measurements exceed
       acceptable levels. Trucks will be covered and hosed down before they leave the
       Site to rriinimize dust and dirt on the road.

1.8: As a follow up question, a commenter said that putting air quality monitors in the
field will get information after the fact, not before. The community will already have
been contaminated before elevated dust levels have been identified.

       EPA Response: Monitoring devices will be used that provide real-time or
       "instantaneous readings, so mitigative measures can be taken quickly.

1.9: There is a current concern for trespassing children and their safety since the entire
site is not fenced. There are inadequate signs warning people if they approach the site
from a direction other than Sharp Road.



                                            4



                                                                                      R2-0004234

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      EPA Response: The fence is currently in place around the treatment plant to
      protect it from vandalism and prevent exposure to trespassers to chemicals inside
      the plant. The entrance to the treatment plant on Sharp Road is clearly posted,
      advising the name of the Site and appropriate telephone numbers to learn more
      information. The rest of the Site is not fenced because the contamination is not at
      the surface—it is located 10 to 30 feet below ground surface. As a result, there is
      not an unacceptable risk to exposure for trespassers onto the property.

1.10: Will the remedy pose a concern for children who might trespass?

       EPA Response: Yes. EPA will need to establish security measures and limit
       access during the implementation of the remedy, because of the equipment and
       physical hazards while excavating hazardous material. Among other measures,
       EPA expects to install a fence around the work area.

1.11: A commenter asked if the groundwater is moving towards the wetlands. Have
wetlands been tested? Is the water moving from the wetlands?

       EPA Response: The shallow groundwater flows towards the wetlands. NJDEP
       installed a series of monitoring wells that extend into the wetland area. Some of
       those wells have historically shown elevated concentrations of contaminants.
       Recent sampling data indicate those levels have diminished. Drainage from the
       wetland area discharges into Sharps Run, an intermittent or seasonal stream.

1.12: Why does the existing system not remediate TCE?

       EPA Response: The existing system was designed to keep the groundwater
       plume from migrating by intercepting the contaminated groundwater and piping it
       to the treatment plant. Because TCE does not easily dissolve from the clay lenses
       in the soil, the clay will remain a perpetual source of contamination and it would
       take an indefinite number of years to reach the remediation goals, if ever

1.13: How will EPA address dewatering, as it is expected that water will be encountered
at four or five feet below ground surface, and down to 30 feet?

       EPA Response: The FS evaluated this issue, and the cost of dewatering is
       included in the cost estimate for the selected remedy. EPA expects to install a
       cutoff wall around the Full Area and pump out the water within and treat it. This
       will allow the soils to be excavated "in the dry."



                                           5



                                                                                    R2-0004235

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

1.14: Why was the current treatment system designed to operate at seven gallons per
minute?

       EPA Response: The system was originally designed to treat more than twice that
       volume of water. However, the rate at which groundwater can be extracted in the
       area is limited by the permeability of the subsurface soils.

1.15: During the excavation, EPA will encounter "marl," a local subsurface soil that is
very difficult to handle.

       EPA Response: EPA expects to encounter the organic deposit called marl or
       marlstone at the Site. Based upon EPA's experience at other sites, difficulties in
       addressing marl are not expected. Appropriate measures to address the marl will
       be explored during the remedial design.

1.16: Will NJDEP or EPA be the lead?

       EPA Response: EPA will be the lead agency for future Site activities.

1.17: Has testing been done on the deeper aquifers? Are there any plans to do additional
testmg of the deeper aquifer?

       EPA Response: Yes, NJDEP has tested the deeper aquifer. Groundwater
       monitoring well sampling is performed regularly. The last sampling was
       performed in April of this year and it included two of the deep wells. No
       contamination was found. The deep monitoring wells will continue to be sampled
       regularly.

1.18: A community member asked about backfill. Will the fill be tested before it is
transported on the Site?

       EPA Response: Yes.

1.19: A commenter was concerned that many citizens did not receive notice of the
meeting and were not aware of the public meeting.

       EPA Response: EPA notified the public through the news media, information on
       EPA's webpage, and direct mailing of 920 postcards for those on the mailing list
       for the Ellis Site. EPA issued a press release about the Proposed Plan and public
       meeting. The Burlington County Times, the Central Record, and the Courier


                                           6



                                                                                   R2-0004236

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       Post published articles as a result of this press release. EPA also posted the
       information on our webpage and the Evesham Township did so as well..

1.20: How will the public receive notification that the ROD has been published?

       EPA Response: The Record of Decision will be placed on the EPA web page for
       Ellis Property (http:// www.eDa.gov/region2/superfund/nDl/ellis/) once it is signed
       and issued. EPA will issue a press release and also notify the township. In
       addition, postcards will be mailed to all parties.

1.21: If approximately 5,000 trucks are transporting contarninated soil from the Site, will
the same number be required to deliver clean fill?

       EPA Response: Yes, the volume of soil that is excavated needs to get filled with
       an equal volume of clean fill.

1.22: Does the time for implementation include this backfilling?

       EPA Response: Yes, once construction begins, it is estimated to take a year to
       complete remedial activities.

1.23: Thefinalsentence of page four of the Proposed Plan states that the significant level
of TCE in the groundwater indicates the existence of a DNAPL source but "such source
has not yet been found." Does that indicate that there is something on the site that's
producing additional toxicity that hasn't been identified?

       EPA Response: High levels of TCE have been detected in groundwater. From
       EPA's experience, these elevated levels indicate that a pool of TCE product
       (which is a DNAPL) is nearby, although EPA does not have direct evidence of its
       presence.

1.24: Are there additional hot spots on the Site that haven't been identified?

        EPA Response: EPA believes that the extent of the TCE contamination has been
        defined and that there are no additional hot spots.

1.25: Is there a possibility that volume of contaminated soil could expand, or is the
estimated quantity considered to be the upper limit?




                                             7



                                                                                        R2-0004237

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       EPA Response: There is always a degree of uncertainty associated with
       estimating soil volumes. EPA believes that the amount of soil needing to be
       trucked off Site will be reduced through the application of m-situ treatment.
       Estimates of the volume of soil that will be excavated will be refined during the
       design phase. The 67,500figuremay change if different conditions are
       encountered in the field. There is a possibility that thefigurecan increase.

1.26: A commenter asked, of the nine alternatives considered, why is Alternative 2 the
only one that mentions protecting the excavation from collapse?

       EPA Response: Alternatives 5/6 involve excavation of the Residual Source Area
       only, and would entail the installation of a cutoff wall. Alternative 2 is the largest
       excavation remedy, and poses the most challenges with subsidence during
       excavation.

1.27: A commenter asked about EPA's criterion for success of the remedy.

       EPA Response. The goal of this action is to clean up the groundwater to drinking
       water standards. The Decision Summary details the Agency's measure of success,
       namely, achieving the Groundwater Quality Standards and the Maximum
       Contaminants Levels of the Safe Drinking Water Act. Note that the remediation
       goals that were established in the 1992 ROD have not changed.

1.28: Outside of that area, is EPA fairly confident cirinking water standards are met
everywhere else on that site?

       EPA Response: Outside of Residual Source Area and the Plume Area,
       contaminant levels are slightly elevated in specific wells. By removing the TCE
       source, EPA expects that the levels will drop quickly. Groundwater will reach
       dririking water standards fairly quickly

1.29: Is the Community of Legacy Oaks (west of Sharp Road) included in this project?

       EPA Response: No.

1.30: Will the remedy include installation or reinstallation of monitoring wells that may
be damaged or destroyed during the remedial action, so that groundwater contaminants
can be momtored?

       EPA Response: Yes.

                                             8



                                                                                        R2-0004238

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

1.31: Will information and updates be made available to the public and the township?

       EPA Response: Yes. EPA will send periodic updates to people on its mailing
       list, and also inform the Township. EPA will hold public information sessions as
       the project progresses.

1.32: A representative of a company noted that its property was immediately south of the
Site. The prevailing winds generally go from north to south towards this property. The
company has several employees working outdoors with trucks and trailers and
equipment, etc, and the air-handling equipment for the office buildings draw ambient air
that could be contaminated by the Site. The company also owns an adjacent vacant lot,
and its property value could be diminished by the Site. The company, therefore, has a
strong interest in this particular street. In addition, the business operates a high volume
of truck traffic on Sharp Road. The commenter asked for assurance that no issues would
arise between the remedy and this ongoing business.

       EPA Response: EPA will take precautions to minimize the generation of dust
       and will have perimeter air monitoring to protect the community from exposure
       to airborne contaminants during cleanup. Because of community concerns
       regarding dust and truck traffic, EPA selected excavation of the Full Area along
       with in-situ treatment as a polishing step. The selected remedy is expected to
       reduce the volume of soil that will be excavated and reduce the number of trucks.
       EPA.

Part 2: Written Comments

Comments from technical representative of a treatment technology vendor

2.1.1: According to the Proposed Plan, the remedial alternatives considered included
"Alternative 9, Full Area In-Situ Thermal Treatment." In-Situ Thermal Treatment (ISTT)
is typically applied as a source area remediation technology, and much less often in
plume areas. Therefore it would have been more appropriate to have also
considered ISTT for the Residual Source Area, coupled with another technology such as
In-Situ Bioremediation for the Plume Area, as was the case with Alternatives 5/6 and 7/8.
This would have led to a lower-cost remedy, while still achieving remedial goals.

       EPA Response: Noted. Yes, that is another way that the FFS could have
       evaluated the technologies.



                                            9



                                                                                   R2-0004239

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

2.1.2: Under Alternative 9, Full Area In-Situ Thermal Treatment, it is stated that "The
FFS assumed electrical resistance heating (ERH) as the treatment method for this
alternative." Based on the information provided in the Proposed Plan and the ROD,
Thermal Conductive Heating (TCH) should also have been considered given the
subsurface conditions, constituents of concern, and remedial goals. Several U.S.
government guidance documents have evaluated each of the ISTT technologies, and ERH
and TCH are both deemed appropriate for a site such as this one. TCH has been selected
numerous sites where TCE is present in moderate and low permeability soil above and
below the water table, such as at the Solvent Recovery Service of New England (SRSNE)
Superfund Site in Southington, Connecticut, the Dunn Field/Memphis Depot NPL Site in
Memphis, Tennessee, and the Prologis Brownfields site in Teterboro, New Jersey.

       EPA Response: The FFS considered ERH, steam injection, and TCH as
       appropriate thermal treatment technologies. For the purpose of evaluating cost
       and comparison to other alternatives, ERH was chosen.

2.1.3: The plan states that the selected alternative, "Alternative 2 (Full Area Excavation
with Off-Site Disposal) removes the residual source and contaminated material from the
site, and while some of the excavated material may require treatment before it can be
land-disposed, therefore it satisfies EPA's preference for remedies that use treatment as a
principal element." To the degree that some of the excavated material would not require
treatment prior to land disposal, treatment would not be a principal element; thus, this key
contention justifying selection of Alternative 2 is invalid.

       EPA Response: EPA had selected Alternative 2 as the preferred remedy as per
       its evaluation of all nine criteria. Treatment of material is not the only
       justification for the preference of Alternative 2. EPA has selected excavation of
       the Full Area and in-situ treatment as a polishing step as the remedy for the Site.
       The bulk of the TCE contamination will be excavated and disposed of at an off-
       site hazardous waste landfill. In-situ treatment will be used to treat TCE
       contamination where appropriate. During the design phase, EPA will evaluate in-
       situ technologies, mcluding ERH, TCH, steam injection, chemical reduction,
       chemical oxidation, and bioremediation. The evaluation will consider cost,
       minimizing the number of trucks, and protection of human health.

2.1.4: By contrast, Alternative 9, ISTT does provide treatment, and of all the considered
remedial alternatives, ISTT holds the best prospect for achieving the remedial goals with
a high confidence and within a short time frame.




                                            10



                                                                                      R2-0004240

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       EPA Response: Because of the complex heterogeneity of the subsurface and the
       uncertainties associated with the specific groundwater flow channels, excavation
       was deemed to be the most practical approach to identifying and removing
       contamination. However, in-situ treatment will be used in combination with
       excavation where appropriate, and can result in cost savings.

2.1.5: The plan states, "Although unlikely, Alternative 9 (Thermal Treatment) could
potentially cause uncontrolled migration of contaminants vaporized by the thermal
heating and not captured by the vapor extraction/recovery system. The installation and
operations of the electrical system involved with the Thermal Treatment may also present
significant physical hazards and would also require specific safety precautions and
training." In-Situ Thermal Treatment is safe and well-controlled process. EPA has
studied many ISTT projects and found a lack of evidence of uncontrolled migration of
contaminants. Furthermore, ISTT presents fewer physical hazards requiring specific
precautions and training than excavation and off-site treatment/disposal, which present
hazards to on-site workers, neighbors and motorists.

       EPA Response: Comment noted, however, what the Proposed Plan states is still
       true.

2.1.6: The plan states, "However, Alternative 9 (Full Area In-Situ Thermal Treatment)"
is more difficult to implement due to the considerable system installation, startup and
operations, including drilling, wells installation, and mechanical, electrical, and vapor
extraction and treatment systems." ISTT has over the past 15 years become a widely-
used in situ remediation technology, at over approximately 180 hazardous waste sites
through 2007, and well over 200 sites today. The difficulties alluded to are no longer
impediments for implementability, and therefore should not be any more of an issue than
for the other considered alternatives.

       EPA Response: Comment noted, however, what the Proposed Plan states is still
       true.

2.1.7: The Plan states, "The most cost-effective remedial alternatives are Alternatives
3/4 (($2,800,000-$3,600,000), 7/8 (($4,600,000-$5,100,000), and Alternative 9
($6,400,000); while Alternative 1 ($10,000,000) and Alternative 2 ($13,600,000) are the
least cost-effective." While Alternative 9 was considered among the most cost-effective
remedial alternatives, we are confident that as we discussed in Item 1 above, had ISTT
been considered for the Residual Source Area, coupled with another technology such as
In-Situ Bioremediation for the Plume Area (as was the case with Alternatives 5/6), that
ISTT would have emerged as the most cost effective alternative.


                                           11



                                                                                   R2-0004241

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

EPA Response: Comment noted.

Written Comments on Behalf of Sharps Run Home Owners Association Board
Members

2.2.1: There have been different reports in the media about the amount of soil to be
removed and replaced. What are the actual numbers (in cubic yards and truckloads)?

       EPA Response: The Proposed Plan estimated 67,500 cubic yards of soil would
       be excavated. EPA stated at the public meeting that an estimated 5,000 trucks
       would be needed to transport contaminated soil from the Site, and an equivalent
       number would be needed for clean fill. Please note that the selected remedy
       differs slightly from the preferred remedy in the Proposed Plan. Based on
       comments during the public meeting and comments received during the public
       comment period, EPA has selected excavation of soil in the Full Area with in-situ
       treatment as a polishing step. This will reduce the amount of soil to be trucked
       off-site for disposal. Estimates of the amount of soil to be removed will be
       refined in the remedial design.

2.2.2: Sharp Road is narrow, has soft shoulders and has difficulty accommodating
normal traffic. Are there plans in place to widen it before the works begins?

       EPA Response: No. Sharp Road is rated for the type of trucks anticipated for
       this project.

2.2.3: Are alternate ways to get to the site being considered? What are they? Are reduced
speed limits being considered?

       EPA Response: During the remedial design, a transportation plan will consider
       routes that will be used by the trucks, and may consider reduced speed limits.
       There are no other means of transport besides trucking.

2.2.4: If Sharp Road is used, what is the portion which would be used? South to
Evesham-Medford Road or north to Church Road?

       EPA Response: Most likely, the southward route would be used as it is the
       shortest and quickest route to the highway. EPA would not select residential
       streets if designated truck routes are available.



                                           12



                                                                                       R2-0004242

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

2.2.5: There is very little room for parking trucks on Sharp Road. If it is used, will there
be improvements made to create a staging area?

       EPA Response: Sharp Road is a two-lane road and indeed, it does not have
       enough room for parked or idling trucks. Trucks will not be parked on Sharp
       Road. There is enough land to create a staging area on the Site to accommodate
       the trucks and other equipment, if necessary.

2.2.6: The nearby developments, like Sharps Run and Legacy Oaks, should not be used
in any way as thoroughfares for the necessary truck traffic. What plans are in place to
prevent that?

       EPA Response: The communities of Sharps Run and Legacy Oaks will not be
       used as thoroughfares.

2.2.7: The justification for the project is that it will shorten the cleanup cycle. By how
much? Does it cost more or less than the original plan?

        EPA Response: It is not clear that the existing groundwater treatment plant
        would ever achieve the remediation goals. It would certainly take many decades,
        based upon the existing remedy data. By removing the TCE source, EPA expects
        that the site would be cleaned up within a couple of years. The cost of this
        additional cleanup is more than the original remedy.

2.2.8: What measures are being considered to minimize/prevent contamination of nearby
areas during and after the completion of the project?

        EPA Response: A health and safety plan will be prepared before construction
        begins. Periodic sampling and monitoring will be performed throughout the
        project to ensure that contamination does not migrate off site. In addition, dust
        control measures will be undertaken and all trucks will be decontaminated before
        they leave the Site.

2.2.9: What measures will be taken to prevent the illegal vehicle traffic through the area,
which occurs regularly now?

        EPA Response: This is outside of EPA's jurisdiction. EPA does not regulate or
        enforce traffic laws.




                                             13



                                                                                       R2-0004243

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

2.2.10: The site is pretty much an eyesore now; it is sure to become more so during the
project. What measures will be taken to miriimize this? Could EPA plant trees in front of
the Site? Could the existing metal building be replaced with something more attractive?
Would the Agency consider a decorative fence with plantings?

       EPA Response: The Site will assume the appearance of a construction site
       during the cleanup. EPA does not have plans for landscaping of the Site. The
       existing metal building, which houses the treatment plant, is expected to remain
       until the treatment plant is no longer needed. The Site does not look substantially
       different than a number of other properties on Sharp Road.

2.2.11: Eventually, if this goes forward, Evesham Township will be taking over
responsibility for the Site. What is their involvement in the project?

       EPA Response: The Township of Evesham is not responsible for taking over or
       performing any part of the cleanup of the Site. EPA supports redevelopment of
       thcproperty after the completion of the remedy, and will consult with the
       Township at that stage of the project.

Written Comments From A Nearby Property Owner

2.3.1: As an adjoining property owner, I am greatly upset that neither the EPA nor the
town felt it important to communicate with me about this meeting or the recent findings.
I only found out about this important information because a concerned friend called to
alert me. Property owners much farther away from the site were notified but I, as an
adjoining property owner was not included in this notification? I have subsequently
signed up to receive notifications via the EPA web site but kindly request that the EPA
and or town please include me in such important communications.

       EPA Response: See EPA's response to Comment 1.19, above. The commenter
       has been added to the mailing list for the Site and shall receive notification of Site
       information in the future.

2.3.2: I have a well on my property that is 30 feet deep. This well serves my buildings.
Is this well safe?

       EPA Response: The contamination plume is well delineated and does not extend
       on to neighboring properties.




                                            14



                                                                                       R2-0004244

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

2.3.3: I am most concerned for my safety and the safety of my employees. Initially after
the discovery of contamination on this site, the EPA tested our water. That testing
discontinued more than 20 years ago because we were told there was no concern. In light
of these recent disclosures by the EPA that the current cleanup methodology is not
working, and that additional plumes have been found, I have cause to worry that the
pollutants have migrated and may be impacting my well. As such, I kindly ask that EPA
immediately test my water and provide me with information regarding the safety of my
water. I would ask that this testing be ongoing until such time as the site is deemed clean.

       EPA Response: See response to Comment 2.3.2.

2.3.4: As the recent "Superfund Program Proposed Plan" dated July 2013 indicates, the
current methodology to remediate the site is not working. The unique and misunderstood
characteristics of this site, along with additional findings have demonstrated that much of
the efforts and costs to clean the site have not yielded the projected results. To that end,
the assurances we were given in the past regarding timelines and goals have proven
inaccurate. Recognizing these facts and the uncertainty going forward, further
development along Sharp Road should be halted until such time as the exact sources of
the pollutants are positively identified and cleaned up.

       EPA Response: See response to Comment 2.3.2. In addition, EPA has no
       comment on development of properties that are not affected by Site
       contamination.

2.3.5: The Town of Evesham, and its planning and zoning board members have altered
the master plan to allow more and more houses to be built close to this well-known
Superfund site. The master plans for Sharp Road at the time of the disclosure of the
dangers restricted the entire area to commercial and industrial use. Zoning and planning
board members, bowing to pressures from developers, altered the master plan. And as a
result, the town directly owns the responsibility for putting many people at an increased
risk of exposure to this site and the listed contaminants.

        EPA Response: EPA does not get involved in local land use decisions. There is
        no evidence that indicates the Site poses an increased risk of exposure to these
        neighboring properties.

2.3.6: I have witnessed developers steer meetings away from discussions about this site.
I have witnessed developers mislead the public with regard to these hazards. Most
disturbingly, I have witnessed one developer go so far as to purposefully plant evergreen
trees infrontof the "Ellis Superfund" sign on Sharp Road in a blatant effort to conceal


                                             15



                                                                                      R2-0004245

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

the signfrompotential home buyers. We cannot continue to hide this site. Better and
more visible signage alerting the public to the dangers of this site need to be installed
immediately.

       EPA Response: EPA will do its best to maintain signs at the Site.
       Implementation of the remedy will raise the visibility of the Site, and EPA will
       perform more outreach during this upcoming cleanup phase. EPA is concerned
       that trespassing might damage Site features, like monitoring wells; however, there
       is no surface contamination, so exposure to trespassers is not a concern.

2.3.7: There is no barrier to the ever-expanding local population limiting access to the
Site. As more and more people live closer and closer to the Site, the potential for
unintended exposure to the soil and to the groundwater/ surface water has significantly
increased. Increasingly and quite often I see people wandering on the site and walking
dogs throughout the property. Huntersfrequentthe Site to hunt birds and fowl. Just this
week I witnessed several youths playing in the rear of the property trying to catch frogs.

These folks are in harm's way and they do not even know it. I strongly feel that proper
perimeter fencing be installed along the entire property line and that sign calling attention
to the dangers be installed as soon as possible.

       EPA Response: See EPA response to Comment 1.9. EPA's review of the Site
       contamination concludes that it does not pose an unacceptable exposure to
       trespassers, because the contamination is not located at the surface but 10 to 30
       feet below ground surface. Consequently, a fence around the perimeter of the
       property is not warranted to prevent exposure. Trespassers are not welcome, but
       are not at risk. The Site will be fenced during the cleanup.

2.3.8: As noted in the Proposed Plan on page 4 and 5, "the significant levels of TCE in
the groundwater indicate the existence of a DNAPL source, but such a source has not yet
been found." Clearly, the full extent of the problems and dangers on this Site are not fully
understood. Recognizing this fact, and the fact that the treatment methods are ongoing,
dynamic, and subject to future re-evaluation, I think it is incumbent on the EPA and the
Town of Evesham to prohibit and restrict additional development of the land to prevent
recreational or residential development.

       EPA Response: EPA presumes that this comment refers to the development of
       the Ellis Property land. EPA supports retiirning sites to beneficial use after they
       are cleaned up. EPA has no position on the redevelopment of neighboring
       properties.

                                             16



                                                                                        R2-0004246

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

2.3.9: With regard to the various proposed alternatives listed to remediate the site, I have
a significant concern about any "in-situ" treatments. As previously discussed, my office
and my employees work immediately next to this site every day. Excavation of these
pollutants, and treating them above ground in close proximity to my office, my well head
and the many homes in the area causes me great concern. I am worried that we will be
significantly more exposed to these pollutants than we currently are.

       EPA Response: EPA will take precautions to control dust and eliminate
       exposure routes to contaminants during the cleanup. An air monitoring plan,
       health and safety plan, and routine operating procedures will be developed and
       followed to exposure to minimize dust and contaminants during cleanup In-situ
       treatment, to the degree that is it used, will take place in the ground, not above the
       ground.

2.3.10: I am further concerned that any additional disruption or alterations to the Site
will further alter the natural flow of groundwater. Clearly, the installation of the
containment wall in 2012 altered the natural flow of groundwater. Observing the
property daily, especially during periods of heavy rain, suggests that water builds up on
that side of the property more than ever observed prior to the construction of the wall. As
an adjoining property owner, I am concerned that you are in effect altering the natural
path of the water and forcing it to flow closer to my property and my shallow well.

       EPA Response: The presence of a sand channel limited the effectiveness of the
       northern portion of the collection trench. A cutoff wall was installed in 2012 to
       isolate the contaminated groundwater from the sand channel and direct it, instead,
       to the collection trench. This cutoff wall does not alter the direction of the
       groundwater flow, it only keeps clean groundwater from infiltrating into the
       collection trench. After significant rain events, surface water is seen on the
       property, but it is not associated with the contaminated groundwater. Because the
       water table is naturally high in the area and the low permeability of the sand,
       water collects at the surface and does not seep into the ground readily. This is not
       related to the cutoff wall.

2.3.11: Understanding that the Site cannot be properly remediated without some
additional actions, I seek some absolute assurancesfromthe EPA that myself and my
employees, the value of my property and the value of the surrounding properties will not
be compromised either in the short term or the long term in any way by the treatment
methods selected.



                                             17



                                                                                      R2-0004247

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       EPA Response: EPA has no control over property values in the surrounding
       area. From EPA experience, property values in the vicinity of a Superfund
       cleanup are not influenced by a site if the properties are not directly affected.
       Refer to response to Comments 2.3.3 and 2.3.9.

2.3.12: As a property owner on Sharp Road, I am concerned about the quality of life
during and after the chosen treatment plan. As is well known, Sharp Road is in
deplorable condition. Certainly, any treatment method will necessitate heavy equipment
and dump trucks traveling on Sharp Road. I would like to seek some assurance from the
EPA that we, as residents and property owners, will not suffer the consequences of
further degradation of our roadway.

       EPA Response: Please see the response to Comment 2.2.2. In addition, EPA
       will make repairs if any road damage is caused by implementation of the remedy.

2.3.13: Furthermore, I seek some assurance that off-site treatment or in-situ treatment
not cause any increased exposure to these hazards. My concerns include suchtilingsas
dust, mud and airborne exposure, alterations to the groundwater or flooding of my
property. We ask that EPA take these concerns into consideration when deciding on a
best course of action.

       EPA Response: Please see responses to Comment 2.3.9 and 2.3.10. Community
       participation and involvement will continue as we proceed into the design phase
       and cleanup phase. This will allow community members to understand the efforts
       that EPA will take, during remedy implementation, to meet the expectations of
       this commenter.

Written Comments From Former Evesham Residents and Ellis Site Task Force
Members

2.4.1: We support Alternative #2, as recommended by EPA and NJDEP, because
removing the source of contamination, particularly TCE, is the only way to effectively
clean up the site. As EPA has pomted out in the site fact sheet "The Preferred Alternative
will be effective in achieving the RAOs and ARARs. The potential presence of DNAPL
in the Residual Source Area, which is considered the continuing source of groundwater
contamination, was considered to be the most difficult problem for the other technologies
to address effectively, particularly in comparison to Alternative 2. The current
groundwater collection trenches and treatment system would remain in place during the
implementation of the preferred alternative and for a short period thereafter, and natural
bioremediation processes are expected to restore the aquifer to the cleanup goals within a


                                            18



                                                                                           R2-0004248

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

period of approximately one to three years. Overall, the implementation of the Preferred
Alternative is expected to reduce the duration of the operation of the existing pumping
and treatment system to one year after the completion of remedial activities. In addition,
the Preferred Alternative is expected to minimize the future migration of groundwater
contamination; reduce or eliminate the source of future groundwater contamination; and,
reduce or eliminate the direct contact threat associated with contaminated soil."

       EPA Response: Comment noted. Please note-that Selected Remedy is
       excavation of the Full Area and off-site disposal, with in-situ treatment as a
       polishing step.

2.4.2: We agree that the Residual Source Area must be removed and point out that the
Ellis Site Task Force has been making this recommendation for at least 15 years. If the
DNAPL source had effectively been characterized and removed during the initial soil
cleanup, millions of dollars would not need to be spent on a an ineffective groundwater
pump and treat system, and 13 million dollars would not be needed now to perform the
needed source removal.

       EPA Response: The initial soil cleanup addressed soil near the surface and is not
       in the same area as the DNAPL source, so it would not have addressed the
       Residual Source Area and the Plume Area. The original remedy addressed all
       direct contact exposure concerns at the Site.

2.4.3: The sooner the removal takes place the better. We urge that special efforts be
made to protect the wetlands to the east of the site from groundwater contamination
migration, and that EPA be prepared to enhance groundwater treatment or conduct
further source removal if the levels of TCE do not "bioremediate" within the 1- 3 years as
planned. If one year passes and the levels of TCE are not substantially reduced, additional
measures should be implemented immediately. The delays between each step of the
cleanup process have been unconscionable and have cost the public millions of dollars
unnecessarily. Granted these delays are likely caused by lack of funding to the
Superfund program and notfromnegligence on the part of program staff. Were the tax on
chemicals that formerly funded the program reinstated the funding issue would not be so
strained.

        EPA Response: After excavation and in-situ treatment of the Full Area, EPA
        expects the levels of TCE to decrease fairly quickly. The groundwater collection
        and treatment plant will operate for approximately one year to ensure the
        contamination does not reach the wetland area. EPA intends to operate the
        collection and treatment plant longer if necessary to achieve the remediation

                                            19



                                                                                        R2-0004249

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       goals. The existing treatment system has resulted in the cleanup of the wetland
       area already, by cutting off the source.

Written Comments from A Community Member

2.5.1: Considering the sequester and the claimed intense budget problems, why after so
many years is this project, that was placed on the National Priorities List (NPL)
December 1,1982, suddenly coming to the fore?

       EPA Response: The changes recommended to the remedy in the Proposed Plan
       have been under development for a number of years, and the Proposed Plan was
       released when the necessary studies had been completed. There is no association
       with any other schedule.

2.5.2: Why, of the 34 sites in Evesham, has this project been highlighted for federal
remediation?

       EPA Response: Ellis Property is the only Site in Evesham that is on the NPL.
       Non-NPL sites are not eligible for cleanup under the federal Superfund program.
       The letter provided no further information on the other sites, but EPA has no other
       sites in Evesham. Readers can speak with NJDEP about active or potential sites
       under state regulation.

2.5.3: Why has project management been taken over by EPA from NJDEP?

       EPA Response: EPA and NJDEP have agreed to EPA's assiiming the lead for
       this project at this stage. This decision is derived primarily from a difference in
       contracting methods (state vs. federal) that will allow EPA to address the Site
       more quickly.

2.5.4: Will 67,500 cubic yards of soil actually be removed from Evesham? Where will it
go?

       EPA Response: See response to Comment 1.4, above. Excavated soil will be
       trucked to a disposal facility approved to receive it

2.5.5: What specific area of the 36 acres is involved in the dig?




                                           20




                                                                                     R2-0004250

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       EPA Response: Please see Figure 3 of the Decision Summary (also included in
       the Proposed Plan). The area that is outlined with a solid black line is the Full
       Area. Everything within the Full Area will be involved in the excavation.

2.5.6: What are the dimensions (length, width, height) of the dig?

       EPA Response: The exact dimensions of the dig are not known attime,but will
       be determined in the final design.

2.5.7: How has the dig depth been determined?

       EPA Response: The depth has been determined from sampling results that
       indicate the depth of TCE contamination.

2.5.8: What testing (type, frequency, locations) will be done during the dig?

       EPA Response: This will be determined during the design phase EPA
       typically follows NJDEP's "Technical Requirements for Site Remediation,"
       N.J A.C. 7:26E.

2.5.9: How will the TCE be isolated?

       EPA Response: The excavation area (the Full Area) is already isolated by the
       existing treatment system. This system will remain in place during the remedy.

2.5.10: How will it be determined that all of the TCE has been removed?

       EPA Response: EPA will conduct post-excavation sampling to determine that
       the cleanup goals are met. Refer to the response to Comment 2.5.8.

2.5.11: What other harmful chemicals are known to reside at the site?

       EPA Response: By addressing TCE, the most wide-spread contaminant, other
       contaminants of concern will be addressed. Please refer to the Summary of Site
       Risks section in the Decision Summary of this ROD that describes the
       contaminants of concern.

2.5.12: Will the removed soil be treated in any manner at the site? How?

       EPA Response: The remedy does not require on-site treatment of excavated soils
       prior to transportation; however, at some sites, wastes pose transportation risks

                                           21



                                                                                    R2-0004251

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       and need to be treated prior to leaving the Site to meet U.S. Department of
       Transportation safety regulations. EPA does not expect that to be an issue a the
       Ellis Site.

2.5.13: Will the removed soil be treated at its final destination? How?

       EPA Response: Treatment may be required prior to land disposal, per the
       requirements of the permit of the disposal facility.

2.5.14: How many vehicle loads of soil will be needed to carry the dug soil away from
the site?

       EPA Response: See response to Comment 1.4, above.

2.5.15: How many vehicle loads will be needed to carry new replacement soil to the
Site?

       EPA Response: See response to Comment 1.21, above.

2.5.16: What will be the source of replacement soil? What tests will be performed on the
replacement soil to assure it is contaminant free in total? Where will replacement soil
tests be conducted?

       EPA Response: Typical sources of clean backfill are found locally. It is tested
       prior to bringing it onto the Site. The samples will be analyzed in a laboratory
       approved by EPA and NJDEP.

2.5.17: What is the project start date?

       EPA Response: EPA expects to start the remedial design of the project in 2014.
       Please see response to Comment 1.1, above.

2.5.18: Once started, will the project continue uninterrupted until completion?

       EPA Response: EPA expects the cleanup to be performed under a regular work
       schedule (week days during normal business hours) without interruptions.
       However, there may be instances of interruptions beyond EPA's control, such as a
       lapse or delay in funding or severe weather conditions that warrant temporary
       stopping of work to protect the safety of our workers.



                                           22




                                                                                     R2-0004252

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

2.5.19: What is the estimated completion date?

       EPA Response: EPA expects to complete the excavation and in-situ treatment
       within one year, once it begins.

2.5.20: On page 15 of the July 2013 Proposed Plan, "...and Alternative 2 ($13,600,000)
are the least cost-effective" and "This remedial alternative has been determined to be the
most cost-effective...". Please explain

       EPA Response: Please refer to the Selected Remedy section of the Decision
       Summary of this ROD EPA uses nine criteria to evaluate the proposed remedies,
       cost being one of them.




                                           23



                                                                                    R2-0004253

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      Attachment A

    PROPOSED PLAN

Ellis Property Superfund Site




                                R2-0004254

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Superfund Program Proposed Plan

                               Ellis Property Superfund Site
                               Evesham Township, Burlington County, New Jersey
                                                 July 2013


EPA ANNOUNCES PROPOSED PLAN
                                                                       MARK YOUR CALENDAR
This Proposed Plan identifies the U S. Environmental
Protection Agency's (EPA's) proposed change to the          PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD:
soil and groundwater remedy selected in the September       July 12,2013- August 12,2013
30, 1992, Record of Decision (ROD) for the Ellis            EPA will accept written comments on the Proposed
                                                            Plan during the public comment period
Property Superfund site, located in Evesham Township,
New Jersey.                                                 PUBLIC MEETING:
                                                            Wednesday, July 24,2013 6:30 p.m.
The original ROD in 1992 addressed soil and                 EPA and NJDEP will hold a public meeting to explain
groundwater contamination at the site. EPA, with the        the Proposed Plan and all of the alternatives presented
concurrence of the New Jersey Department of                 in the Focused Feasibility Study Oral and written
Environmental Protection (NJDEP), selected excavation       comments will also be accepted at the meeting. The
                                                            meeting will be held at Evesham Township Municipal
and off-site disposal of contaminated soils, and            Building, Municipal Courtroom, 984 Tuckerton Road,
construction of a groundwater collection and treatment      Marlton, New Jersey.
system to restore the contaminated groundwater as the
remedy for volatile organic compound (VOC)                  For more information, review the Administrative
contamination in groundwater at the site The soil           Record at the following locations:
component of the remedy is complete and the
                                                            Evesham Library           EPA-Region 2
groundwater collection and treatment system has been in     984 Tuckerton Road         Superfund Records Center
operation since 2000 However, as described below,           Marlton, NJ 08053          290 Broadway, 18* Floor
EPA and NJDEP have identified a source of VOC               (856) 983-1444             New York, NY 10007-1866
contamination in the subsurface soils at the site These     Hours: Monday - Thursday (212)637-4308
                                                            10 00 am-8-30 pm;          Hours. Monday-Friday
VOCs are contributing to groundwater contamination          Friday 10-00 am - 5:00 pm 9:00 am to 5:00 pm
and are preventing the groundwater collection and
treatment system from restoring the aquifer
                                                           EPA's preferred remedy to address the additional
The groundwater remedy in the original ROD mcluded         contamination is excavation and off-site disposal of the
extraction and treatment of contaminated groundwater,      Residual Source Area and contaminated soil in the
and reinjection of the treated groundwater upgradient      Plume Area. EPA believes that it will take
from the site Performance monitoring of the                approximately one year to excavate the source and
groundwater remedy indicates that it has only been         contaminated soil, followed by several years of
partially effective, and recent investigations reveal      monitoring to confirm the effective remediation of the
additional contamination at the site the presence of       groundwater plume.
residual sources (Residual Source Area) and an area of
contaminated soil (Plume Area). As a result, the goal of   This Proposed Plan includes summaries of the cleanup
the remedy for groundwater, aquifer restoration, cannot    alternatives evaluated for use at the site This document
be achieved within a reasonable timeframeusmg the          is issued by EPA, the support agency for site activities,
existing system                                            in conjunction with NJDEP, the lead agency for this site.

                                                           EPA is issuing this Proposed Plan as part of its public
                                                           participation responsibilities under Section 117(a) of the
                                                           Comprehensive Environmental Response,
                                                                                                               Page 1




                                                                                                      R2-0004255

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, as amended        In response to an anonymous tip, in September 1980,
(CERCLA), and Section 300.435 (c)(2)(H) of the             NJDEP conducted an inspection of the site. During this
National Oil and Hazardous Substances Contingency          visit, numerous corroded and leaking drums were
Plan. This Proposed Plan summarizes information that       observed, in addition to dead and stressed vegetation in
can be found m greater detail in the June 2013 Focused     the vicinity of drum storage locations.
Feasibility Study (FFS) and other documents contained
in the Administrative Record file for this site. This      NJDEP directed the removal of over 100 drums and
Proposed Plan is being provided to inform the public of    visibly contaminated surface soils as part of a removal
EPA's preferred alternative and to solicit public          action m 1983, and the site was placed on the National
comments pertaining to the preferred alternative.          Priorities List (NPL). NJDEP then initiated a remedial
Changes to the preferred alternative, or a change from     investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the
the preferred alternative to another alternative, may be   nature and extent of the release.
made if public comments or additional data indicate that   Investigations during the RI identified numerous buried
such a change will result m a more appropriate remedial    drums EPA performed a second removal action in 1989
action The final decision regarding the selected remedy    that excavated and disposed of an additional 218 drums
will be made after EPA has taken all public comments       from the site
into consideration. The public is encouraged to review
and comment on the preferred alternative considered by     The RI identified soils contaminated with metals,
EPA m this Proposed Plan                                   polychlorinated byphenyls (PCBs), and bis(2-
                                                           ethylhexyl)phthalate, and groundwater contaminated
SITE BACKGROUND                                            with VOCs, particularly tetrachloroethylene (PCE) and
                                                           trichloroethylene (TCE) NJDEP completed the RI/FS
The Ellis Property site is located at 150 Sharp Road in
                                                           for the site, and worked with EPA to issue a Record of
Evesham Township, Burlington County, New Jersey.
                                                           Decision (ROD) in 1992, requiring the excavation of
This property was originally used as a dairy farm, until
                                                           contaminated soil and installation of a groundwater
acquired by Irving Ellis in 1968 Following the property
                                                           collection, treatment and discharge system The goal of
acquisition, approximately four of the 36 acres were
                                                           the groundwater action was to restore the groundwater to
used in drum reconditioning operations. Surficial spills
                                                           drinking water standards
and discharges in association with drum reconditioning
and chemical storage are believed to have contributed to
                                                           Enforcement
the observed contamination of soil and groundwater at
the site with cWorinated solvents and metals. Operations   Irving and Reba Ellis settled with EPA and NJDEP via
ceased in the late 1970s following a fire at the site.     Consent Decree in June 1997. No other viable
                                                           potentially responsible parties have been identified for
                                                           the site, and investigation and cleanup activities have
                                                           been paid for with Federal and State funds, with NJDEP
                                                           as the lead agency.

                                                           SITE CHARACTERISTICS and DESCRIPTION OF
                                                           PROPOSED CHANGES

                                                           Original Remedy

                                                           The elements of the remedy selected in the original ROD
                                                           included the following:




                                                                                                             Page 2




                                                                                                     R2-0004256

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   •   Excavation of contaminated soil and                     minute (5 gpm) with a peak flow of 15 gpm Currently
       treatment/disposal at an approved off-site              the system functions at a maximum rate of
       facility;                                               approximately 7 gpm (including system recirculation)
   •   Extraction of contaminated groundwater from             due to system flow-through limitations (e g., the
       the shallow aquifer underlying the site,                abundant presence of solids) and re-injection rate
   •   Treatment of the contaminated groundwater in a          constraints (e g., treated water cannot be discharged as
       facility to be constructed on site;                     quickly as the system can extract/treat it)
   •   Disposal of the treated groundwater on the site         In addition to the groundwater treatment system, a total
       by reinjection; and                                     of 38 monitoring wells and 14 piezometers are currently
   •    Implementation of an environmental monitoring          used m the monitoring of local groundwater flow and
       program to ensure the effectiveness of the              contaminant migration. These wells are screened in
       remedy.                                                 three distinct formations underlying the site at the
                                                               following intervals: 22 shallow wells in the
All these actions have been implemented. The ROD               Hornerstown Formation, approximately 10 to 20 feet
identified approximately 760 cubic yards of sods               bgs; six intermediate wells in the Navesink Formation
contaminated with metals, polychlorinated biphenyls            approximately 50 to 60 feet bgs, and 10 deep wells in
(PCBs) and bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate that exceeded the        the Wenonah-Mount Laurel Formation approximately 90
site cleanup goals Site-specific,risk-basedcleanup             to 100 feet bgs
goals were selected based upon an assumption of
eventual unrestricted site use. When the soil remedy           New Information
was implemented in 1998, nearly 1,400 cubic yards of
soil exceeding the site cleanup goals was excavated for        While the removal and remedial response actions taken
off-site disposal. All the soil excavations and drum           to date have eLunmated drums and large areas of
removals were performed above the water table, which           contaminated soil, residual TCE in localized areas of the
is, on average,fivefeet below ground surface (bgs)             site along the interface of the Hornerstown Formation
                                                               and Navesink Formation have been consistently
In addition to the soil actions identified in the ROD, an      identified in site monitoring wells during groundwater
area of soil contaminated with PCE was discovered              monitoring TCE and other VOCs found in groundwater
during the design phase of the groundwater remedy, and         today were not identified as soil contaminants at the time
was excavated down to approximately 12 feet bgs in             of the ROD because they were not detected at significant
2000.                                                          levels

The groundwater treatment system was completed in              In 2006, EPA performed a Remediation System
2000 and is still in operation today. The system consists      Evaluation (RSE) of site operations An RSE involves an
of a trench installed near the eastern edge of the site with   mdeoendent team of exoert hvdroeeolosists and
two extraction points (MH-1 and MH-2), two other               engineers conducting a broad evaluation of remedy
extraction wells (PW-1 and PW-2), a treatment plant,           performance. The recommendations are intended to help
and a re-injection trench. Groundwater is pumped from          the site team identify opportunities for improvements.
the extraction points and is then treated and discharged       The September 2006 RSE report identified several
to the wetlands to the east and downgradient of the            enhancements to improve the performance of the
collection trench.                                             selected response action. In addition, the ROD had
                                                               called for studies of the site to identify the presence of
The treatment consists of solids settling by gravity,
                                                               dense nonaqueous phase liquids (DNAPLs), typically
coagulation/flocculation and co-precipitation for metals
                                                               VOCs that rnight act as continuing sources of
removal, sludge dewatering, and VOC removal via air
                                                               contamination to the groundwater. In 2007, NJDEP
stripping and carbon adsorption The system was
                                                               conducted a Pre-Design Investigation (PDI) to further
designed to operate at approximately five gallons per

                                                                                                                  Page 3




                                                                                                          R2-0004257

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

delineate the residual sources) and extent of                         Source area delineation of chlorinated solvent
contamination in soil and groundwater, to evaluate the                contamination was conducted using a Membrane
presence of DNAPLs, and assess potential changes to                   Interface Probe (MIP) The MIP results
the groundwater remedy                                                suggested that a residual contamination source
                                                                      appeared to be relatively shallow (approximately
                                                                      10 feet bgs) around bonng location P22 (see
        WHAT IS THE "CONTAMINANT OF                                   Figure 3), while it moved deeper (20 feet bgs)
                 CONCERN"?                                            into the clay layer around boring locations P53
                                                                      andP5.
 The 1992 ROD identified a number of COCs for soils              •    Investigation of groundwater quality was
 and groundwater. EPA and the NJDEP have
                                                                      conducted along the sand channel and potential
 identified trichloroethylene (TCE) as the primary
 contamination remaining on site that poses the                       contamination source areas through collection of
 greatest potential risk to human health. By                          groundwater samples via direct push sampling
 addressing TCE, other groundwater contaminants                       points installed adjacent to selected MIP
 would also be addressed.                                             investigation locations. The PDI confirmed that
                                                                      there was no contamination in the sand channel
 TCE has been detected in groundwater at                              prior to entering the extraction trench.
 concentrations rangingfromnon-detectable to
                                                                      Groundwater analytical results indicated TCE to
 14,000,000 micrograms per liter (ug/L). This level
 was detected in the "residual source area" of the site.              be the primary contaminant of concern
 TCE concentrations from recent groundwater                           remaining at the site and that the primary
 sampling events regularly exceed 10,000 ug/L.                        residual source areas were in the vicinity of
                                                                      bonng location P22 and P53 and P56.
 TCE is a halogenated organic compound that is                   •    TCE was detected in the groundwater in the
 historically used as a solvent and degreaser and was
                                                                      residual source area up to 14,000,000 ug/L at
 used during past drum reconditioning activities
 conducted at the site. Exposure to TCE has                           depths between 10 and 26 feet below ground
 potentially narmful health effects in humans,                        surface. This concentration is two orders of
 includmg anemia, skin rashes, diabetes, liver                        magnitude higher than the highest groundwater
 conditions, and urinary tract disorders. TCE is also                 monitoring well sample results (15,500 ug/L)
 considered a probable carcinogen based on laboratory                 since 2003 Additionally, extraction well PW-2
 studies.                                                             has shown consistently elevated TCE levels
                                                                      above 15,000 ug/L in the last 2 years of
                                                                      sampling
                                                                  •   Investigation along the suspected sand channel
Summary Of PDI Results:
                                                                      and contamination source areas was conducted
    •   A stratigraphy investigation was conducted in                 through the collection of soil samples adjacent to
        the vicinity of MW-2, MW-6, PW-1, and PW-2                    selected MJP mvestigation locations TCE was
        (See Figure 2) Cone penetrometer technology                   the only compound that exceeded NJDEP
        (CPT) tests confirmed the existence of a "sand                criteria, but was typically present at
        channel" that could act as a preferential pathway             concentrations exceeding 1 milligram per
        for contamination. The sand stratum was                       kilogram (1 mg/kg)
        identified between one and 9 feet thick at the site
        and increased in thickness moving east to west        Overall, the PDI investigation identified TCE, found
        from MW-6 to MW-8.                                    predominantly between 10 and 24 feet bgs, as the
                                                              primary remaining concern at the site, with more
                                                              elevated concentrations identified during the PDI than
                                                              historical groundwater results The significant levels of
                                                              TCE in the groundwater indicates the existence of a
                                                                                                                Page 4




                                                                                                        R2-0004258

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

DNAPL source, but such a source has not yet been            direct it, instead, to the collection trench This wall was
found. The DNAPL source material constitutes a"             also designed to be used as a shoring protection for
principal threat waste at the site The influence of         excavation in the vicinity of the plume area.
pumping wells PW-1 and PW-2 in extracting subsurface
contamination bound in the tight soil matrix is limited     SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS
Note that these two pumping wells are well placed
                                                            A Baseline Human Health Risk Assessment (BHHRA),
relative to the TCE source areas and pumping has been
                                                            and Ecological Risk Assessment were prepared as part
ongoing for more than 10 years, yet they appear to have
                                                            of the RI/FS at the time of the 1992 ROD. The
made little progress toward addressing these sources.
                                                            conclusions and assumptions of these risk assessments
The primary cause of persistent elevated levels of
                                                            were most recently reassessed by EPA as part of a Five
groundwater contamination in portions of the site
                                                            Year Review for the site in September 2010 EPA
appears to be residual deep soil contamination below the
                                                            concluded that the current and future land use
water table These contaminants, bound tightly in the
                                                            assumptions for the site are still valid, with an
soils, leach slowly out of the soils, serving as a
                                                            expectation of future unrestricted residential land use.
continuing source of groundwater contamination that is
                                                            The basis for taking an action at the site derived,
not easily addressed by the existing system.
                                                            primarily, from direct contact or groundwater exposure
                                                            to a future resident
Based on a review of the groundwater monitoring results
from November 1999 to October 2010, multiple residual       The soil remedial action called for in the 1992 ROD
source areas of TCE contamination appear likely at the      removed soil contamination within approximately the
site The primary potential source area in the shallow       first 10 feet of site soils, alleviating the potential for
zone is in the vicinity of monitoring wells MW-2 and        direct contact. The soil cleanup goals at the time of the
MW-6, continuing downgradient to the extraction             ROD were for the following contaminants of concern
trench, where relatively high TCE concentrations persist.   (COCs), with the ROD criteria and NJDEP's current
A statistical analysis of the TCE concentrations detected   unrestricted use soil standards:
at MW-2 and MW-6 was conducted for eight quarterly
sampling events performed between October 2003 and                                     Table 1
September 2005 This analysis illustrated that TCE                                                            Current New
levels had not decreased at either MW-2 or MW-6               Contaminant of Concern         1992 ROD           Jersey
during this time period. Additionally, extraction well              (in mg/kg)                  Soil        Residential Soil
PW-2, which is located between MW-2 and MW-6,                                                 Cleanup        Remediation
                                                                                               Goal           Standards
exhibited varying concentrations, which were
persistently detected at elevated levels for TCE in 2013,   Arsenic                              20                19
                                                            Lead                                400               400
as high as 47,195 ug/L. Another potential source area,
                                                            Polychlonnated biphenyls            0 49              0 22
based on previous investigations, is in the vicinity of     (PCBs)
 extraction well PW-1, which has had elevated               Chromium                            945               (20)*
 concentrations of TCE in the influent to the treatment     Bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate          49                35
 plant in 2009 and 2010, as high as 31,286 ug/L in 2013
                                                                 it has an interim guideline of 20 mg/kgfor hexavalent
The RSE and PDI also identified several issues likely to         chromium
affect overall system performance, including the location
                                                            TCE was not selected as a COC for direct contact in the
of extraction wells in low-permeabihty soil formations
                                                            original ROD, and while contamination remains at
and the presence of the sand channel on the northern part
of the site. The sand channel was believed to limit the     depth, the expected response action would remediate
effectiveness of the northern portion of the collection     TCE to levels below NJDEP's promulgated remediation
trench in adequately intercepting contamination. A          goal for unrestricted use (7 mg/kg), so the original RAOs
cutoff wall was installed in 2012 to isolate the            for soil would not be affected by a change to the original
contaminated groundwater from the sand channel and          remedy.
                                                                                                                         Page 5




                                                                                                            R2-0004259

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

A comparison of the current groundwater standards with          trivalent or the more hazardous hexavalent chromium.
the standards used at the time of the remedy selection          Based on new toxicity information on hexavalent
indicate several changes, as shown in Table 2 None of           chromium, the cleanup goal for this chemical has been
these changes alter the scope of the selected remedy, or        lowered significantly. EPA and NJDEP do not have a
this Proposed Plan.                                             residential risk-based screemng level for total chromium,
                                                                however, EPA's screemng value for tnvalent chromium
                             Table 2                            is 120,000 mg/kg and for hexavalent chromium is 0.29
                               Groundwater    Current New       mg/kg. It is plausible that past site operations resulted in
 Contaminant of Concern           Cleanup        Jersey         hexavalent chromium impacts at the site; however, the
       (in ug/L)               Goal at Time   Groundwater       highest soil concentration of total chromium was 493
                               of 1992 ROD     Standard
                                                                mg/kg, and chromium was not a remedy driver either as
Antimony                            20                6          a consequence of the RI/FS testing or during the
Arsenic                              8                3          subsequent remedial action for soils. It is highly
Beryllium                           20                 1
Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate          30                3          unlikely that chromium in the soil could remain when
1,2-dichloroethylene                 2                 1         other soil contaminants were remediated. Thus, the
Methylene chlonde                                     3          direct-contact pathways for the COCs identified in the
Nickel                                               100
Tetrachloroethylene (PCE)              1             04          1992 ROD have been addressed by the already-
Tnchloroethylene (TCE)                 1               1         implemented soil remedy, however, because some of the
1,1,2-tnchloroethane                   5              3.         current levels are more stringent, they will be used when
Vmyl chlonde                                        0 08
Total chromium                     100                70         determining completeness of the remedy gomg forward.
Lead (total)                       100                5          Confirmation sampling will be performed during the
Zmc                               5,000             2,000        cleanup

The groundwater exposure assumptions made at the time           The 2010 Five-Year Review also evaluated ecological
of the 1992 ROD are still valid. The vapor intrusion            risks and concluded that while there have been changes
pathway was not evaluated at the time of 1992 ROD,              m how risk is calculated since originally assessed in
however, it is an incomplete exposure pathway because           1992, the clean-up levels used for the upland portion of
there are no receptors. A comparison of the maximum             the site appear to be protective of terrestrial receptors
TCE and PCE concentrations with groundwater values              There are concentrations of TCE in the surface water,
provided in the OS WER Draft Guidance for Evaluating            but the concentrations are below chrome aquatic values
the Vapor Intrusion to Indoor Air Pathway from                  Therefore, there are no surface water contaminants of
Groundwater and Soils (November 2002) was conducted             ecological concern.
as part of the 2010 Five Year Review The screening
values used m the draft guidance provide groundwater            REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES
levels associated with an indoor air concentration that
                                                4
represents a cancer risk ranging from 1 x 10" and               Remedial action objectives are specific goals to protect
         6
 1 x 10" or a noncancer hazard quotient of 1.                   human health and the environment. These objectives are
Concentrations higher than these screening values               based on available information and standards, such as
indicate the potential for vapor intrusion. TCE and PCE         applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements
concentrations found in groundwater exceed the 1 x 10"      4   (ARARs) and nsk-based levels established in the
vapor intrusion screening values of 5.3 ug/L and 110            BHHRA, prepared for the RI/FS at the time of the 1992
 Ug/L, respectively. For this reason, construction of any       ROD Because the BHHRA established that the soil and
type of building within the area of contaminated                groundwater at the site poses an unacceptableriskto
groundwater may create conditions for a future vapor            human health and the environment, remedial action
 intrusion exposure if the groundwater is not remediated.       objectives (RAOs) were established in the 1992 ROD.
 Previous soil testing at the site (during the RI and           EPA and NJDEP have concluded that these remedial
 remedial action) was for total chromium, not for               action objectives are still appropriate. EPA has added


                                                                                                                    Page 6




                                                                                                            R2-0004260

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

one additional RAO for groundwater, to address the                     between 10 and 20 feet bgs and is estimated at
potential for vapor intrusion exposure                                 approximately 45,000 cubic yards in volume
                                                                  •    Full Area. This area covers approximately
Soil                                                                   85,000 square feet of the site, and is the sum of
       •   Prevent contact with contaminated soil, which               the Residual Source Area plus the Plume Area
           represents an unacceptable risk, or reduce                  (67,500 cubic yards).
           contaminant concentrations in the soil below
           risk-based levels,                                  Please refer to Figure 2 showing Residual Source Area
       •   Prevent further migration of soil contaminants      in dotted line and the Plume Area in shade The Full
           mto the groundwater; and                            Area consists of the Residual Area and the Plume Area.
       •   Prevent migration of contaminated soils off site    The Residual Source Area and Plume Area were
                                                               considered separately because, while the same remedial
Groundwater                                                    technologies could be implemented in either area, certain
   • Prevent the migration of contaminated                     technologies are more effective for higher concentration
      groundwater off site;                                    areas and others more appropriate, from a cost and
                                                               effectiveness standpoint, for lower concentration areas.
   • Prevent the migration of contaminated
                                                               Within these designated areas the soil remediation goal
      groundwater into the underlying aquifers,
                                                               for TCE will be 1 mg/kg, which is expected to achieve
   • Prevent potential exposure by inhalation/vapor
                                                               the 1 ug/L remediation goal in groundwater.
      intrusion that presents unacceptable nsk under a
      future land use scenario, and
   • Return the aquifer to its designated use as a             SUMMAR Y OF REMEDIAL AL TERN A TIVES
      source of drinking water by reducing                     Technologies were screened in the Focused Feasibility
      contaminant concentrations in the shallow                Study (FFS) to select a set of remedial technologies
      groundwater to drinking water quality                    appropriate for this site The following five remedial
It should be noted that the applicable New Jersey              technologies were retained for further evaluation:
drinking water and groundwater quality standard for the
primary contaminant of concern, TCE, of 1 ug/L has not             •   Excavation with Off-Site Disposal,
changed since the 1992 ROD. Based upon the 2007                    •   Enhanced Bioremediation;
PDI, the implemented remedy has only been partly                   •   In-Situ Chemical Reduction;
successful in achieving the RAOs for groundwater The               •   In-Situ Chemical Oxidation; and,
results of the 2007 PDI identified the following                   •   In-Situ Thermal Treatment
additional areas (not known at the time of the ROD) that
need to be addressed to meet the RAOs:                         These retained remedial technologies were then used to
                                                               develop Remedial Alternatives to address contamination
                                                               and achieve RAOs at the site. These Alternatives
       •   Residual Source Area: The horizontal extent of
                                                               consisted of either individual or a combination of the
           TCE concentration s exceeding 11,000 ug/L,
                                                               retained remedial technologies in order to best achieve
           representing likely DNAPL source material.
                                                               the remediation goals. The following Remedial
           This area covers approximately 24,000 square
                                                               Alternatives were evaluated against all of the technology
           feet of the site. This area is typically found
                                                               screemng criteria. The FFS considered two distinct m-
           between 10 and 24 feet bgs and is estimated at
                                                               situ chemical treatment methods separately, but they
           approximately 22,500 cubic yards in volume
                                                               have been combined (e g , Alternative 3 and Alternative
       •   Plume Area: The area outside of the Residual
                                                               4 are now Alternative 3/4) for the Proposed Plan
           Source Area that represents the horizontal extent
           of TCE concentration greater than 100 ug/L              •   Alternative 1: Continuation of the Existing
           This area covers approximately 61,000 square                Pump-and-Treat (P&T) System;
           feet of the site. This area is typically found
                                                                                                                   Page 7




                                                                                                           R2-0004261

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    •   Alternative 2: Full Area Excavation with Off-          This remedial alternative assumes that no new actions
        Site Disposal;                                         will be implemented at the site and the existing P&T
    •   Alternative 3/4. Full Area In-Situ Chemical            system will continue to operate for a minimum of 30
        Treatment,                                             years For costing purposes, 30 years is assumed,
    •   Alternative 5/6: Residual Source Area                  however, the operation period of 30 years is considered
        Excavation with Off-Site Disposal and Plume            to be mdefinite considering the limited effectiveness of
        Area In-Situ Chemical Treatment;                       the system since operation began in 2000, and the period
    •   Alternative 7/8: Residual Source Area In-Situ          required to reach the RAOs may be substantially longer
        Chemical Treatment via Soil Mixing and Plume           than 30 years. Annual groundwater monitoring would
        Area Enhanced Bioremediation; and,                     be conducted for approximately 30 years to track
    •   Alternative 9 Full Area In-Situ Thermal                performance of the remediation.
        Treatment                                              Alternative 2: Full Area Excavation with Off-Site
PROPOSED REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES                                 Disposal

Common Elements                                                Capital Cost -$10,518,000
                                                               Annual O&M-$783,000
Each of the remedial alternatives discussed below would        Total Present Worth - $13,600,000
continue the institutional controls that currently prevent     Implementation Period -1 year
use of the contaminated groundwater—a component of
the 1992 remedy. The institutional control for                 This remedial alternative involves excavation and off-
groundwater is in the form of a classification exception       site disposal of contaminated soil in the Full Area, which
area (CEA). These controls need to be in place until the       compnses the residual source area and the plume area
aquifer is restored. In addition, until the RAO of aquifer '   This alternative would provide the removal of the
restoration is achieved, each alternative would require        residual source area and contaminated soil in the plume
engineering controls for vapor mitigation (vapor               area, reduce contamination concentrations across the site
barriers, vapor mitigation systems and/or monitoring), if      and result in a significantly shorter operation period for
buildings come to be placed over any of the groundwater        the P&T system.
contamination zones identified for the site
                                                               Contaminated soils would be excavatedfroman average
With the exception of Alternative 1, Continuation of the       depth interval of 10 to 20 feet bgs, and as deep as 30 feet
Existing P&T System, each of the other alternatives is         bgs in some limited areas. Approximately 67,500 cubic
designed to treat TCE as the mainriskdriver.                   yards of soil would be excavatedfromthe site The
                                                               upper soils (approximately 31,500 cubic yards) from
During the implementation phase of the alternatives, the       zero to 10 feet bgs that are not contarninated would be
existing P&T system would remain in place and                  excavated and stockpiled and used for backfill.
operational, preventing further contaminant migration.         Contaminated soils would be disposed as hazardous
After completion of the remedial actions devised for           waste at an RCRA-approved off-site disposal facility
each alternative, the groundwater P&T system would             Dewatenng would be necessary during the excavation of
remain in place for some period while the aquifer              the saturated portion of the soil.
recovered The anticipated length for this stage of each
alternative vanes, as discussed below.                         Additional excavation may be conducted in some select
                                                               areas based on field screening and observation during
Alternative 1: Continuation of the Existing P&T                the excavation activities. Approximately 15 new
System                                                         monitoring wells would be installed to replace the
                                                               existing wells that would be abandoned prior to the
Capital Cost-Not Applicable (N/A)                              excavation activities. Operation of the existing
Total Cost -$10,000,000                                        groundwater P&T system would be continued during the
Implementation Period—N/A
                                                                                                                  Page 8




                                                                                                          R2-0004262

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

excavation, the system would be limited to extracting       The ZVI reaction is a rapid process and thus requires a
groundwater from collection trench only, because the        short timeframeto reach remedial goals. The limiting
extraction wells PW-1 and PW-2 are in the excavation        factor for the technology is the delivery of the ZVI into
area and would be abandoned prior to the excavation         the aquifer It is anticipated that ZVI would be injected
activities                                                  through a total of approximately 100 locations based on
                                                            a 30-foot grid injection pattern. ZVI would be injected
Groundwater levels are expected to reach the                in a slurry using direct-push technology to the target
remediation goals within a relatively short period after    depth interval of 10 to 30 feet bgs. It is assumed that two
completion of the soil excavation, without further          injection events (assuming one to two months apart)
remedial activities, however, the P&T system would          would be needed and a total of approximately 26,000
remain m place after completion of the excavation to        pounds of ZVI would be injected
evaluate the effectiveness of continued operation of this
system to further reduce the residual groundwater           ISCO is a process that involves the injection of reactive
contaminants For the purpose of the FFS, the period of      chemical oxidants (such as Peroxide, Fenton's Reagent,
operation for the P&T system was assumed to be one          Permanganate) mto the subsurface for rapid contaminant
year after completion of the remedial action, quarterly     destruction. Oxidation of organic compounds using
groundwater monitoring was assumed to be conducted          ISCO is rapid and exothermic and results in the
for the first year, followed by annual groundwater          reduction of contaminants to primarily carbon dioxide
monitoring for the next nine years to monitor the           and oxygen.
remedial performance Actual period of operation of the
                                                            Modified Fenton's Reagent was assumed to be the
P&T system and groundwater monitoring schedule will
                                                            oxidant, for costing purposes. Modified Fenton's process
be determined by EPA after completion of the remedial
                                                            combines proprietary chelated iron complex catalysts,
action and will be based on achieving the performance
                                                            mobility control agents, oxidizers, and stabilizers. The
standards set during design.
                                                            process generates powerfulfreeradicals when the
Alternative 3/4: Full Area In-Situ Chemical                 catalyst reacts with hydrogen peroxide to promote co-
Treatment                                                   existing oxidation-reduction (redox) conditions

Capital Cost-$1,515,000- $2,185,000                         As with ISCR, ISCO is generally a rapid reaction, and
Annual O&M - $ 783,000                                      the technology is limited by the ability to deliver the
Total Cost - 2,800,000-$3,600,000                           oxidant to the aquifer It is anticipated that the Modified
Implementation Period-1 year                                Fenton's Reagent would be injected through a total of
                                                            approximately 300 points based on a 16-foot grid
This alternative includes the use of in-situ chemical       injection pattern using direct-push technology to the
treatment, either in-situ chemical reduction (ISCR)         target depth interval of 10 to 30 feet bgs. It is assumed
[Alternative 3] or in-situ chemical oxidation (ISCO)        that 3 injection events (one to two months apart) would
[Alternative 4] to remediate soil and groundwater           be needed and a total of approximately 240,000 gallons
contamination at the site. Final selection of the in-situ   of the Modified Fenton's Reagent would be injected
treatment technology would be made after further studies
in remedial design, and the site may require a              Delivery of the selected chemical is critical to the
combination of different in-situ technologies to address    success of this technology. Due to the tightness of the
site contamination.                                         soil matrix, results of the PDI suggest that uniform
                                                            delivery of the selected chemical would be difficult.
ISCR uses chemical reductants such as zero-valent iron
(ZVI) The ZVI donates electrons, acting as the              In Alternative 3 or Alternative 4, the groundwater will
reductant in a reaction that removes chlorine atoms from    be monitored during treatment to prevent the migration
chlorinated hydrocarbon contaminants such as TCE.           of reagents orfreeradicals.


                                                                                                                Page 9

                                                                                        /


                                                                                                        R2-0004263

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

I




The FFS assumes that groundwater would be extracted          injection events (assuming one to two months apart)
from collection trench only and treated on site through      would be needed and a total of approximately 12,000
existing treatment system for one year to avoid* 1)          pounds of ZVI would be injected
interference with the chemical treatment in the target
treatment area; and 2) impact of chemical reducing           ISCO is considered more implementable than ISCR, as
agents to the existing P&T system Treated groundwater        the exposure of ZVI to air during the mixing process
would be discharged mostly to surface water, with a          would reduce its effectiveness. If ISCO is used
portion being discharged via groundwater. For the            (Alternative 6), Modified Fenton's Reagent would be
purpose of the FFS, quarterly groundwater monitoring         used to address the contamination in the Plume Area
was assumed to be conducted for the first year, followed     The oxidant would be injected through a total of
by semi-annual groundwater monitoring for the next           approximately 240 points based on a 16-foot grid
mne years to monitor the remedial performance Actual         injection pattern using direct-push technology. It is
period of operation of the P&T system and groundwater        assumed that 3 injection events (assuming 1 to 2 months
monitoring schedule will be determined by EPA after          apart) would be needed and a total of approximately
completion of the remedial action and will be based on'       144,000 gallons of the Modified Fenton's Reagent
achieving the performance standards set during design.       would be injected.

Alternative 5/6: Residual Source Area Excavation             In Alternative 5 or Alternative 6, the groundwater will
with Off-Site Disposal and Plume Area In-Situ                be monitored during treatment to prevent the migration
Chemical Treatment                                           of reagents orfreeradicals

Capital Cost -$6,3 71,000-$6,383,000                         After completion of the Plume Area remedial action,
Annual O&M-$783,000                                          operation of the existing groundwater P&T system was
Present Worth - $8,600,000                                   assumed to operate one year, extracting groundwater
Implementation Period - 3 years                              only from collection trench, because the extraction wells
                                                             will be abandoned and removed during the excavation
This remedial alternative combines the use of                activities For the purpose of the FFS, quarterly
Excavation with Off-Site Disposal (Alternative 2) to         groundwater monitoring was assumed to be conducted
address contamination in the Residual Source Area            for the first year, followed by semi-annual groundwater
followed by in-situ chemical treatment (either ISCR or       monitoring for the next nine years to monitor the
ISCO) to address contamination in the Plume Area.            remedial performance Actual period of operation of the
Alternative 5 utilizes ISCR, while Alternative 6 utilizes    P&T system and groundwater monitoring schedule will
ISCO                                                         be determined by EPA after completion of the remedial
                                                             action and will be based on achieving the performance
In the Residual Source Area, soils would be excavated as     standards set during design.
described in Alternative 2 from approximately 10 to 20
feet bgs with the excavation as deep as 30 feet bgs in       Alternative 7/8: Residual Source Area In-Situ
some limited areas Approximately 22,500 cubic yards          Chemical Treatment via Soil Mixing and Plume Area
of soil would be excavated. After excavation,                Enhanced Bioremediation
contaminated soils would be disposed of at RCRA-
approved off-site disposal facilities.                       Capital Cost - $2,858,000-$3,298,000
                                                             Annual O&M-$872,000
In-situ chemical treatment would be then be used to          Present Worth-$4,600,000-5,100,000
address the contamination m the Plume Area If ISCR is        Implementation Period — 5 years
used (Alternative 5), a slurry of ZVI would be injected
through a total of approximately 70 locations based on a     This remedial alternative involves the use of in-situ
30-foot grid injection pattern. ZVI would be injected in a   chemical treatment, with in-situ soil mixing (rather than
slurry using direct-push technology. It is assumed that 2    chemical injection used m Alternatives 3/4 and 5/6), to
                                                             address contamination in the Residual Source Area,
                                                                                                              Page 10




                                                                                                       R2-0004264

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

followed by the use of enhanced bioremediation to             In Alternative 7 or Alternative 8, the groundwater will
address contamination in the Plume Area.                      be monitored during treatment to prevent the migration
                                                              of reagents or free radicals.
High TCE concentrations in the Residual Source Area
would be addressed by in-situ chemical treatment (as          The combined remedial action is expected to take
described in Alternative 3/4) Alternative 7 utilizes          approximately five years to complete. Operation of the
ISCR, while Alternative 8 utilizes ISCO. Treatment            existing groundwater P&T system was assumed to be
chemicals would be applied in the Residual Source Area        continued for one additional year The system would be
using an in-situ soil mixing method. Prior to the soil        limited to extracting groundwater from collection trench
mixing, steel sheet piles will be installed to an             only and on-site treatment through existing treatment
approximate depth of 40 feet bgs to support stability of      system to avoid: 1) interference with the chemical
soil in the mixing area The uncontaminated upper soil,        reduction in the target treatment area; and 2) impact of
from zero to 10 feet bgs (approximately 9,000 cubic           chemical reducing agents to the existing P&T system.
yards) would be excavated and stockpiled Treatment            For the purpose of the FFS, quarterly groundwater
chemicals (approximately 11,200 pounds of ZVI or              monitoring was assumed to be conducted for the first
 144,000 gallons of Modified Fenton's Reagent) would          three years, followed by semi-annual groundwater
be mixed with contaminated soils using an excavator.          monitoring for the next nine years to momtor the
Target depth zones for in-situ mixing of contaminated         remedial performance. Actual period of operation of the
soils are from 10 to 20 feet bgs, with mixing as deep as      P&T system and groundwater monitoring schedule will
30 feet bgs in some limited areas. After the soil mixing      be determined by EPA after completion of the remedial
is complete, the excavation area would be backfilled          action and bill be based on achieving the performance
with the stockpiled soils.                                    standards set during design.

Approximately five new monitoring wells would be              Alternative 9: Full Area In-Situ Thermal Treatment
installed to replace the existing wells abandoned and
                                                              Capital Cost - $4,504,000
removed prior to the excavation and soil mixing
                                                              Annual O&M - $783,000
activities.
                                                              Total Cost-$6,400,000
Enhanced bioremediation would then be used to address         Implementation Period -2 years
the contamination in the Plume Area. The following
                                                              Thermal Treatment is an in-situ physical treatment via
description assumes that an edible oil substrate (EOS)
                                                              subsurface heating to enhance the volatilization and
would be used as the reducing agent for the treatment,
                                                              subsequent capture and treatment of VOCs. Heating can
though other means are used to augment biodegradation
                                                              be achieved via several options, including electrical-
within the aquifer.
                                                              resistance heating (i.e, passing electricity through soil
It is anticipated that the EOS would be injected at a total   via electrodes), steam injection, and thermal conduction
of approximately 150 locations based on a 20-foot grid        (via electrical heaters).
injection pattern using direct-push technology.
                                                              The FFS assumed electrical resistance heating (ERH) as
Depending on the ability of intrinsic microorganisms to
                                                              the treatment method for this alternative. ERH is an in-
completely reduce site contaminants, bioaugmentation
                                                              situ thermal technology that passes electrical current
(addmg microorganisms to the aquifer) may also be used
                                                              among electrodes placed in the subsurface Electrical
to stimulate complete reductive dechlorination of TCE's
                                                              resistance generates heat that eventually causes water in
breakdown products (dichloroethylene and vinyl
                                                              the subsurface to gently boil. Steam stripping,
chloride) to ethane. The FFS assumed that one
                                                              volatilization and other mechanisms, such as hydrolysis
application of EOS would be required to address TCE
                                                              and increased chemical reaction rates, rapidly remediate
concentrations m the Plume Area
                                                              subsurface contaminants.


                                                                                                               Page 11




                                                                                                        R2-0004265

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Approximately 200 electrodes would be installed to 30        alternatives would provide protection of human health
feet bgs over the approximately 80,000 square feet of the    and the environment by addressing the residual soil and
Full Area A total of 200 vapor recovery wells and 25         groundwater contamination remaining at the site,
temperature monitoring points would also be installed        coupled with engineering controls (including vapor
Operation of the existing groundwater P&T system was         mitigation, if needed, in the future), and institutional
assumed to continue for one year, extracting                 controls.
groundwater from collection trench only, because the
                                                             Compliance with ARARs
extraction wells PW-1 and PW-2 would need to be
abandoned and removed prior to the installation              While groundwater is not currently in use, applicable
activities for the thermal treatment system.                 drinking water standards are exceeded throughout the
It is estimated that total heating treatment would be        site for TCE and a few other constituents TCE levels at
conducted over an eight to 10-month period and vapor         the site exceed the New Jersey Groundwater Quality
and groundwater samples would be collected                   Standards for a Class UA aquifer A CEA is m place to
periodically to monitor system performance For the           prevent use of groundwater while it remains
purpose of the FFS, groundwater monitoring would be          contaminated, and this CEA would remain in place for
conducted for the first year, followed by semi-annual        any of the remedial alternatives considered.
groundwater monitoring for the next nine years to
monitor the remedial performance. Actual period of           All of the remedial alternatives discussed for
operation of the P&T system and groundwater                  remediation of soil and groundwater contamination
monitoring schedule will be determined by EPA after          would meet their respective ARARs and are consistent
completion of the remedial action and will be based on       with all applicable Federal, State, and local laws and
achieving the performance standards set during design.       regulations, in particular, the relevant parts of the New
                                                             Jersey Technical Requirements for Site Remediation
EVAL UA TION OF REMEDIAL AL TERNA TIVES                      (NJ.A C.7:26E).

 Nine criteria are used to evaluate the different            All of the remedial alternatives would meet the NJDEP
remediation alternatives individually and against each       soil cleanup standard for unrestricted use for TCE of 7
other in order to select a remedy, (see table on following   mg/kg. In addition, the active remedial alternatives are
page, "Evaluation Criteria for Superfund Remedial            expected to achieve an Impact-to-Groundwater
Alternatives"). This section of the Proposed Plan            remediation goal of 1 mg/kg, which EPA has developed
profiles the relative performance of each alternative        for TCE at similar sites using NJDEP's Impact to
agamst the rune criteria, notmg how each compares to         Groundwater Soil Screening guidance While not an
the other options under consideration. A detailed            ARAR, this guidance is "To-Be-Considered" cntena
analysis of alternatives can be found in the FFS.
                                                             RCRA land-disposal requirements would govern the
Evaluation Criteria
                                                             disposition of excavated material designated for off-site
Each remedial alternative was screened using the             disposal.
following evaluation criteria to determine which
                                                             No other major ARARs considerations affect remedial
alternative will be most effective in achieving the RAOs.
                                                             decision-making. All the Alternatives would be
Overall Protection of Human Health and the                   completed in compliance with chemical-, action- and
Environment                                                  location-specific ARARs.

Alternative 1 (Continuation of the Existing P&T              Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence
System) would not protect human health or the
environment because it would not address the residual        All of the remedial alternatives are capable of removing,
soil and groundwater contamination. All of the other         reducmg, and/or mitigating the site contaminants.

                                                                                                               Page 12




                                                                                                        R2-0004266

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternatives 2 (Full Area Excavation with Off-Site                                 7/8 (Residual Source Area In-Situ Chemical Treatment
Disposal) and 9 (Full Area In-Situ Thermal Treatment)                              via Soil Mixing and Plume Area Enhanced
are considered to be effective over the long term because                          Bioremediation) is more effective and reliable because
the technologies are more suitable for addressing                                  high contaminant concentrations in the Residual Source
contamination situated in the tight geological conditions                          Area would be effectively reached and degraded by
present at the site.                                                               chemical reduction or chemical oxidation using soil
                                                                                   mixing Also, the enhanced bioremediation technology
                                                                                   introduces chemical amendments into the areas to be
 EVALUATION CRITERIA FOR SUPERFUND REMEDIAL                                        treated that stay active for several months, and this
                ALTERNATIVES
                                                                                   extended contact time may overcome the low
Overall Protecttveness ofHuman Health and the Environment evaluates                permeability of the soil formation, thus it may be more
whether and how an alternative eliminates, reduces, or controls threats to         effective at addressing low concentrations in the Plume
public health and the environment through institutional controls, engineering
controls, or treatment
                                                                                   Area

Compliance with ARARs evaluates whether the alternative meets federal and
                                                                                    Alternative 5/6 (Residual Source Area Excavation with
state environmental statutes, regulations, and other requirements that are         Off-Site Disposal and Plume Area In-situ Chemical
legally applicable, or relevant and appropriate to the site, or whether a waiver   Treatment) is deemed to be the next most effective and
is justified
                                                                                   permanent alternative over the long term Soil
Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence considers the ability of an                 excavation would effectively remove contaminants m
alternative to maintain protection of human health and the environment over        the Residual Source Area. However, in-situ chemical
time
                                                                                   treatments tend to involve quick-acting chemicals
Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume of Contaminants through
                                                                                   (relative to the slower degradation processes mvolved in
Treatment evaluates an alternative's use of treatment to reduce the harmful        enhanced bioremedation), that do not stay active m the
effects of principal contaminants, their ability to move in the environment,       ground for more than a few days Small portions of the
and the amount of contamination present
                                                                                   relatively low contaminant concentrations m the Plume
Short-term Effectiveness considers the length of time needed to implement          Area may be untreated due to the tight formation that
an alternaUve and the risks the alternative poses to workers, the community,       prevents quick contact with the treatment agents
and the environment during implementation
                                                                                   Multiple treatments may be required to effectively treat
Implementability considers the technical and administrative feasibility of         these areas. Alternative 3/4 calls for the same in-situ
implementing the alternaUve, including factors such as the relative                chemical treatment, but throughout the whole treatment
availability of goods and services                                                 zone. It is expected, along with Alternative 1
                                                                                    (Continuation of the Existing P&T System) to have the
Cost includes estimated capital and annual operations and maintenance costs,
as well as present worth cost Present worth cost is the total cost of an            most difficulty with effectiveness over the long term,
alternative over Ume in terms of today's dollar value Cost estimates are            due to untreated residues not reached by the remedial
expected to be accurate within a range of +50 to -30 percent
                                                                                    action and the difficulty of treating DNAPLs.
State/Support Agency Acceptance considers whether the State agrees with
the EPA's analyses and recommendations, as described in the RI/FS and
                                                                                   Alternative 1 (Continuation of the Existing P&T
Proposed Plan                                                                      System) would be the least effective over the long term
                                                                                   Results from samples collected from monitoring wells
Community Acceptance considers whether the local community agrees with
EPA's analyses and preferred alternative Comments received on the
                                                                                   and soil sampling locations indicate that the groundwater
Proposed Plan are an important indicator of community acceptance                   extraction system has not effectively extracted
                                                                                   contaminant from the aquifer or reducing groundwater
 The tight geologic formation, which has limited the
                                                                                   contamination
effectiveness of the current remedy to extract
contaminants from the subsurface, is expected to cause
problems for some of the in-situ treatment technologies
(Alternatives 3/4 and 5/6) during injection of reagents
and chemicals to the contamination zones Alternative
                                                                                                                                  Page 13




                                                                                                                            R2-0004267

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume of                 the nearby community All the alternatives (with the
Contaminants through Treatment                                exception of Alternative 1) will increase truck traffic, but
                                                              Alternative 2 would generate more than twice the
Alternatives 3/4,5/6,7/8, and 9 satisfy CERCLA's              number of trucks on the road to the next nearest
preference for remedies that use treatment to reduce the      Alternative (Alternative 5/6, which also calls for
contaminant mass                                              extensive excavation and off-site disposal). EPA would
                                                              need to work with the community to mitigate the traffic
Alternative 1 (Continuation of the Existing P&T
                                                              impacts as much as possible.
System) has not demonstrated a capacity to reduce the
toxicity, mobility or volume of the Residual Source           Although unlikely, Alternative 9 (Thermal Treatment)
Areas withintightsoil matrix at the site.                     could potentially cause uncontrolled migration of
                                                              contaminants vaporized by the thermal heating and not
Alternative 2 (Full Area Excavation with Off-Site
                                                              captured by the vapor extraction/recovery system The
Disposal) removes the residual source and contaminated
                                                              installation and operations of the electrical system
material from the site, and while some of the excavated
                                                              involved with the Thermal Treatment may also present
material may require treatment before it can be land-
                                                              significant physical hazards and would also require
disposed, therefore it satisfies EPA's preference for
                                                              specific safety precautions and training.
remedies that use treatment as a principal element.
                                                              Remedial technologies in Alternatives 3/4, 5/6 and 7/8
Short-term Effectiveness
                                                              pose some minor short-term health risks to workers
All of the proposed remedial alternatives except for          during the injection activities Alternative 1
Alternative 1 (Continuation of the Existing P&T               (Continuation of the Existing P&T System) poses the
System) are expected to reduce TCE contamination and          least short-term healthrisksto workers.
achieve the RAOs within approximately five years,
                                                              Implementability
which is considered a relatively short duration
Alternative 2 will reduce TCE contamination in the            The materials, system components, skills and labors are
shortest time, with the most certainty. Alternatives 3/4      readily available for all of the technologies and remedial
and 9 are expected to reduce TCE contamination in a           alternatives proposed. Therefore, all alternatives are
short amount of time (between one and two years).             considered implementable. However, Alternative 9 (Full
However, there is higher uncertainty that these               Area In-Situ Thermal Treatment) is more difficult to
technologies will be effective in this aquifer. Alternative   implement due to the considerable system installation,
5/6 is expected to reduce contamination within three          startup and operations, including drilling, wells
years Alternative 7/8 is expected to reduce TCE               installation, and mechanical, electrical, and vapor
contamination in about five years                             extraction and treatment systems
None of the remedial technologies pose insurmountable         Alternative 2 (Full Area Excavation with Off-Site
short-term risks. All the alternatives pose short-term        Disposal) would require a considerable amount of
healthrisksto workers that need to handle hazardous           planning, heavy equipment, structural support (through
substances and work at a large-scale construction             steel sheet piles, etc.), staging areas, and overall
project, and theseriskswill need to be properly managed       coordination of the excavation activities to depths of 20
through worker health and safety programs. These              feet bgs, with 30 feet bgs in some limited areas.
programs are standard practice at all Superfund sites, as     However, these deeper excavations require no
are health and safety measures to assure that no              specialized equipment and are typical in standard
exposures to nearby properties occur during remedial          construction practice. Alternatives involving Enhanced
actions                                                       Bioremediation, ISCR or ISCO (3/4, 5/6, and 7/8) would
                                                              require a considerable number of injection locations, but
Soil excavation in Alternatives 2, and 5/ 6 would also
                                                              all the injection points are on the property, and relatively
create the most additional truck traffic, a disruption for

                                                                                                                 Page 14




                                                                                                          R2-0004268

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

shallow, so not difficult to implement. These in-situ       protective of human health and the environment while
response actions are also constrained by the ability to     effectively addressing TCE contamination in a relatively
effectively deliver the treatment reagents to the           short period of tune This alternative is considered
subsurface soil and in addressing DNAPLs For                readily implementable to overcome the existing site
Alternative 7/8, which requires soil mixing, ISCO is        conditions.
considered more implementable than ISCR, as the
exposure of ZVI to air during the mixing process would      The Preferred Alternative was also determined to be
reduce its effectiveness.                                   effective in achieving the RAOs and ARARs. The
                                                            potential presence of DNAPL m the Residual Source
The groundwater P&T system is already in place at the       Area, which is considered the continuing source of
Site. Although the system may require modification,         groundwater contamination, was considered to be the
Alternative 1 is considered easy to implement.              most difficult problem for the other technologies to
                                                            address effectively, particularly in comparison to
Cost                                                        Alternative 2. The current groundwater collection
                                                            trenches and treatment system would remain in place
The most cost-effective remedial alternatives are
                                                            during the implementation of the preferred alternative
Alternatives 3/4 (($2,800,000-$3,600,000), 7/8
                                                            and for a short period thereafter, and natural
(($4,600,000-55,100,000), and Alternative 9
                                                            bioremediation processes are expected to restore the
($6,4000,000); while Alternative 1 ($10,000,000) and
Alternative 2 ($13,600,000) are the least cost-effective.   aquifer to the cleanup goals within a period of
                                                            approximately one to three years. Overall, the
State/Support Agency Acceptance                             implementation of the Preferred Alternative is expected
                                                            to reduce the duration of the operation of the existing
The State of New Jersey supports the preferred              P&T system to one year after the completion of remedial
alternative as presented in this Proposed Plan.             activities. In addition, the Preferred Alternative is
Community Acceptance                                        expected to minimize the future migration of
                                                            groundwater contamination, reduce or eliminate the
Community acceptance of the preferred alternative will      source of future groundwater contamination, and, reduce
be evaluated after the public comment period ends and       or eliminate the direct contact threat associated with
will be described in the Record of Decision, the            contaminated soil
document that formalizes the selection of the remedy for
the site.                                                   Based on the information currently available, EPA and
                                                            NJDEP believe the Preferred Alternative meets the
SUMMARY OF THE PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE                        threshold criteria and provides the best balance of
                                                            tradeoffs among the other alternatives with respect to the
The Preferred Alternative for the remediation of TCE        balancing and modifying criteria. EPA and NJDEP
contamination at the Ellis Property Superfund site is       expect the Preferred Alternative to satisfy the following
Remedial Alternative 2, which involves the use of           statutory requirements of CERCLA § 121 (b)- (1) be
excavation and off-site disposal, to address                protective of human health and the environment, (2)
contamination in the Full Area.                             comply with ARARs (or justify a waiver), (3) be cost-
                                                            effective; (4) utilize permanent solutions and alternative
The Preferred Alternative was selected over the other
                                                            treatment technologies or resource recovery technologies
remedial alternatives because it is expected to be
                                                            to the maximum extent practicable; and (5) satisfy the
protective of both human health and the environment
                                                            preference for treatment as a principal element, or
while reducing/removing the residual source in a cost-
                                                            explain why the preference for treatment will not be met
effective manner. The Preferred Alternative would
achieve the remediation goals for the principal threat
source areas and for soils. This Remedial Alternative
has been determined to be the most cost-effective and
                                                                                                             Page 15




                                                                                                      R2-0004269

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

COMMUNITY PARTICIPA TION

EPA and NJDEP provide information regarding the
cleanup of the Ellis Property Superfund site to the public
through public meeting, the Admimstrative Record file
for the site, and announcements published in the local
newspaper. EPA and the NJDEP encourage the public
to gain a more comprehensive understanding of the site
and the Superfund activities that have been conducted at
the site.


For further information on the Ellis Property site please
contact

Richard Ho
Remedial Project Manager
(212) 637-4372
ho nchard(51eDa.aov

Natalie Loney
Community Relations Coordinator
(212) 637-3639
lonev natalie(2),epa aov

Carlton Bergman
Site Manager
NJDEP
401 East State Street
Trenton, New Jersey 08625
Phone (609)633-6621

Written comments on this Proposed Plan should be
addressed and mailed to Mr. Ho at.

U S EPA Region 2
                 th
290 Broadway 19 Floor
New York, New York 10007-1866

The public liaison for U.S EPA Region 2 is

George H Zachos
Regional Public Liaison
Toll-free (888) 283-7626
(732)321-6621
US EPA Region 2
2890 Woodbndge Avenue, MS-211
Edison, New Jersey 08837-3679




                                                                     Page 16


                                                             1




                                                                 R2-0004270

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Figure 2
           Page 17




            R2-0004271

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           uaiuD

                                                                                   CD
                                                                                       1
                                                                                   —          n t uc
                                                                                     ««-» I M P S !


                                                                                              «B»«u.


                                                                                       a        w w
                                                                                       O      MM



                                                                                  *—»—•
                                                                                 «—»—«


                                                                                   SSSSTSSSMIS!




                                                                                   w» KX • t i souaun on

                                                                                   Draxt ir w   an xt»


                                                                                   M B V M B B M




                                                                                             sotx w rat
                                                                                               r- tor
                    am foKsm nmniwi «m M*MM mwsv. Mucm ewnr. KOT JOSH
           HVMOnmCH SROUKDWATW ANALYTICAL TCI RESULTS AND TARGET TMATKBNT ARBA                         nmia
                               • tupo> tamer to. *-owt


Figure 3
                                                                                                          Page 18




                                                                                                           R2-0004272

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      Attachment B

     PUBLIC NOTICE

Ellis Property Superfund Site




                                R2-0004273

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

II        Zahm will perform mar- the Medford School of
 cord rtrme, Celtic. Scots and tra-
                                     Music on Aug 30
- T h e ditional music, followed by
                                       The free concerts begm
•on cert students from the N J
                                    al 7 pm in the gazebo
aS6"u School of Music on July 26
                                    Several restaurants and
age of      August's perfomieia are stores will remain open dur-
»pping jazz band Tno of Three on
                                    ing die performances, and
lunton Aug 2, student band M-
                                    families are encouraged to
kerton Town Jazz Jam on Aug 9;
                                    come out and make an
         Bramn Road, playing evening of it Bring your
[issing acoustical roots-folk/blue-
                                    own lawn chairs for seating
I rock grass on Aug 16, acoustic       For more information,
         soloist Mike Kaufman on visit          www villageof-
harlie Aug 23, and students from tauntonforge com


iity Notes.
fy 22-25                Fill a bag (provided) with books for $5
 ' Bible Roundup at        All proceeds benefit the Mount Laurel
i Tabernacle will run Library
n 10 a.m. to II 30         The library is located at 100 Walt
years olds and their Whitman Avenue (next to the post office)
dren, kindergarten For more information, call 856-234-7319,
sixth grade It is a ext. 333 or visit www mtlaurel bbjij us
 , activities, games,
m is free For infor- Register for arts summer campMAPLE SHADE Kgh School ahrtent goverrmS,                                 S ^ ^ ^ Z ^
  emad Lcoo@com-
                          The Medford Arts Center's Rockin'Arts
0576 or mail. 160
                       summer day camp, for children seven to 10 stags the national anthem daring commencement exerdses.
acle. NJ 08088
                       years old, will be held at the MAC. located

np begins 7122
                       at 18 North Mam Street. Thefirstsession
                       runsfromAug 5-9,9 ajn. to noon, with a     What's Up,
lancocas United second session taking placefromAug 12-
 host its "Kingdom 16 Poetry, art, drama, music and story-
  Stand Strong for telling wul provide a myriad of opportuni-                                                                         »*ep»Ye*! Ths IHnfly
 6 pjiL to 830 p m. ties for creativity and fun Campers may                 UNUBU r a m ENvnowrofai. ntui mjnoN           Cwwti wll hat) Eta •mud Blueberry
                                                                    W!7F   ^**P*P        WvnB,
                                                                                        'U!UC    CO M M ENT ON  THI       FoctM Item 1 to 4 pjn. at i s MDI
rch, which is locat- attend one or both sessions smce the activ-                                                          «rew In VtaDMsvn. Fm aanie-
' Road in Mount ities at each will vary                             * y woroaatFuitPoaTMBHXBuurmi                         •lon. OuoDerry ehwuefci beted
                                                                    imir   SUreaPUND  SITE EVESHAM  TTHPN5HIR  NEWJERSET  e ^ end Jem ewflsble tore* cm
                         Space is still available in both sessions                                                        009-207-4334
Jugh grade 6 are The cost is $ 115 per child with preregistra-                             ttWIlMili loaetepaBojof.
ith and fun, featur- honrequiredRegistrations may be made                                                                                     Ths Second
ic, science expen- online at wwwjnedforUartscenter org or by                                                             MoMljuM brrthptooe of Quanr
:. For further mfor- mail Checks made out to Friends of the                                                              •urireeja ABoe Pam. m bt iwu et
                                                                                                                         now end 1 pjn. et 128 tteoton
 stration contact Medford Cultural Arts should be mailed to                                                              Road. CM II S3 CM 8S6-231
le camp director, at FMCA, PO. Box 745, Medford, NJ 08055                                                                1885




                                                                                                     •' »*<
                                                                                                          «•
                      Please include both the child's and parent's
                      names, address, phone number and email                                                                             — T h e
                                                                                                                         W M * IronroeUun OonntBBC
 e at library For more information, call 609-714-1497                                                                    * • f * m te aaai mnm Carrerae
                                                                                                                            MmW Mnta « 1 (Lm. r*, »
e Mount Laurel                                                                                                              « * » Col BMsy Finer « 809-790-
id Media Sale will Members sought for EMT squad                                                                             T02B or nine ( N U i i i t o M i
                                                                                                                            DM •Centra- ki ouoject On)
-27 at the Mount       Browns Mills Emergency Squad is cur-
                    rently looking for new members Free                                                                                 My IS
ids are mvited to training is provided m as little as rune                                                                  ° 8 M ^ Tha ftiom M M Senior
ednesday evening months There are many advantages such                                                                      CBBanckjb am epornor • bug trip
                                                                                                                            p*^jo8ott of PftOadBftjMa. |G5far
New members are as new job skills, eight college credits                                                                                $70 tor mrwrnrnbere
; sale will be open towards a degree and the satisfaction of                                                                5 5 " » « * » by Juno 28 CM 809-
                                                                                                 N—iSoJ? 10007              8930304.
ay from noon to giving back to your community                                                    112-S37-O08
I sun to6.30p.rn       Visit wwwbmcsl89 org or pick up an Ot,                                    HcnMoa.-H.la                          M r so
n to 4 30 p.m. A application at 30 Juliustown Road in                                                                      C S M a n The willing Women
 day on Saturday. Browns Mills                                                                                             ! r . Z. T * *P0neer • "Hen Fry
                                                                                                                           SandaWi" own 11 ajn. to 4 p m. at
                                                                                                                           SL M M BaptW Church In areora
                                                                                                                           ••Dm. C o t to OS per eaneMch. To
                                                                                                                           ptoo»on«toer.«a> 60»893«i7&
                                                                                    N»1W.Nyi0O07-l86«
                                                                                                                                      • * * The Tejsomede
                                                                                                                           beoue,.frDm, 1 to E pjn, M 81
                                                                                                                          .HeeAta Road. Ticket* en $10 par
                                                                                                                           pereon. CeO 800-760-1148
                                                                                                                           _          Mr an _
                                                                                    w*i i » » » M « « < t n i             ^^^^^^^^         TIIB Statsfiood
                                                                                                                          of Mao) Eirame «a hold to emu-
                                                                                 * * * " " <+*                            el rummefn et*t tram 9 pjn. ID
                                                                                                                         jwon at 30B Eon Lene A on eeee




                                                                                                                                                                R2-0004274

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

           Attachment C

PUBLIC MEETING ATTENDANCE SHEET

     Ellis Property Superfund Site




                                     R2-0004275

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       F=PA                         Ellis Property Superfund Site
                                           Public Meeting
                                Evesham Township Municipal Building
                                       Municipal Courtroom
                                  Wednesday, July 24, 2013 @ 6:30 PM
PLEASE PRINT CLEARLY
         NAME                            ADDRESS (with Zip Code)                      E-mail     faL&X'*




                             1? C04+i±    QtZA/^j /Hf4>~rf»1       oK>£?
                                                                             fir/ rLrtTc ©>A^


                                                                                               VhtUm
                             3 &/*hTCi(eu- cr               i^^cre^        -S
                                                                           Oarr>lfY)n.r
                                                                                  \n.r mere,aya^ •   r j y / ? i




                       ok.




                                                                                           R2-0004276

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

— E D A                           Ellis Property Superfund Site
                                          Public Meeting
                               Evesham Township Municipal Building
  ^CrM
PLEASE PRINT CLEARLY
                                      Municipal Courtroom
                                 Wednesday, July 24, 2013 @ 6:30 PM

         NAME          x              ADDRESS (with Zip Code)         E-mail

                                                                        i r - f.i QOU-1
                                                        •




           <




                           i




                                                                <




                                                                               R2-0004277

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        ERr\                              Ellis Property Superfund Site
                                              Public Meeting
                                    Evesham Township Municipal Building
                                           Municipal Courtroom
                                      Wednesday, July 24, 2013 @ 6:30 PM
PLEASE PRINT CLEARLY
              NAME                          ADDRESS (with Zip Code)                      E-mail
                       Of
                 \W
Jafc gay /y                  £-7/ oWfre?

                                 6> Cia        C


       4
                            sf    Go<-per*)fop     Lt\pe   nX^u^^M    0^0$3


  r"g.rroi^

4%                                                                                                               •7
                                                                                                                      V
                            2r


                                                                              j heist*. & xfes.p^, „   K 7   4


                                                                                                   Qryn,
                                                                                              R2-0004278

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

               Attachment D

TRANSCRIPT OF JULY 24,2013 PUBLIC MEETING

         Ellis Property Superfund Site




                                            R2-0004279

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                   Page 1
 1
 2                           E L L I S PROPERTY SUPERFUND SITE

 3
 4                           PROPOSED PLAN PUBLIC MEETING

 5
                               J u l y 24, 2013 6:30p.m.
 6
 7                     Evesham Twsp. Municipal Bldg,
                          984 Tuckerton Road
 8                         Marlton NJ 08053
     PRESENT:
 9   Richard Ho
10
11   Remedial P r o j e c t Manager

12
13   N a t a l i e Loney
     Community R e l a t i o n s Coordinator
14
15   Environmental P r o t e c t i o n Agency
16   John Prince
17
18   C a r l t o n Bergman
19   S i t e Manager
20   NJDEP
21
22   Thomas O'Neill
23   Section Chief
24   NJDEP
25


                            Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                R2-0004280

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                    Page 2
 1           MS. LONEY:         Thank you everyone f o r coming out
 2   on t h i s warm J u l y evening.          My name i s N a t a l i e Loney.
 3   I'm   a community involvement coordinator                    with the EPA,
 4   Environmental P r o t e c t i o n Agency.           Today with me a r e some
 5   of my colleagues          from the s t a t e and some of my colleagues
 6   from EPA.
 7           From EPA t h i s over here i s Robert A l v i .
 8   Robert i s a g e o l o g i s t .    T h i s i s Richard Ho.          Richard Ho
 9   i s remedial p r o j e c t manager who has been managing the
10   site.     John Martin to my r i g h t and your l e f t i s our p r e s s
11   o f f i c e r and the person who w i l l be presenting                tonight i s
12   John P r i n c e .   John P r i n c e i s a s e c t i o n c h i e f i n the Super
13   Fund Program.
14           We a l s o have two f o l k s from New J e r s e y
15   Department of Environmental p r o t e c t i o n .              The f i r s t i s
16   C a r l t o n Bergman.     C a r l t o n i s the former s i t e manager f o r
17   the E l l i s Property Super Fund S i t e .             And next to C a r l t o n
18   i s Tom O ' N e i l l .   Tom i s the s e c t i o n c h i e f with New J e r s e y
19   Department of Environmental P r o t e c t i o n f o r Operation and
20   Maintenance.
21           The purpose of tonight's meeting i s to go over
22   the proposed plan f o r the c l e a n up of the E l l i s                 Property
23   Superfund S i t e .       T h i s i s a p u b l i c meeting.       So a f t e r the
24   p r e s e n t a t i o n we w i l l open the f l o o r f o r question and
25   answer.      We do have a stenographer here who w i l l be


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018               (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-:


                                                                                 R2-0004281

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                          Page 3
 1   recording everything.                So we do ask that when you                    are
 2   asking your question, j u s t p l e a s e s t a t e your name f o r the
 3   record and t r y to t a l k as c l e a r l y as p o s s i b l e .
 4           How   d i d we get here tonight?                This s l i d e     you
 5   can follow along on your hand out.                        T h i s s l i d e k i n d of
 6   gives the over view of Superfund S i t e s .                       S t a r t i n g with
 7   the d i s c o v e r y and i t ' s p l a c e d on the Superfund l i s t .                  We
 8   do our p r e l i m i n a r y assessment and s i t e i n s p e c t i o n
 9   followed by, excuse me,               followed by p l a c i n g i t on the                NPL
10   list.
11           Once a s i t e has been i d e n t i f i e d and p l a c e d           on
12   the Superfund L i s t we then go through a process                           of
13   remedial i n v e s t i g a t i o n and f e a s i b i l i t y     study where we
14   look a t the nature and extent of contamination                            a t the
15   s i t e and we a l s o i n v e s t i g a t e f e a s i b l e —     feasible rather
16   options f o r addressing contamination                     a t the s i t e .
17           Once we come up with something c a l l e d a
18   proposed plan which looks a t the a l t e r n a t i v e s t h a t can be
19   a p p l i c a b l e a t the s i t e , we have a p u b l i c meeting.                We
20   accept comments and then we                 f i n a l l y make our d e c i s i o n as
21   to what remedy w i l l be implemented.                     So we have a
22   proposed remedy which'is a proposed plan and then                                  the
23   record of d e c i s i o n , which i s where EPA makes i t s f i n a l
24   d e c i s i o n as to what remedy w i l l be used a t the                   site.
25           Once the remedy has been s e l e c t e d i t ' s


                            Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FTNK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                        R2-0004282

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                     Page 4
 1    designed and a c t u a l l y implemented.             And i n many cases
 2    once contamination has been removed from the s i t e i t can
 3   q u a l i f y to be and i n many cases s i t e s have been d e l e t e d
 4    from the NPL s i t e .        I n the case of the E l l i s Property
 5   Superfund S i t e we have gone through p r e t t y much
 6   everything on t h i s l i s t .         We have gotten past the record
 7   of d e c i s i o n which happened i n I b e l i e v e 2003, c o r r e c t ?
 8           MR. PRINCE:        '92.
 9           MS. LONEY:        I'm s o r r y .   I was t a l k i n g about
10   the implementation of the remedy.                    So the remedy a t t h i s
11   s i t e was a c t u a l l y b u i l t and implemented i n 2003            —
12           MR. BLTJME:       2000?
13           MR. PRINCE:         2000.
14           MR. BLUME:        Ten y e a r s a f t e r the ROD.
15           MS. LONEY:        Thank you.        A l l these numbers
16   begin to f l o a t i n my head.
17           MR. BLUME:        I t ' s been a long time.           I t ' s not a
18   surprise.
19           MS. LONEY:        Thank you, s i r .       Anyway so what
20   has happened a t t h i s s i t e i s that EPA continues to
21   evaluate any remedy that we implement and i n e v a l u a t i n g
22   the remedy here i t was determined that i t was not a c t i n g
23   as e f f i c i e n t l y as o r i g i n a l l y designed. And t h a t ' s why
24   we're here today.            We're a c t u a l l y coming out with^another
25


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     9 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018               (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                   R2-0004283

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                    Page 5
 1   to f i x , to c o r r e c t , to remove the contamination that was
2    i d e n t i f i e d a t the s i t e .
 3           So what John Prince i s going to be doing i s he
4    i s going to be going over what that proposed remedy i s .
 5   You have u n t i l August 12th to comment on i t .                    The
 6   proposed plan i s a v a i l a b l e on-line and we a l s o have
 7   copies of i t here a t the l i b r a r y .           So you have an
 8   opportunity to ask questions and comment on the p l a n
 9   tonight or i f you p r e f e r , you can e-mail comments to
10   R i c h a r d Ho and on the l a s t page of your handout i s h i s
11   e-mail address, along w i t h the address of the web page
12   that has the proposed p l a n on-line, as w e l l as other s i t e
13   r e l a t e d matters.
14           So I'm going to turn the f l o o r over to John
15   r i g h t now.     Once John i s completed I ' l l come back on and
16   w e ' l l s t a r t the question and answer phase.                 Thank you so
17   much.
18           MR.   PRINCE:        Thank you, N a t a l i e .     So I'm only
19   going to speak f o r about 20 minutes, t r y to keep t h i s
20   short and give the f l o o r over to the community.                         There
21   may be some opportunities f o r us to c l a r i f y some i s s u e s
22   here through questions and answers and comments that you
23   w i l l have and r e a l l y that i s the primary purpose here i s
24   to r e a l l y hear from the community.
25           So I'm going to summarize a l i t t l e more about


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-:


                                                                                  R2-0004284

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 6
 1   Superfund.         You w i l l s o r t of l e a r n a l i t t l e more about
 2   t h a t process i f you don't know i t and then d e t a i l s about
 3   the s i t e .     I am -- when we get to the question and answer
 4   p e r i o d I am going to be r e l y i n g on C a r l t o n Bergman and
 5   Tom   O'Neill from DEP            a f a i r amount of —            the Superfund
 6   p r o j e c t program r e q u i r e s involvement,              cooperation,
 7   c o l l a b o r a t i o n from the s t a t e .   And p r o j e c t s can be l e d by
 8   New   J e r s e y or they can be l e d by              EPA.
 9           I n t h i s case the c o l l a b o r a t i o n has r e a l l y been
10   a l e a d from New          J e r s e y and so some of the s i t e         specific
11   d e t a i l s we w i l l turn to them.            So I'm not going to spend
12   to too much time on some of the past h i s t o r y but the land
13   was   -- we are on Sharp Road.                   I got some maps and we                  will
14   help focus e x a c t l y the l o c a l e , i f you're not                familiar
15   w i t h i t , i n a couple more s l i d e s .           But i t ' s on Sharp Road
16   here i n Evesham.                                ~~"
17          Was      farmland up u n t i l the 1960s.                A Mr.    Ellis
18   and h i s w i f e purchased the property,                     about 36 a c r e s .   1




19   They used a p o r t i o n of that land f o r a drum r e - c o n d i t i o n
20   operation and that involved g e t t i n g drums from other
21   p l a c e s , c l e a n i n g them out and p a i n t i n g them, and
22   r e - s e l l i n g them.
23          And by c l e a n i n g them out that meant that i f
24   they was        -- i t was     a drum that they couldn't                re-use       they
25   b u r i e d i t and the m a t e r i a l that they were c l e a n i n g out


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FJNK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                      R2-0004285

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                   Page 7

1    much of i t seemed to end up on the land.                      And the
2    m a t e r i a l t h a t they were using to c l e a n the drums were
3    i n d u s t r i a l solvents.    So we w i l l h i t on a couple of those
4    d e t a i l s as we go through the process.
 5           DEP,     the s t a t e became involved around            1980
 6   when the Superfund program was,passed i n t o law, a l s o the
 7   same y e a r .     And so i t progressed through some of those
 8   emergency response stages of the d e a l i n g w i t h the
 9   immediate problems around the time the Superfund program
10   was g e t t i n g up and running.          And i t was proposed f o r the
11   Superfund l i s t and placed on the l i s t i n the e a r l y
12   1980s.
13           So I'm going to —           I'm r e a l i z i n g t h i s i s not
14   the best map and t h i s i s j u s t to make sure you're paying
15   attention.         T h i s map was not i n your handout so —                 Route
16   70, okay.         Sharp Road i s about two m i l e s north of here.
17   We have narrowed i n a l i t t l e .          We're s t i l l going
18   north/south Sharp Road.              You can see the s i t e i s here and
19   a c t u a l l y we're r e a l l y j u s t showing a p o r t i o n of the
20   site.     We're showing a portion near Sharp Road of again
21   of a 36-acre property.
22           Now,     what I would l i k e you to note on t h i s
23   f i g u r e i s that we have now turned the o r i e n t a t i o n so that
24   Sharp Road i s on the bottom.                So that north i s now            that
25   way and the area t h a t we're r e a l l y focusing on f o r the


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                 R2-0004286

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                     Page 8
 1   c l e a n up i s down here near Sharp Road.                  I s a relatively
 2   l a r g e property and much of t h i s p a r t f u r t h e r to the e a s t
 3   i s wetland, i t ' s marsh land.             The upland — i t ' s

 4   r e l a t i v e l y f l a t l a n d and the upland s o r t of former

 5   farmland and former area where Mr. E l l i s was doing h i s

 6   operation i s c l o s e r to Sharp Road and I w i l l point out

 7   that r i g h t about here i s our e x t r a c t i o n trench, maybe

 8   halfway on t h i s f i g u r e that you w i l l see i n l a t e r

 9   figures.

10          So what d i d we f i n d back i n the l a t e '80s and

11   e a r l y '90s when we were r e a l l y t r y i n g to f i g u r e out what

12   the s i t e looked l i k e , we found s o i l contamination and

13   ground water contamination.                The s o i l    contaminates

14   predominately were the s o r t of m a t e r i a l s that we might

15   expect from those drums being washed out and dumped on

16   the ground.        And what we saw on the ground water was

17   r e a l l y more i n l i n e with some of these i n d u s t r i a l

18   s o l v e n t s such as PCE or t r i c h l o r o e t h y l e n e TCE that were

19   probably used —          were found i n some of those drums but

20   were a l s o used to c l e a n them out and they're r e l a t i v e l y

21   s o l u b l e and get i n t o the ground water.

22          So we a r e looking a t that time r e l a t i v e l y

23   shallow s o i l contamination.              I t ' s r e a l l y d i f f e r e n t than

24   what we're f i n d i n g i n the ground water.                 So the o r i g i n a l

25   remedy r e a l l y has two components, s o i l s and ground


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063



                                                                                  R2-0004287

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                     Page 9

1    water.      We're r e f e r r i n g to r e l a t i v e l y shallow s o i l

2    contamination and deeper ground water contamination but
3    l e t me e x p l a i n what those terms mean i n terms of t h i s
4    site.
5            As we d r i l l down through the s o i l s i n t h i s
 6   a r e a I ' d l i k e you to p i c t u r e three s o r t of d i f f e r e n t
 7   zones.      Nearest the s u r f a c e i s an area of about 30 f e e t
 8   of k i n d of a sandy shallow Aquifer.                   The water t a b l e i s
 ?   encountered about f i v e to t e n f e e t into the ground.                          This
10   time of —        t h i s p a r t i c u l a r season i t ' s a l i t t l e shallower
11   because i t ' s been a l o t of r a i n .           Then there's about 20
12   f e e t of s a t u r a t e d s o i l and so that 30 f e e t i s where we're
13   seeing contamination from t h i s s i t e .               Below that a second
14    zone i s s o r t of a r e a l l y clayey.          That i s a c t u a l l y
15   r e l a t i v e l y t h i c k here, impenetrable to these s o r t s of
16    contaminants moving through i t .
17           And then deeper below that a r e a s e r i e s of
18   Aquifers that a r e a c t u a l l y used —            t y p i c a l l y used f o r
19    d r i n k i n g water.   Most prominently the Wynona, Mount '
20    L a u r e l and that s t a r t s a t about 100 f e e t below ground
21    surface.       We have t e s t e d a l l of those zones.              The one
22    we're concerned about i s r e a l l y that shallowest area from
23    ground s u r f a c e to about 30 f e e t .
24           So when I t a l k about shallow i n t h i s
25    p r e s e n t a t i o n I'm t a l k i n g about, you know, s o r t of that
                                                                                                 I
                               Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                    R2-0004288

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                   Page 10
 1   say   f i v e to ten f e e t s u r f a c e s o i l s and when we're t a l k i n g
2    about deep —            I'm r e a l l y t a l k i n g about that ground water
 3   t h a t ' s down about 30 f e e t .
4            So we saw some s o i l contaminants.                     The remedy
 5   c a l l e d f o r excavating those and taking those away.                       There
 6   i s t h i s ground water problem w i t h these q u i t e s o l u b l e
 7   i n d u s t r i a l s o l v e n t s p r i m a r i l y TCE.   And the remedy there
 8   was to i n s t a l l a pumping and t r e a t i n g system that would
 9   e x t r a c t contaminants out of the ground.                     Put them through
10   a treatment system.
11           The excavated volumes were s u b s t a n t i a l l y
12   l a r g e r than we o r i g i n a l l y expected during that remedy but
13   that remedy was —               was done i n the l a t e 1990s and then
14   the   pump and t r e a t system went i n t o p l a c e i n the year
15   2000.       So what we have today i s again and I ' l l -- we're
16   narrowing down even f a r t h e r .                Sharp Road i s s t i l l on the
17   bottom and now that e x t r a c t i o n t r e n c h that I r e f e r r e d to
18   e a r l i e r i s up a t the top of the f i g u r e and that wetland
19   area i s o f f of our drawing.
20           We've got treatment f a c i l i t y .                We've got a
21   c o l l e c t i o n system and that c o l l e c t i o n system i s down a t
22   the    end of the d i r e c t i o n the ground water flows.                   That
23   c o l l e c t i o n l i n e or trench and then a number of e x t r a c t i o n
24   w e l l s that are p l a c e d i n some of the areas where the
25   contamination i s higher.                   A l l of t h i s work i s taking


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-!


                                                                                   R2-0004289

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                   Page 11
1    place i n t h i s shallow            zone between ground s u r f a c e and

2    about 30 f e e t below the ground s u r f a c e .

3            So t h i s i s not a --

4            MR. BOWMAN: Could you c l a r i f y where the
5    e x t r a c t i o n w e l l s are?    I thought the e x t r a c t i o n w e l l s
 6   were down by the trench.
7            MR. PRINCE:          We do e x t r a c t water from the
 8   trench and then there i s s e v e r a l l o c a t i o n s of e x t r a c t i o n
 9   w e l l s that a r e i n hot spot areas on the s i t e .
10           MR. BOWMAN: Thank you.
11           MR. PRINCE:          So t h i s i s n ' t an e c s t a t i c
12   process.        The need to make changes i n these s o r t of pump
13   and t r e a t systems a r e something that we a r e very mindful
14   of.     And so t h i s s t a r t e d i n 2000.         Our f i r s t   real
15   r e - v i s i t of t h i s , of t h i s f a c i l i t y began a t about 2006.
16   I t has r e s u l t e d i n some changes i n the way the p l a n t
17   operates to make i t more e f f i c i e n t .             To make i t get more
18   contaminants out of the ground.                     But one of the things
19   that we were f i n d i n g was that there a r e some r e a l l y
20   p e r s i s t e n t l e v e l s of t h i s TCE solvent that we were not
21   making much of an impact on. So that l e d to some broader
22   s t u d i e s of how the p l a n t was performing.                And that has
23   l e d us today to make a couple of f i n d i n g s or conclusions
24   that r e a l l y a r e new information that we — we were not
25   working with when we made the o r i g i n a l d e c i s i o n .               Most


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                   R2-0004290

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                   Page 12
 1   important of which i s that sandy Aquifer that                         I've
 2   r e f e r r e d to has a f a i r l y high content of l i t t l e l e n s e s of
 3   clays.        T h i s mar,   that i s s o r t of mixed i n t o the sand              and

 4   those l e n s e s are f u l l of organic matter because t h a t c l a y

 5   i s high i n organic          content.

 6           And    TCE    tends to adhere to i t . So once i t ' s

 7   gotten i n there and i n the s o r t of c l a y lenses i t makes

 8   i t p r e t t y d i f f i c u l t for the pumping process to p u l l i t

 9   off    again.        I t has very l i t t l e impact on those r e s i d u e s .

10   So that has l e d us to r e a l l y look at —                i n much g r e a t e r

11   d e t a i l on what's remaining there.               So t h i s i s a drawing.

12   It's    i n your hand out.          I t t r i e s to capture where we

13   think the r e a l core of t h i s problem i s . And                  I'm   going to

14   show t h i s p i c t u r e again l a t e r but e s s e n t i a l l y y o u ' l l see

15   that our area of concern i s i n s i d e kind of a contained

16   unit.     I t ' s i n s i d e where our cut off w a l l i s and where

17   our e x t r a c t i o n system i s . What i s the e x t r a c t i o n system

18   doing, i t ' s c o l l e c t i n g water from a couple of hot                 spots

19   but then at the end p u l l s water out, puts i t through the

20   treatment p l a n t and then we re-introduce                   that water,

21   upgraded.         So i t ' s s o r t of meant to f l u s h , s o r t of

22   r e - c i r c u l a t e and have a c l o s e d system that         eventually

23   p u l l s these contaminates out and i f t h i s were a sandy

24   Aquifer that r e a l l y didn't have those c l a y s we might be

25   done by now.           But r e a l l y i t ' s that condition        that i s        —


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212)       869-:


                                                                                   R2-0004291

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 108 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 Page 13

1    we think i s hanging up the c u r r e n t system from doing what
2    we l i k e i t to do.
3           So l e t me j u s t t a l k a l i t t l e b i t about c u r r e n t
4    r i s k s a t the s i t e .     The e a r l i e r work that we had done
 5   w i t h regard to excavating contaminate s o i l ,                primarily
 6   focusing on d i r e c t contact from exposure from someone
 7   being out there.              So those s u r f a c e s o i l exposures have
 8   a l r e a d y been addressed.         The r e s i d u a l contamination i s a
 9   depth.      I t ' s g e n e r a l l y below ten f e e t when you s t a r t
10   encountering the ground water i s when we s t a r t to see
11   it.
12          T h i s p a r t i c u l a r water t h a t ' s contaminated.       Is
13   not   being used as a d r i n k i n g water source we do have --
14   a c t u a l l y l e t ' s f l i p back to the f i g u r e .   Yes, we do have
15   w e l l s s o r t of bounding t h i s zone on the s i d e s .           So we do
16   know where —         what the scope of t h i s i s .           That's v e r y
17   w e l l understood.           So we know that there i s n ' t some w e l l
18   that someone might be using that we wouldn't know about.
19           The flow of the ground water contamination i s
20   c u r r e n t l y e a s t e r l y and has been the whole time t h i s
21   system has been operating.                I n other words, towards the
22   marsh.      And vapor i n t r u s i o n i s a concern that we have a t
23   some Superfund s i t e s where there a r e v i t a l organic
24   compounds i n water and the water moves under e x i s t i n g
25   structures.         And those vapors can a c t u a l l y move again and


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                 R2-0004292

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 109 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                   Page 14
1    move up and appear inside buildings but because there are
2    no buildings near the area of the ground water
3    contamination we're not worried about that here.
4            And so we're r e a l l y concentrating on what to
 5   do about what we have l e f t and how to resolve t h i s which
 6   this i s TCE, i s persisting at the s i t e and the existing
 7   system i s not —           look l i k e i t ' s going to get us there any
 8   time soon.
 9           The remedy i n 1992 established some clean up
10   objectives.         Why are we here.            What are we trying to
11   achieve.        We're not proposing to change any of these.
12   This s o i l objectives e s s e n t i a l l y are met with the
13   exception there i s —             some of the deeper s o i l has VOCs i n
14    i t and we c e r t a i n l y want to address those.                But the other
15   remedial objectives with regard to s o i l have been met and
16    then for ground water we're currently preventing
17   migration because we have t h i s enclosed system.                          We
18    c e r t a i n l y wouldn't want a vapor intrusion problem to come
19    in the future but that's not a prospect that we're
20    looking at soon.
21           And then ultimately what are we after,
22    restoration of the aquifer and that's what brings us back
23    here because that's the one point that we're not
24    reaching. • So this i s a figure that comes out of our
25    f e a s i b i l i t y study.   The dotted areas i n the middle are


                               Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                  R2-0004293

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 110 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                     Page 15

1    q u i t e h e a v i l y contaminated zones and then the l a r g e r a r e a

2    i n the r e d l i n e encompasses a zone t h a t ' s i n i t i a l l y a 100

3    times the c l e a n up standard, the d r i n k i n g water

4    standard.        R e l a t i v e l y e l e v a t e d zones.   These d i s t i n c t i o n s

 5   a r e i n t e r e s t i n g to us i n the f e a s i b i l i t y study because

 6   some technologies that work w e l l when concentrations a r e
 7   very, very high don't n e c e s s a r i l y work w e l l when they're
 8   l e s s e r and- v i c e v e r s a .
 9           So we d i v i d e d the s i t e i n t o these separate
10   u n i t s so t h a t we could look a t some d i f f e r e n t
11   technologies.           So those areas a r e e s s e n t i a l l y what we
12   c a l l the r e s i d u a l source area.           That's that couple of
13   r e a l l y concentrated areas about a h a l f a c r e i n s i z e when
14   you put them a l l together.                 Contaminants s t a r t a t about
15   ten f e e t down.         I t ' s about ten or 20 f e e t t h i c k that we
16   f i n d these r e s i d u e s and i t ' s about 22,000 cubic yards of
17   material.
18           The l a r g e r c i r c l e when we add a l l those
19   together, the f u l l area down here a t the bottom i t ' s
20   about two a c r e s i n t o t a l .        Again, we don't encounter
21   these contaminants u n t i l we get down to about t e n f e e t
22   and i t says ten —             from ten f e e t down to about 20, 25
23   f e e t down that we f i n d the bulk of these c o n s t i t u e n t s .
24           So we came up w i t h many a l t e r n a t i v e s and I'm
25   happy to go i n t o the d e t a i l s of them i n the question and


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                     R2-0004294

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 111 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                          Page 16

 1   answer period i f you care to go i n t o more d e t a i l .                           And I

 2   have s l i d e s on each one of them but                    I'm j u s t going to

 3   concentrate on —              I'm going to t r y and keep i t a l i t t l e

 4   b i t s i m i l a r so that we can get to that p a r t and give you

 5   some d e t a i l s on p a r t i c u l a r a l t e r n a t i v e s .    So a l t e r n a t i v e

 6   one was —         w e l l , l e t ' s - u s e as a b a s e l i n e    that we keep the

 7   e x i s t i n g system operating as i t ' s being operating and

 8   don't change anything.                  And our modeling of the

 9   performance of that are over a 30-year performance

10   window.

11           We don't t h i n k we're going to remove a l o t of
12   contaminates because i t s -- every day i t ' s p u l l i n g
13   contaminants out of the ground but we don't see that i t ' s
14   going to move the b a l l towards a c t u a l l y r e s t o r i n g the
15   ground water because of that intimate                            relationship
16   between these c l a y s and the a b i l i t y of the pumping system
17   to remove them.
18           Why don't we go to j u s t quickly,                     I'll     turn
19   to —      a l t e r n a t i v e two i s -- c o n s t r u c t i n g    a remedy where
20   we excavate t h i s m a t e r i a l         i s not unheard of.              We can dig
21   i t out and so we've r e s e r v e d that a s an a l t e r n a t i v e and
22   we have a l s o —          and then I'11           j u s t b r i e f l y mention the
23   nature of the other a l t e r n a t i v e s and that i s s i n c e we
24   selected —          back i n 1992 a pump and t r e a t system a t a
25   s i t e l i k e t h i s was p r e t t y much the gold standard.                       I t was


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                          R2-0004295

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 112 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 Page 17
1    the way we d i d b u s i n e s s .    That's, you know, pump and

2    t r e a t , sandy Aquifer, VOCs, s o l u b l e , you put i n a pump
3    and t r e a t   system.
4           Years have passed.            We have learned a l o t i n
5    our agency and the i n d u s t r y that does these s o r t s of
 6   c l e a n ups has learned a l o t about other options that a r e
7    out there.        And so today when we d i d t h i s f e a s i b i l i t y
 8   study on these remnants we found a whole v a r i e t y of other
 9   things that we could look a t .               I ' l l mention j u s t a couple
10   chemical o x i d a t i o n where you introduce chemicals i n t o the
11   ground that r e a l l y r e a c t with and destroy these
12   constituents.
13          There are many s i t e s where we've used
14   b i o l o g i c a l treatments by way of b a c t e r i a t h a t use VOCs
15   l i k e t h i s as food.      We can introduce them i n t o the
16   Aquifer and k i n d of feed them and encourage them to break
17   down the VOCs by consuming them.                   We concluded        that t h a t
18   a c t u a l l y was not a good f i t a t t h i s s i t e .       And then we
19   have a l s o a t other s i t e s used a kind of thermal heat
20   treatment process by l i t e r a l l y heating the ground
21   surface.        Putting e l e c t r o d e s i n t o the ground and h e a t i n g
22   i t to the degree where you're heating the water but a l s o
23   heating these v o l a t i l e s and g e t t i n g them i n t o vapor s t a t e
24   and then they r i s e and you c o l l e c t them a t the ground
25   surface.        So the other a l t e r n a t i v e s look a t v a r i o u s


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                 R2-0004296

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 113 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                    Page 18
 1   combinations         of those t h i n g s .     Excavating and           chemical
 2   oxidations or heat treatment of the core a r e a .                         Some
 3   other combinations            that we thought were appropriate and I
 4   have d e t a i l s on a l l of them and we can t a l k about them i f
.5   you    like.
 6           I'm going to f i n i s h up my remarks though.
 7   We'll go r i g h t to the l a s t l i n e and I w i l l j u s t t a l k a
 8   l i t t l e about our p r e f e r r e d a l t e r n a t i v e which i s
 9   a l t e r n a t i v e two,   the excavation remedy.
10           And we a r e p r e f e r r i n g t h i s for a couple of
11   reasons that r e a l l y t i e back to the same reason that the
12   pump and t r e a t system i s s t r u g g l i n g to do t h i s job.              And
13   that i s , you know, there i s some c l a y s down there.
14   They're going to bind t i g h t l y i n a chemical o x i d a t i o n
15   process too.           They are going to make i t somewhat more
16   d i f f i c u l t f o r a thermal heating process to operate.                     And
17   there are some u n c e r t a i n t i e s w i t h operating t h a t s o r t of
18   system i n t o the ground that we f e e l i n t h i s case are
19   going to -- may put us i n a p o s i t i o n where we might get
20   say 75 percent of the way                there through these
21   c o n s t i t u e n t s i n the ground treatment methods but s t i l l              be
22   faced w i t h e l e v a t e d l e v e l s that w i l l s t i l l want to
23   operate the pump and t r e a t system and we s t i l l wouldn't
24   be a t the...
25           So t h a t ' s our r a t i o n a l e for t h i s p a r t i c u l a r


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                    R2-0004297

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 114 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 Page 19

1    alternative.        I do want to mention that i t i s the most

2    expensive a l t e r n a t i v e that we considered.             So obviously-

3    c o s t i s an important f a c t o r to a l l of u s . And i t does

4    involve the most trucks needing to come to that

 5   facility.       A l l of them a r e involved,          some t r u c k s .   Some

 6   of the other a l t e r n a t i v e s involve some excavating.                   This

 7   i s the one that i n v o l v e s i t the most.            I n v a s i v e and

 8   complete l e v e l i t would look simply l i k e t h i s .

 9         The     f a c i l i t y would —   the pump and t r e a t

10   system would remain there.               We would use sheeting to

11   i s o l a t e the area of contamination and do water i t so we

12   can excavate i t i n the dry r a t h e r than excavating wet

13   s o i l s because we have to get down i n t o the s a t u r a t e d

14   zone.     We move the shallow           s o i l s aside, excavate those

15   material.        I t w i l l be placed on trucks and moved to a

16   secure d i s p o s a l f a c i l i t y that we would s e l e c t and —           that

17   was   appropriate       f o r t h i s s o r t of m a t e r i a l and then we

18   r e t u r n the s u r f a c e s o i l s to the excavation       and then

19   b a c k f i l l i t up to the ground surface, p u l l out the

20   sheeting and through a l l t h i s process we a c t u a l l y leave

21   the ground water, the e x i s t i n g system i n p l a c e and our

22   expectation       i s that we might need to operate i t f o r some

23   period of time.          We're estimating          about a year that we

24   would continue to operate i t .

25           And   t h a t ' s a l l we have to contribute on our


                             Fink & Camey Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018               (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                 R2-0004298

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 115 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                   Page 20

1    side.     N a t a l i e , you're going to s o r t of give some
2    summaries on what --
3            MS. LONEY:        Exactly.       On your hand out there
4    were copies made.            I s there anyone remaining              t h a t does
 5   not have a copy of the hand out.                    Keep your hands up.
 6   Anyway I j u s t wanted to again go over where we -are now
 7   and your involvement.              The comment p e r i o d f o r t h i s
 8   Superfund s i t e i s 30 days.             The ad was placed i n the
 9   l o c a l paper on the 12th of J u l y and the comment p e r i o d
10   c l o s e s on the 12th of August.              You can e-mail your
11   comments to Richard and h i s address i s there.                        You can
12   a l s o f a x on the 19th f l o o r but you can send i t to Richard
13   Ho.     Everybody knows who he i s . You can send i t to h i s
14   fax or to h i s e-mail.
15           I do have some copies of the proposed p l a n
16   here.      I t i s the t e c h n i c a l document.         So i f anyone i s
17    i n t e r e s t e d i n looking a t i t I do have them.              I w i l l leave
18    them i n the back of the room.                 I t ' s also available
19    on-line i f you don't want to have the hard copy.                             It is
20    a v a i l a b l e a t that web address.          So you can e-mail and you
21    can fax your comments i f you p r e f e r to wait or you can                             i
22    submit your comments tonight.
23           The great thing about p u b l i c meetings i s i t
24    o f f e r s a l l of you an opportunity to hear what your
25    neighbor's       concerns and questions and i s s u e s a r e and you


                               Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                   R2-0004299

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 116 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 Page 21

1    a l s o get an opportunity to hear the d i r e c t answers to any

2    questions you may have from EPA.

3           So we r e a l l y want you to take advantage of our

4    presence here tonight.             To ask us any questions or

5    concerns you may have about the remedy.                      You're not

6    r e q u i r e d to submit your comments tonight.                You have u n t i l

7    the 12th of August.            So I'm going to open up the f l o o r

 8   now f o r question and answer.              One thing when you a r e

 9   going to ask your question, p l e a s e s t a t e your name f o r

10   the stenographer and i f you have a name that has a l o t of

11   vowels i n i t she may ask you to s p e l l i t as w e l l .                 Thank

12   you.

13          MS. MINTZ:        Susan Mintz, 27 M i t c h e l l Court

14   here i n Marlton.         What i s the time l i n e from the

15   beginning of t h i s p r o j e c t u n t i l the completion f o r the

16   removal of the contaminated s o i l s ?               That's the f i r s t p a r t
17   of my question.          The second part i s have you looked a t
18   the Sharp Road access f o r your equipment because there i s
19   r e a l concern f o r the s a f e t y on the i n t e g r i t y of the Sharp
20   Road a c c e s s ?
21          MR. PRINCE:         So here i s our schedule as we can
22   speak about i t today and yes, your handouts s a y the 9th
23   but i t i s the 12th.          We had some l a s t minute changes on
24   the l a s t page and obviously we didn't q u i t e get them a l l
25   into your house.           I f we r e c e i v e comments t h i s August our


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                R2-0004300

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 117 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 Page 22

1    r e s p o n s i b i l i t y i s to be responsive to those comments

2    which doesn't mean we're going to change the remedy, but

3    means that we need to demonstrate that we have responded

4    to them.        We understand        them.    There are l o t s of v a l u a b l e

 5   information t h a t we get from t h i s comment period.                      And   I
 6   am going to answer your question.
 7          And a f t e r -we r e c e i v e those our goal would be
 8   to s e l e c t the remedy which i s i n something c a l l e d a
 9   Record of D e c i s i o n by September of t h i s y e a r .             I f we
10   r e c e i v e a l o t of comments we may not be able to meet t h a t
11   deadline but l e t ' s assume that we s i g n t h i s remedy, t h i s
12   year, our next step i s to design something that we                          can
13   implement and that i s something that we can put out to
14   b i d and h i r e a c o n s t r u c t i o n company to do and we          call
15   that the remedial design.               That t y p i c a l l y takes a year,
16   a t l e a s t a year to 18 months to implement.                   Now    we're
17   talking       2015.
18           When we are f i n i s h e d with the remedial design
19   t h i s i s one of many p r o j e c t s that EPA does around the
20   country, the funding f o r the c l e a n up i n t h i s case i s not
21   coming from p r i v a t e p a r t y .     I t ' s coming out of the s t a t e
22   and f e d e r a l o f f i c e s .   So there i s a budget that congress
23   gives us each year f o r implementing cleanups each year.
24   And so we w i l l make a p r e s e n t a t i o n and I'm expected                2015
25   that we're ready to go ahead w i t h t h i s p r o j e c t and there


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                 R2-0004301

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 118 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 Page 23
1    w i l l be other p r o j e c t s and i t ' s p o s s i b l e that we w i l l not
2    be funded that year.            But w e ' l l g e t funded e v e n t u a l l y i f
3    the EPA -- i f we make a commitment to implementing a
4    remedy i t w i l l get implemented e v e n t u a l l y .          Not e a r l i e r
 5   than s t a r t i n g i n 2015 and the p r o j e c t e d time frame i s
 6   about a year to implement i t .
 7          Your second question was about Sharp Road
 8   access?
 9          MS. MINTZ:        The i n t e g r i t y , because i n order
10   for   i t to support t h i s equipment that you're proposing i n
11   your a l t e r n a t i v e , you would r e a l l y have great concerns
12   about the i n t e g r i t y of that s t r u c t u r e .     I t wouldn't meet
13   the demands of the weight and the t r a f f i c .
14          MR. PRINCE:         So w e ' l l —    there i s two things
15   that we do i n t h i s design process.                One i s develop a
16   t r a n s p o r t a t i o n plan that we can b r i n g to the community
17   and say w e l l , okay, where do your school buses run.                         What
18   are the best routes f o r us to come and go presuming t h a t
19   there w i l l be t h i s many, many t r u c k s .          And we a l s o need
20   to do engineering s t u d i e s to ensure that the l o c a l
21   i n f r a s t r u c t u r e matches what we plan to do. And i f i t
22   doesn't we're going to have to f i g u r e out a way to g e t i t
23   to match.       So I'm glad you're r a i s i n g t h i s          question.
24          MS. LONEY:        Yes, s i r .
25          MR. ROACH:        William Roach of Legacy Oaks. I


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                 R2-0004302

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 119 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                  Page 24

1    haven't n o t i c e d any e x t r a c t i o n w e l l s on the north s i d e of

2    Sharp Road.         Am I to b e l i e v e the plume doesn't go out

3    that f a r ?
4           MR. PRINCE:           The ground water moves i n t h i s
 5   d i r e c t i o n and t h a t ' s north.
 6          MR. ROACH:          I'm sorry, west.          I'm s o r r y west.
7           MR. PRINCE:           Carlton, can you speak to w e l l s
 8   that we have i n that d i r e c t i o n ?
 9          MR. BERGMAN:           There a r e no w e l l s on the west
10   s i d e of Sharp Road.           We've never found any contamination
11   i n the ground water.
12           MR. ROACH:         Are we to b e l i e v e there i s no
13   plume on the west s i d e of Sharp Road?
14           MR. BOYLE:         Carlton, excuse me, i s n ' t there a
15   w e l l a c r o s s the s t r e e t ?   I'm John Boyle.         I own the
16   property d i r e c t l y -- i t ' s that t r i a n g u l a r piece, one up
17   from there.
18
             MR. BERGMAN:           Good to f i n a l l y meet you.
19
             MR. BOYLE:          I b e l i e v e there i s one monitoring
20
     well     across
21
             MR. BERGMAN:           I don't know what i t i s .          It is
22
     not ours.
23
             MR. LYNN:         Jack Lynn, 38 M i t c h e l l Court,
24
     Marlton.        When we t a l k about that many cubic yards how
25
     many truck loads i s that?

                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                 R2-0004303

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 120 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                  Page 25

1           MR.    PRINCE:      About 5,000.

2           MR.    LYNN:     5,000.
3           MR.    PRINCE:      About three an hour 200              days,
4    about three an hour e i g h t hours a day.                   That's f o r about
5    a year.
 6          MR.    SHEETZ:      Guy Sheetz.         Does the s t a t e of
7    New   J e r s e y c u r r e n t l y hold the OME c o n t r a c t ?
 8          MR.    O'NEILL:       Yes.     We c o n t r a c t out the
 9   operation and maintenance c u r r e n t l y f o r our p l a n t .
10          MR.    SHEETZ:      W i l l that continue to operate
11   even a f t e r t h i s remedy here i s implemented?
12          MR.    O'NEILL:       The p l a n t per t h i s proposed p l a n

13   i s expected to run f o r approximately a year post the

14   removal a c t i o n which was removing the s o i l but u n t i l that

15   i s implemented we w i l l continue to operate the p l a n t i n

16   order to maintain c o n t r o l of the plumb a t that                   site.

17          MR.    SHEETZ:      Thank you.

18          MR.    KLUGER:       I have an extensive comment.                Is

19   that okay?
20          MS.    LONEY:      That's f i n e .
21           MR.   KLUGER:       You say that now when you                haven't
22   heard i t y e t . ,Okay.          My name i s Mark Kluger and I'm                the
23   p r e s i d e n t of a company c a l l e d Day Jack and Day J a c k does
24   what I do i s I help companies market remediation
25   technologies.          I've worked e x t e n s i v e l y w i t h EPA r e g i o n


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                R2-0004304

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 121 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                        Page 2 6

1    two, w i t h New J e r s e y DEP.        So I have some e x p e r t i s e i n

2    remediation technologies and I would l i k e to d i s c u s s one

3    of the technologies that you f o l k s looked a t , one of the

4    a l t e r n a t i v e s and I have comments about the proposed p l a n

5    responses to t h a t .       So I would l i k e to get a l l that on

 6   the r e c o r d .

 7          Everybody comfortable w i t h t h a t ?

 8          MR. BLUME:        Could you t e l l us where you're

 9   from again and what your p r o f e s s i o n a l c r e d e n t i a l s are?

10          MR. KLUGER:        I'm a s a l e s and marketing

11   t e c h n i c a l resource graduate of Johns Hopkins U n i v e r s i t y .

12   I have been doing t h i s now s i n c e 1970 —

13          MR. BLUME:        Any l i c e n s e s ?

14          MR. KLUGER:        No p r o f e s s i o n a l l i c e n s e s .     I'm a

15   member of RTIC.

16          MR. BLUME:        Have you been q u a l i f i e d as an
17   expert w i t n e s s i n any hearings?
18           MR. KLUGER:       No.
19           MR. BLUME:       Thank you.
20           MS. LONEY:       Before you s t a r t your comments I
21   want to make i t c l e a r we want to make sure everybody e l s e
22   has an opportunity to ask questions.                          So we would ask
23   that you t r y to make them as simple as p o s s i b l e .
24           MR. KLUGER:        I t shouldn't take long.                      The
25   technology that I'm going to be t a l k i n g about i s


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                        R2-0004305

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 122 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 Page 27

1    e l e c t r i c a l r e s i s t a n c e heating which was a l t e r n a t i v e nine

2    i n the proposed p l a n .          And I think there i s some

3    s i g n i f i c a n t advantages p r i m a r i l y i n g r o s s l y reduced t r u c k

4    traffic.       We're t a l k i n g about f i v e percent a t most of

5    these, f i v e to s i x thousand t r u c k s and the —                another b i g

 6   advantage i s expense and we're applying remedial,

 7   remedial s o l u t i o n g e t t i n g funding f o r these things,

 8   expense i s going to be s i g n i f i c a n t .

 9          This technology has been used e x t e n s i v e l y i n

10   New J e r s e y .   We have completed four p r o j e c t s i n mass

11   reductions.         We're t a l k i n g about more than 99 percent

12   performing i n s o l v e n t s .        I t ' s been used i n EPA Superfund

13   p r o j e c t s and besides the four a l r e a d y completed t h e r e a r e

14   f i v e that a r e a c t i v e l y c u r r e n t .   I w i l l cut to the

15   important p a r t s here.

16           I t was s t a t e d by Mr. P r i n c e that when they

17   looked a t e l e c t r i c a l r e s i s t a n c e heating that i t would not

18   c l e a n up some of these c l a y systems.               That i s an

19   i n c o r r e c t statement.       We have had extensive experience

20   cleaning up c l a y .         We've cleaned up rock.              We've cleaned

21   up sand.        So the t e c h n i c a l comment that t h i s         technology

22    i s somehow inappropriate f o r c l a y I take i s s u e w i t h and

23    I ' d l i k e to understand         the b a s i s of that      statement.

24           MR. PRINCE:          We propose t h i s as one of the
25    alternatives.          We c e r t a i n l y consider i t a v i a b l e one when


                              Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
       West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                  R2-0004306

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 123 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                   Page 28

 1   we're weighing i t against some of the other a l t e r n a t i v e s

2    and I'm not going to go i n t o too much more d e t a i l

 3   tonight.
 4          MR. KLUGER:          Well, the vendor I work w i t h w i l l
 5   a b s o l u t e l y guarantee r e s u l t s .   I f you say I want 99
 6   percent of the contamination mass out of that c l a y they

 7   w i l l provide that and they w i l l guarantee those r e s u l t s .

 8          There's another comment about i n the t e c h n i c a l

 9   document, about d i f f i c u l t y of using t h i s technology for

10   non-aqueous phase l i q u i d s , DNAPLs s p e c i f i c a l l y .        I t turns

11   out that DNAPLs a c t u a l l y i s e a s i e r for t h i s technology

12   than aqueous phase contaminants.                   I t ' s the f i r s t thing to

13   go.     So there are t e c h n i c a l i s s u e s w i t h the document that

14   we would l i k e to address.

15           MS. LONEY:         I w i l l s a y t h i s , that the w r i t t e n

16   comment that a r e submitted to EPA, for example, the

17   t e c h n i c a l comments that w i l l be submitted, EPA responds

18   to a l l of those t e c h n i c a l i s s u e s and those kinds of

19   comments i n something c a l l e d a responsiveness                  summary and

20   that responsiveness            summary i s part of that Record of

21   Decision.

22           When EPA makes i t s f i n a l d e c i s i o n about any

23   remedy that Record of D e c i s i o n has the d e c i s i o n as to

24   what remedy w i l l be implemented and i t responds to the

25   t e c h n i c a l questions and that p a r t i c u l a r document would be


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                   R2-0004307

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 124 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                     Page 29

1    made p u b l i c .    So once EPA makes i t s d e c i s i o n we w i l l have

2    a w r i t t e n response to the t e c h n i c a l questions that were

3    raised.
4           MR. LEVENSON:           J a y Levenson, Walway Drive.                  My
 5   concern i s airborne contaminants both during the
 6   excavation.          We have a l o t of c o n s t r u c t i o n near our
 7   community and every time somebody s t a r t s digging we get
 8   coated w i t h dust.          You're going to have as many as 5,000
 9   truck loads going w i t h i n a h a l f a mile of where I l i v e ,
10   maybe a quarter of a mile.                  What are you going to do
11   about c o n t r o l l i n g the dust?
12          MR. PRINCE:          We are, as I hope might imagine,
13   very s e r i o u s about dust because we can't implement a
14   remedy without spreading contamination                        around, then we
15   shouldn't be doing i t .              And so we have a number of
16   processes that we implement.                    We have e s s e n t i a l l y a dust
17   c o n t r o l p l a n during the a c t u a l c o n s t r u c t i o n t h a t ' s b u i l t
18    into how we operate.              We have perimeter a i r monitoring
19    that t e l l s us i f there i s a r e l e a s e that we need to be
20    responsive to and then there i s a whole s o r t of s e r i e s of
21    steps that we undertake to' respond to t h a t .                        Essentially
22    stopping whatever i t i s that we're doing and f i g u r i n g out
23   why    there would be dust.
24           And   then with regard to truck t r a n s p o r t i s s u e ,
25    which I think i s probably p a r t of your question, t h a t ' s


                              Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
       West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                     R2-0004308

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 125 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 Page 30

1    something we need to take v e r y s e r i o u s as w e l l and the

2    t r u c k s need to be cleaned and s e a l e d before they l e a v e .

3          So a l l of that information i s m a t e r i a l ,

4    whatever the implemented remedy i s t h a t ' s the s o r t s of

 5   things that we p u l l out i n the remedial design stage and

 6   prepare so that we -can c l e a r l y communicate them to the

 7   community before we implement i t .                 So that we would

 8   a c t u a l l y be back here to e x p l a i n how we're going to meet

 9   that s p e c i f i c a l l y , whatever the implemented remedy i s

10   before we s t a r t the work.           So you w i l l a c t u a l l y be able

11   to hear us d e s c r i b e i n d e t a i l how those things, would be

12   addressed here.

13         MR. LEVENSON:           Sounds l i k e i f you're p u t t i n g

14   a i r q u a l i t y monitors out there you're going to get

15   information a f t e r the f a c t not before.               So we w i l l
16   already have been contaminated                by the time you f i g u r e out
17   that we've had some dust problems.
18          MR. PRINCE:         For dust c o n t r o l we a c t u a l l y do
19   r e a l t i m e a i r monitoring so i t ' s alarmed back to the work
20   station.       So i f i t ' s dust a t the perimeter —               we have
21   s o r t of t i e r s of t h i s where there i s dust monitoring a t
22   the a c t u a l excavation area and loading area and then
23   there's perimeter a i r monitoring,                t h a t ' s a second      tier.
24          And i n each case they're r e a l time.                  I n other
25   words, they a c t u a l l y w i l l see dust and alarm the workers,


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                 R2-0004309

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 126 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 Page 31

1    h e a l t h and s a f e t y o f f i c e r who has c o n t r o l over    stopping

2    the job.       I t ' s independent of the a c t u a l engineer              running

3    the job, h e a l t h and s a f e t y o f f i c e r s separate r o l e i n the

4    way we operate these s i t e s .           And they a r e instantaneous.

 5   They a c t u a l l y measure dust and the way we run these jobs

 6   i s we assume dust i s contaminated even i f i t ' s v e r y w e l l

 7   may not be, we assume t h a t i t i s . So dust we can

 8   measure.

 9           We don't w a i t to see whether they're

10   chemicals.        We a c t u a l l y a r e looking for r e a l t i m e .     We're

11   looking f o r r e a l t i m e measurements.

12           MS. GAMBLE: J e r r y Gamble.             My question i s

13   t h i s area i s not fenced i n or i d e n t i f i e d i n any way t h a t

14   k i d s that p l a y there or whatever; i s that c o r r e c t ?

15           MR. PRINCE:        I t ' s fenced.

16           MS. LONEY:        There a r e signs there as w e l l .

17           MR. O'NEILL:         There a r e signs on the main

18   road.      We do not have s i g n s around the perimeter.

19           MR. PRINCE:        So your concern i s f o r

20    trespassing children?

21           MS. GAMBLE: Yeah, f o r s a f e t y and people have

22    a r i g h t to know i f you r e a l l y don't want people walking

23    on that property.

24           MR. O'NEILL:         We have a d a i l y presence          there
25    currently.        I mean, f o r —       during the week and they do


                              Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
       West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                 R2-0004310

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 127 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                   Page 32

1     keep an eye out f o r people t r e s p a s s i n g on that property

2     during the day, during the week.
3            MR.   PRINCE:      I f I may,     our concerns i n your
4     case our concerns would be s l i p , t r i p , f a l l ,             ticks,
5     exposure     to, going out i n the woods and not to chemical
 6    contaminants      because the m a t e r i a l that we're concerned
7     about i s b u r i e d i n the ground.           I t i s n ' t a c c e s s i b l e to a
 8    t r e s p a s s e r c h i l d coming onto the land.         Okay.
 9           Doesn't mean that I don't acknowledge that
10    someone might be hurt by t r e s p a s s i n g on a property, but
11    i t wouldn't be because of the                contaminants.
12           MR.   BOYLE:      I'm John Boyle.           We own     the
13    property a t 1030 Sharp Road.                My question i s piggybacked
14    off    the p r i o r question a t Tom.          I don't mean to dispute
15    but the property i s not fenced.                 The i n f r a s t r u c t u r e i s
16    fenced but there i s no signage.                 The s i g n s were
17    o b l i t e r a t e d by DeLuca p l a n t i n g t r e e s i n the front of the
18,   signs that block i t .           I think maybe people never even saw
19    them.
20            I would l i k e to know what you guys are going to
21    do?     J u s t y e s t e r d a y I chased k i d s o f f the property.             I'm
22    there every day.           I'm the c l o s e s t person there.              There
23    were k i d s i n the swamp i n the back c o l l e c t i n g f r o g s .
24    There i s a chronic t r e s p a s s i s s u e on the property.                   There
25     are   chronic b i r d hunters who          a c c e s s the property.           There


                              Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
       West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                   R2-0004311

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 128 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                   Page 33

1    are a d u l t people walking t h e i r dogs.              There's unfeathered

2    access to the property and as the town has allowed more

3    and more r e s i d e n t i a l b u i l d i n g around t h i s s i t e , t h e r e ' s

4    j u s t more foot t r a f f i c .     There used to be —             p r i o r to

5    t h i s there was never foot t r a f f i c .

 6          There i s e x t e n s i v e foot t r a f f i c along the

7    property now.          There i s zero signage and maybe most of

 8   the people i n the room would agree, d i d anybody see the

 9   s i g n when they bought t h e i r property that c l a r i f i e d

10   e x a c t l y what was there.          So —

11           MR. O'NEILL:         There i s a r a t h e r l a r g e s i g n on

12   the fence.

13           MR. BOYLE:        The s i g n was o b l i t e r a t e d when

14   DeLuca planted t r e e s i n front of i t to purposely block

15   the s i g n .    Everybody here knows t h a t .             The t r e e s d i e d

16   because they weren't maintained because of the s o i l .                            My

17   question would be and again, I want to back up and say I

18    applaud and I thank everybody f o r being here.                         We a l l

19   want t h i s cleaned up.            But there i s some concern that

20    there i s , you know, unfeatured a c c e s s .               We're a l l a d u l t s

21    and we know to s t a y away but there a r e a l o t of

22    uneducated       f o l k s and there r e a l l y i s -- we w i l l agree
23    there i s poor signage or poor communication r e l a t i v e to
24    the hazards.
25           And you mentioned i n your own o b j e c t i v e s i s to


                               Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                  R2-0004312

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 129 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 Page 34

1    prevent contacts w i t h s o i l and ground water
2    contaminates.         I n the back of that property, I mean, i t ' s

3    a v e r y swampy a r e a .     There's tons of f r o g s .          The k i d s go

4    back there and c o l l e c t frogs.           I know the f e l l o w s t h a t

5    run the s i t e .     I mean, I've been there many times.

6    They're not there every day.                 There i s not a presence on

7    s i t e every day.        I know the OM manager there                —

 8          MR. O'NEILL:          I didn't intend to mislead.

 9   They a r e there f r e q u e n t l y .

10          MR. BOYLE:         But I see many other EPA s i t e s

11   that a r e perimeter fenced i n s i t e s .            The one that comes

12   to example i s on New Albany Road i n Moorestown which was

13   a s i m i l a r l y contaminated s i t e and they blocked that o f f

14   entirely.       Why don't we have that and we're t a l k i n g about

15   a p r o j e c t t h a t ' s going to be four years i n advance of

16   now.     Recognizing t h a t there i s s i g n i f i c a n t l y more foot

17   traffic.      Again, I'm not worried about me.                    I'm not

18   worried about my employees.                 I'm not worried about the

19   a d u l t s here.   We have a growing problem and I think i t

20   needs to be d i s c u s s e d a t l e a s t .

21          MR. O'NEILL:          We w i l l acknowledge the

22   environment i s changing i n the neighborhood.                       When we

23   b u i l t the p l a n t i t i s d i f f e r e n t than i t i s now. I ' l l

24   b r i n g t h i s back.    We w i l l go over w i t h our community

25   r e l a t i o n s group and w e ' l l come up w i t h an answer.             We do


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                 R2-0004313

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 130 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 Page 35

1    fence other s i t e s .      We'll look i n t o that f o r sure.
2    Signage, we had good s i g n up f r o n t .             I am hearing you,
3    you want a d d i t i o n a l signage around the property.                  Not
4    j u s t f o r you but f o r people who a r e u n f a m i l i a r w i t h the
 5   property.       They may not approach i t from Sharp Road.
 6   They may be approaching             i t from the f i e l d s .      They may be
 7   approaching      i t from swampy a r e a s .
 8          MR. BOYLE:        Well, you've got that a f f o r d a b l e
 9   housing complex.          The k i d s come down.           They j u s t don't
10   know and they're s t r a y i n g on i t .            They're a l l out of
11   school.      They're i n there.
12          MR. O'NEILL:         Fencing comes w i t h i t s own
13   challenge.
14          MR. BOYLE:        I t ' s j u s t a l a c k of education. I t
15   may be l i m i t e d exposure.         You're the s c i e n t i s t I'm not.
16          MR. O'NEILL:         I'm w i t h John.         I'm not
17   p a r t i c u l a r l y concerned a t a l l with s u r f a c e
18   contamination.          I t ' s not an i s s u e .     Outside of our
19   enclosure, our component where we do have that fenced.
20   That i s where the p l a n t i s operated.               We use chemicals i n
21   that p l a n t to conduct the treatment.                 We don't want
22   anybody i n s i d e the fenced i n enclosure where we're
23   operating.        That i s why we have fences there.
24          Outside area s l i p , t r i p , f a l l ,      physical
25   hazards not chemical hazards.                  I'm r e a l l y   comfortable


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                 R2-0004314

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 131 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                   Page 36

1    with that.

2          MR.     BOYLE:     But going forward and thank you

3    for addressing         that.      Once they s t a r t excavating           does

4    that present       any e l e v a t e d concern w i t h k i d s , you've got

 5   machines?
 6          MR.    PRINCE:      Yes.      There w i l l be s e c u r i t y
 7   around, 24-hour s e c u r i t y around the whole f a c i l i t y
 8   because of the equipment t h a t i s there even at night.
 9   And   j u s t as an example that Moorestown f a c i l i t y that                  —
10   those s o i l s have a l s o been addressed and i t happens that
11   i f i t was     fenced during the c l e a n up and they j u s t                left
12   up that fence.          I t doesn't a c t u a l l y p r o t e c t anyone except
13   to keep t r e s p a s s e r s o f f of t h a t p a r t i c u l a r land.    It is
14   a l s o s i m i l a r l y i n a s t a t e of not r e a l l y being owned by
15   anyone a t the current s t a t e .            We're working on t h a t .
16          MR.     LUTNER:     My name i s A l Lutner.             I'm   just
17   wondering i f you s a i d that the ground water i s moving
18   towards the wetlands or the wetlands being t e s t e d and i s
19   the water moving from the wetlands where i s i t going?
20          MR.     PRINCE:     We have a whole s e r i e s of w e l l s
21   that go out i n t o the wetland beyond our cut off w a l l                        and
22   those —        some of those w e l l s have h i s t o r i c a l l y shown
23   elevated c o n s t i t u e n t s i n p a s t y e a r s .   We b u i l d the
24   system —        those numbers have j u s t b a s i c a l l y dropped
25   away.        They're not nothing but they're e s s e n t i a l l y going


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                   R2-0004315

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 132 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 Page 37

1    to be a t nothing v e r y soon.            They're going to be a l l

2    below d e t e c t i o n l e v e l s i n the near future because of the

3    system that we've b u i l t .
4           MR. LUTNER:        Why don't you use that system
5    then here?
 6          MR. PRINCE:        That system i s we've captured the
7    s i t e and enclosed the contaminants so they can't g e t any
 8   f u r t h e r away.   We have done that p a r t .           I t i s no longer
 9   migrating away and those c o n s t i t u e n t s have d i s s i p a t e d
10   r e a l l y very q u i c k l y a f t e r that system went i n p l a c e .       The
11   problem i s now what are we doing about what's i n the box.
12          MR. LUTNER:         Thank you.

13          MS. LONEY:         Who i s two?
                           x
14          MR. GREEN: - B i l l Green, L i c e n s e s and

15   Engineer.       De-watering, are you going to address the

16   de-watering?          You a r e going to encounter the water four

17   or f i v e feet probably e s p e c i a l l y r i g h t now but we

18   d e f i n i t e l y have f i v e f e e t a l l the way down to 30 f e e t .

19   That i s a l o t of water.
20          MR. PRINCE:         A l o t of water.         I t ' s a b i g job
21   because we're going to have to s e a l up b a s i c a l l y a box,
22   work i n s i d e the box.
23          MR. GREEN:         Right, the>water i s going to be --
24          MR. PRINCE:         We're going to have to pump i t
25   out and t r e a t i t .     There's no other way to manage i t .


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                R2-0004316

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 133 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 Page 38
 1           MR. GREEN:         Why d i d you not consider pumping
 2   and   t r e a t i n g and h i r i n g seven g a l l o n s    —
 3           MR. PRINCE:          The l i m i t a t i o n s   —
 4           MR. GREEN:          I t seems to be a very, very slow
 5   trickle.         I mean, my faucet i n my house i s more than
 6   that.
 7           MR. PRINCE:          I t gets back to what the Aquifer
 8   w i l l a c t u a l l y allow us to p u l l out which i s not much.
 9   Carlton, do you want to add anything to that?                          I mean,
10   b a s i c a l l y i t ' s l i m i t s to what t h i s u n i t w i l l produce.
11           MR. BERGMAN:           We have four e x t r a c t i o n   points'
12   on the property.             Two of them a r e l o c a t e d w i t h i n the
13   e x t r a c t i o n trench which gives us most of the volume that
14   we t r e a t .   However, the high l e v e l s a r e a c t u a l l y i n the
15   .extraction w e l l s , the two other e x t r a c t i o n w e l l s that we
16   have that a r e upgraded somewhat between the e x t r a c t i o n
17   trench and the ground water treatment p l a n t i t s e l f .                    Very
18   high l e v e l s i n there.          You have double d i g i t PPM, double
19   d i g i t p a r t s per m i l l i o n .   Drinking water standard i s one
20   part per b i l l i o n .      But we p u l l very, v e r y low l e v e l s .
21   These w e l l s only c y c l e on once every couple hours f o r a
22   short period of time.
23           So while we're drawing good contamination from
24   there i t j u s t doesn't -- i t j u s t r e a l l y doesn't come out
25   of the s o i l .


                            Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018               (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                 R2-0004317

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 134 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                      Page 39

 1           MR. O'NEILL:        We have Sharp Road i s down here

 2   again.     The e x t r a c t i o n trench i s up here.              The Wetlands

 3   i s up here.       Most of our water i s out of the e x t r a c t i o n

 4   trench back by the wetlands.                    I t ' s approximately here and

 5   another one approximately here.                      We a l s o draw water that

 6   i s t r e a t e d by the p l a n t .       The e x t r a c t i o n w e l l points a r e

 7   where we get most of our water.

 8           MR. BERGMAN:         That's where the volume comes
 9   from but the high concentrations                     come from the other two
10   extraction points.
11           MR. GREEN:        My next question             then i s why so
12   few w e l l s ?
13           MR. BERGMAN:         Because we didn't             f e e l i t was a
14   good idea to r e a l l y dock the whole thing w i t h a whole
15   bunch of e x t r a c t i o n w e l l s .      Are we r e a l l y g e t t i n g   that?
16   I s that the best way to go?
17           MR. GREEN:        Now, you're t e l l i n g us that i t
18   didn't work, twenty years down the road.                          You want to
19   extract a l i t t l e s o i l .        You d i d some e x t r a c t i o n s o i l ,
20   huge amount of that 20 years ago and that didn't work.
21   Why would I b e l i e v e that i s going to work now? You
22   missed i t the f i r s t time.              How do we know you're going to
23   get i t t h i s time?
24           MR. BERGMAN: Well, because that was s u r f a c e
25   soil.      I t was s u r f a c e   soil.


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                      R2-0004318

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 135 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                  Page 40
1           MR. GREEN:         I t i s in^ your document what i t i s
2    you d i d .    You extracted, I don't know, some huge amount
3    of s o i l .   I t ' s not that b i g of a s i t e .
4           MR. PRINCE:         Well, there a r e l i m i t a t i o n s --
 5          MR. BERGMAN: Again, t h i s i s s u r f a c e s o i l .
 6   We're t a l k i n g about mostly zero to four f e e t .               The
 7   h i g h e s t we r e a l l y see a t ground l e v e l i s f i v e f e e t .     Now
 8   we're t a l k i n g about t e n f e e t below ground s u r f a c e .
 9   They're two e n t i r e l y d i f f e r e n t areas which i s what I was
10   t r y i n g to get a t .
11          MR. PRINCE:         Thank you.
12          MR. COYLE:         I l i s t e n to everybody here.            There
13   i s a l o t of concerns.           You guys cannot have a l o t of
14   experience d e a l i n g w i t h mar, okay.           Any kind of major
15   excavation you're going to have ground to the l e f t to the
16   r i g h t , to the north, to the south c o l l a p s i n g on you.
17   This mar gets i n there, i t ' s a i r pockets i n i t and you
18   don't even know u n t i l you get down there.
19           Do i t one s i t e , something l i k e t h i s .        You
20   solve the problem w i t h beating up the roads.                      You s o l v e
21   the problem of, you know, a couple d i f f e r e n t areas that
22   were addressed tonight.               Option seven, s a t i s f y the
23   concern about d i s t u r b i n g the road s u r f a c e .          That was that
24   lady's question.           You a l s o should e l i m i n a t e the dust
25   i s s u e that the other f e l l o w asked about, you know. I f


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     9 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018               (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-30


                                                                                 R2-0004319

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 136 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 Page 41
1    you contain t h i s s i t e and then you got to get help from
                                                              1
2    the township.         Here that says once you r e done i n f i v e
3    y e a r s they don't do anything w i t h that ground f o r another
4    20.   U n t i l we see i f i t ' s true or not.              We don't want to
5    f i n d 20 y e a r s from now you made another mistake. Amen.
 6   Thank you.        I didn't give my name.              Joe Coyle, Sharp
7    Road.
 8         MS. LONEY:         Thank you, Joe.
 9           MR.   BLUME:      Randall Blume, B-L-U-M-E.               I was
10   on the E l l i s S i t e Task Force that the township c r e a t e d
11   back even p r i o r to the ROD and I was on i t u n t i l about
12   2007/2008 when the township ceased funding t e c h n i c a l
13   expert.       A l t e r n a t i v e two i s the a l t e r n a t i v e that we
14   pushed f o r from the very beginning.                   So I'm glad to see
15   that i t ' s f i n a l l y happening.
16           We know more about the s i t e now where the
17   contamination i s and where i t i s not and we knew that the
18   pump and t r e a t was j u s t not working.              So again, I'm
19   pleased to see that something happened, something i s
20   happening.
21           When we move i n t o the r e s t of the phases of
22   t h i s p r o j e c t , the b u r e a u c r a t i c phases of i t , who,is going
23   to be the lead, w i l l i t be NJDEP or EPA?
24           MR.   PRINCE:       EPA.
25           MR.   BLUME:      Has t e s t i n g been done on the


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                R2-0004320

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 137 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 Page 42

 1   deeper Aquifers?
 2         MR. PRINCE: Yes.
 3           MR. BLUME:       I n the v i c i n i t y of recent t e s t i n g ,
 4   I should say on the deeper Aquifers                   i n the v i c i n i t y
 5   t h a t ' s been done or i s i t a l l through t e s t i n g ?
 6           MR. PRINCE:       We do, a t l e a s t every f i v e years
 7   we go and r e - v i s i t a l l those o l d w e l l s .
 8           MR. BLUME:       So i t would have been probably
 9   p r i o r to the 2010 second f i v e - y e a r review the t e s t i n g was
10   done?
11           MR. PRINCE: Yes
12           MR. BLUME:       Are there any plans i n the

13   immediate future to do a d d i t i o n a l t e s t i n g ?
14           MR. BERGMAN: We d i d monitor w e l l sampling i n
15   A p r i l of t h i s year and i t d i d i n c l u d e two of the deep
16   wells
17           MR. BLUME:       So i t ' s been done more r e c e n t l y
18   than the f i v e year        —
19           MR. BERGMAN: Yes.
20           MR. BLUME:       W i l l the f i l l be t e s t e d before
21   i t ' s transported      or i s that a d e c i s i o n not yet — the
22   f i l l t h a t ' s going to have to come back i n ?
23           MR. PRINCE:        Yes. We t e s t i t before we bring
24   i t in.     That's a good         question.
25           MR. BLUME:       I don't want to assume anything


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                 R2-0004321

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 138 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                    Page 43

1    because i t ' s been way too long.                  I'm glad somebody

2    brought up the questioning of de-watering. With the ROD

3    and subsequent documents that come out -- I mean, there

4    i s a l o t of people here a t t h i s meeting.                  I'm p l e a s a n t l y
5    s u r p r i s e d but I think many of them got personal post
6    cards as opposed to c i t i z e n s t h a t have been involved i n
7    this project.
 8           I didn't f i n d out about i t —               my township l e t
 9   me down.       My s t a t e l e t me down.          Thank goodness f o r the
10   p r e s s because i f they^ had not c a l l e d to ask f o r comment
11   and caught t o t a l l y o f f guard I would not have known,
12   wouldn't have been here.                  So how i s the ROD going to be
13   published?
14           MS. LONEY:         The Record of D e c i s i o n w i l l be
15   placed on the web page.                We would a l s o whenever we come
16   out with a ROD we have a p r e s s r e l e a s e so there w i l l be
17   p r e s s n o t i f i c a t i o n and we would a l s o n o t i f y the
18    township.
19           MR. BLUME:         How about c i t i z e n s who took the
20    time to come here, i s there anyway f o r us —
21           MS. LONEY:         To get n o t i f i c a t i o n of the ROD?                      ;



22           MR. BLUME:         To get n o t i f i c a t i o n .
23           MS. LONEY:         We can e a s i l y send out a m a i l i n g
24    j u s t l i k e the post cards that were sent.                  I f you didn't
25    r e c e i v e one that you put your name on our s i g n - i n sheet.


                                                        - - ——                                  •-
                               Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063
                                                                                   R2-0004322

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 139 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 Page 44

1    I w i l l add you to our m a i l i n g        list.

2            MR.   BLUME:    Okay.         Other than j u s t saying i t ' s

3    about time and that I w h o l e - h e a r t i l y support           alternative

4    two,    I don't have any f u r t h e r questions.              Thanks.

 5           MR.   ZEPPELLI:        Anthony Z e p p e l l i . With regard

 6   to the f i l l that they're p u t t i n g back i n .            There w i l l be

 7   5,000 t r u c k s taking i t out, i t w i l l be            5,000.trucks

 8   p u t t i n g i t back i n ?

 9           MR.   PRINCE:     Something l i k e t h a t .

10           MR.   ZEPPELLI:        So t h a t would be 200 and some

11   days you s a i d ?
12           MR.   PRINCE:      Yep.

13           MR.   ZEPPELLI:        Plus another 200 and some

14   days?
15           MR.   PRINCE:     Nope.   N    The whole process —            200
16   working days i n a year.
17           MR.   BOYLE:     John, t h i s i s a question for you.
18   Thanks f o r a l l of you t a k i n g the time to speak with us.
19   On page four of the information that we p u l l e d off the
20   website, there's a f i n a l paragraph on page four.
21           MS.   LONEY:      You're t a l k i n g about the proposed
22   plan?
23           MR.   BOYLE:      Yes.     The f i n a l sentence of page
24   four reads the s i g n i f i c a n t      l e v e l of TCE i n the ground
25   water i n d i c a t e s the e x i s t e n c e of a DNAPL source but             "such


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                 R2-0004323

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 140 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                   Page 45

1    source has not y e t been found."                 Does that i n d i c a t e that

2    there i s something on the s i t e t h a t ' s producing

3    a d d i t i o n a l t o x i c i t y that hasn't been i d e n t i f i e d ?    I don't

4    know what that means.

5           MR. PRINCE:         These environmental s t u d i e s have

6    t h e i r l i m i t a t i o n s and one of them i s that we sometimes

7    see evidence of c e r t a i n p r o p e r t i e s i n the contaminates.

 8   DNAPL r e f e r s to dense non-aqueous phase l i q u i d .                   So

 9   l i t e r a l l y not water, a l i q u i d i n the ground.             That i s TCE

10   e s s e n t i a l l y separate phase, TCE.

11           There a r e l o t s of d i f f e r e n t t e s t s that we can

12   do to f i n d i t short of j u s t digging something up.                          There
13   are some s i t e s you can l i t e r a l l y open i t up and so there
14   i t i s . And TCE i s n ' t l i k e that and we didn't a c t u a l l y
15   see t h a t .    So we d i d a l o t of d i a g n o s t i c t e s t s to see
16   whether we a c t u a l l y had t h i s separate phase of m a t e r i a l
17   l a y i n g somewhere.       Didn't see i t .
18           However, the concentrations                we f i n d i n the
19   aqueous phase a r e s u f f i c i e n t l y elevated to say w e l l , i t ' s
20   i n there.        I t ' s i n there somewhere or the concentrations
21    i n the water wouldn't be so high.                   So we got a l i t t l e
22    jargony there.          Sorry about that but t h a t ' s how -- we're
23   p r e t t y sure i t ' s there but we didn't a c t u a l l y v i s u a l l y or
24    d i a g n o s t i c a l l y see i t i n the ground.
25           MR. BOYLE:         I've got to process that i n my


                              Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
       West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                   R2-0004324

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 141 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 Page 46

 1   laymen's terms.            Does that mean -- again,             the way my

 2   b r a i n thinks i s , i s there a d d i t i o n a l —       i s there a

 3   concern that there i s a d d i t i o n a l hot spots on the s i t e

 4   that haven't been i d e n t i f i e d or you've i d e n t i f i e d them

 5   and they're j u s t —            they're       substrata?

 6          MR. PRINCE:             They're a l l w i t h i n these, the

 7   confines of- these zones.                   And where we're f i n d i n g   these

 8   r e a l l y , r e a l l y high l e v e l s a r e i n the inner c i r c l e s of

 9   this particular figure.                And there i s a couple

10   c h a r a c t e r i s t i c s of DNAPLs.      I t ' s a separate phase l i q u i d

11   that tends to s i n k by i t s e l f .            Doesn't a c t l i k e water

12   does n e c e s s a r i l y .

13           Once i t ' s d i s s o l v e d i n the water that

14   d i s s o l v e d phase can move w i t h the water.             DNAPL tends to
15   have a l i f e of i t s own.            We think a l o t of i t i s kind of
16   absorbed r i g h t on the c l a y s u r f a c e s down i n the ground
17   and then where i s i t ' g o i n g .            To some degree i t sunk a l l
18   the way to the bottom l a y i n g on top of that c l a y that
19   d i s t i n g u i s h e s t h i s shallow    zone to t h i s deeper s o r t of
20   confining l a y e r .
21           So i n some cases we're going to be, you know,
22   t h i s i s remedy we're s e l e c t i n g .         I n any case the remedy
23   needs to —          whatever the implemented remedy i s going to
24   be we're going to have to be able to get down onto f o r
25   i n s t a n c e that c l a y s u r f a c e where we expect to f i n d kind


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018               (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                 R2-0004325

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 142 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                    Page 47

1    of that l a y e r and r e a l l y t r e a t t h a t s t u f f because t h a t

2    w i l l continue       to l e a k out contaminant i f i t permeates.

3             MR. BOYLE:         J u s t to conclude I'm a proponent

 4   —     I mean, I'm w i t h excavating I think t h a t ' s a good

 5   idea.       But does t h a t problem suggest that or i n d i c a t e

 6   that p o s s i b l y 67,000 cubic yards could expand or i s that

 7   a t the upper l i m i t .         I s there a p o t e n t i a l —     once you

 8   s t a r t digging and a s your report suggest you're not q u i t e

 9   sure.       My concern i s when do you stop                  digging?

10            MR. PRINCE:         Yeah, w e l l , t h a t ' s another phase

11   of our remedial design.                 The reason t h i s has boundaries

12   i s because we have areas around t h i s where we didn't f i n d

13   these c o n s t i t u e n t s and the nature of the m a t e r i a l i s

14   l i m i t e d to approximately t h i s zone.              And we're k i n d of

15   hoping t h a t i t ' s a c t u a l l y s m a l l e r when we do more

16   testing.         So that t h i s scan of the excavation might not

17   be q u i t e as l a r g e .      We might need more excavation or

18   whatever we s e l e c t but t h a t ' s -- we w i l l be working

19   through that i n the remedial design phase to implement

20   that.

21             MR. BERGMAN:         One of the things I would l i k e
22   to point out i s we got i n t o the s u r f a c e s o i l s .                We t a l k e d
23   about that a l i t t l e b i t .          I f you take a look a t what the
24   o r i g i n a l Record of D e c i s i o n c i t e d .    I think the number
25   they c i t e d was 760 cubic yards of s o i l .                  And by t h e time


                                Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
         West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                   R2-0004326

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 143 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                  Page 48

1    we got done we were over 12,000.                   And that was the R I ,

2    which i s kind of what t h i s i n v e s t i g a t i o n i s somewhat

3    s i m i l a r to and i t g i v e s you a b a s i c idea.         Basically

4    characterizes i t ,        s a i d here i s the l e v e l s of

5    contamination.          Here i s how deep they are.. Here i s how

6    f a r out they go but we had to r e f i n e i t .              When we went

7    out to do the remedial design which i s what John i s

 8   t a l k i n g about a s next beyond —            the next step i n t h i s

 9   phase, we had areas we f e l t we had defined the l e v e l s ,

10   you know, where does the l e a d contamination stop.                          That

11   was the b i g g e s t offender, i f you w i l l , biggest

12   contaminate i n the s u r f a c e s o i l s .

13          MR. BOYLE:        Was l e a d .

14          MR. BERGMAN:         Was lead.        We went out.         We d i d

15   one round, almost every l o c a t i o n we had to go out f a r .

16   So we s t a r t e d c o l l e c t i n g two samples.       I f the one that

17   was c l o s e s t to the contamination was contaminated then we

18   run the next one.            We went out seven steps i n some

19   l o c a t i o n s u n t i l we found c l a y .

20          In t h i s instance I f e e l a l i t t l e b i t better
21   about i t but I j u s t want to point out r e a l l y i n the R I
22   for the s u r f a c e s o i l s that r e a l l y got much l a r g e r too.
23   So there i s always that p o s s i b i l i t y .
24          MR. COYLE:         You s a i d that the post c a r d
25   r e c i p i e n t s w i l l a u t o m a t i c a l l y get the ROD information?


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                  R2-0004327

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 144 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                  Page 49

1           MS.    LONEY:       What I'm going do —            s i n c e there

2    was a request t h a t you wanted to be n o t i f i e d about the

3    Record of D e c i s i o n I ' l l send out another post c a r d .

4    That's not something we normally do but we can do i t .

5           MR.    COYLE:       The other thing was you t a l k e d

 6   about hot spots and you've i d e n t i f i e d a couple.                    You   may

7    f i n d another h a l f of a dozen hot spots once you                    start

 8   digging.       You seem to think l i k e that was not p o s s i b l e .

 9   E x p l a i n t h a t to   me.-

10          MR.    PRINCE:        Well, we've done many, many

11   rounds of sampling to get to t h i s stage of deeper s o i l s

12   that we haven't done before and they're i n and o u t s i d e

13   that red zone.             And     t h i s i s the extent to which we         found

14   these c o n s t i t u e n t s and we f i n d them a t c e r t a i n depths and

15   they are i n s o r t of a continuous               blend.

16           MR.   COYLE:        But i t could be as deep as 30 f e e t

17   down?

18           MR.   PRINCE:        There are a couple spots where

19   you would need to go a l l the way                 to the c l a y , yeah.

20           MR.   COYLE:        And     from what I got o f f of the

21   website here, i f you do the o n - s i t e thing you're w i l l i n g

22   to put something l i k e s t e e l w a l l s to p r o t e c t c o l l a p s e s of

23   the other ground.                 Why   i s that the only —         of the seven
24   or nine remedies t h a t ' s the only one t h a t mentions
25   p r o t e c t i n g f u r t h e r c o l l a p s e s when you dig?


                              Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
       West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                  R2-0004328

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 145 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 Page 50
1          MR. PRINCE:         There are a couple of the
2    alternatives that do involve excavation.                       One of the
3    alternatives that involve treating this red zone with
4    chemical oxidation and then excavating j u s t these hot
5    spots.       That's one of the alternatives that we looked at.
 6   And we believe that we can do that scale of excavation by-

7    stepping i t back rather than putting cut off walls.                           The

 8   cut off walls do what you expect them to do, which i s to

 9   r e s i s t that collapse but they also allow us to do water

10   inside the box. We attach i t to the clay at the bottom

11   and create a zone that we can work within and actually

12   p u l l the water out.

13         MR. COYLE:         Why don't you want to take a l l the

14   s o i l out?

15         MR. PRINCE:         Again, you may comment.                I'm not

16   necessarily here to stand up here and argue with you,

17   defending v i s o p h e r i a l l y one alternative after another.

18   Partly your role here i s to say, you know, what I think

19   there are some things you, EPA, you DEP should take more
            i




20   seriously.        Please don't expect me to be argumentative
21   about t h i s .
22              Our reasoning does have to do with the
23   attaining a l e v e l of certitude that we can through
24   excavation, that given our experience with the struggles
25   with the clays i n the existing system, we think have some

                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018               (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                 R2-0004329

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 146 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 51

1    value here.

2           MR.    COYLE:        Thank you.

3           MR.    EVERSON:          Dave Everson here.            I n a context

4    l i k e t h i s what i s your c r i t e r i a for success?                How     will

 5   you know you d i d i t ?

 6          MR.     PRINCE:        U l t i m a t e l y we're aiming to

 7   achieve ground water standards i n the Aquifer.                                 The

 8   u l t i m a t e goal i s to —          the u l t i m a t e goal of t h i s a c t i o n

 9   i s to cleanup the ground water.                     So t h a t ' s our     ultimate

10   measure, have we achieved that standard.                           That a c t u a l l y

11   was   e s t a b l i s h e d i n 1992     and hasn't changed.           There i s a

12   l e v e l of excavation           that we expect w i l l remove i f t h a t ' s

13   the s e l e c t e d a l t e r n a t i v e .   There i s a target zone that                we

14   plan on t r e a t i n g and the f e a s i b i l i t y      study concludes that

15   i f we go a f t e r that zone that, a f t e r some period                        of

16   recovery       s h o r t e r or longer that the Aquifer w i l l                  recover

17   to the d r i n k i n g water standard that involves us s e l e c t i n g

18   a c l e a n up number i n the s o i l s .             I t ' s one p a r t   per

19   m i l l i o n and that i s something we define as we go                          by

20   testing.         That w i l l allow us to measure whether what

21   we're performing here i s going to reach that goal a t the

22   end of the          day.

23           UNKNOWN SPEAKER:                So at the end of t h i s

24   p r o j e c t we can expect to see a bunch of EPA people out

25   there w i t h g l a s s e s of water d r i n k i n g i t ?


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                       R2-0004330

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 147 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                     Page 52
1            MR. PRINCE:         Well, I'm not sure t h a t ' s a f a i r

2    question.          The goal i s to reach d r i n k i n g water             standards,

3    so t h a t ' s our i n t e n t i o n .

4            MR. GORSKI:         Frank Gorski, I was a l s o on the

 5   task f o r c e .     I think we're going to be here another t e n

 6   years g e t t i n g to t h i s .         I would l i k e to r e i t e r a t e a l s o

 7   the m o d i f i c a t i o n was under p u b l i c i z e d , more newspaper.             I

 8   would l i k e to see the township be more a c t i v e , put i t on

 9   their     website.

10           MS. LONEY:         I t was posted on the township
11   website.
12           MR. GORSKI:          I d i d not see i t .          J u s t a general
13   a r t i c l e i n the newspaper.             I too support the removal of
14   the s o i l as the task force d i d 15 years ago.                        This s i t e
15   i s not a n i c e s i t e .      I t r e a c t s weird.        I t always has.
16   TCE i s known to be there.                   I think the p r e d i c t i o n i t was
17   going to take you 100 y e a r s to pump and t r e a t to get i t
18   out of there.           I think t h a t i s on the record somewhere
19   and I think anything             short of removal.              And there i s no
20   guarantee we're going to g e t there.                       So I c l e a r l y support
21   that a l s o .      Piggy-back the other answer whether we have
22   to go deeper.           But can I a l s o say outside of t h a t area
23   you're f a i r l y confident d r i n k i n g water              standards
24   everywhere e l s e on that s i t e ?
25           MR. PRINCE:          Outside of t h i s we have l e v e l s            —


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                    R2-0004331

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 148 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                    Page 53

 1   i f we address t h i s simply to what happens, you know,
 2   beyond the cut o f f w a l l r i g h t , that t h i s w i l l           recover
 3   pretty quickly.
 4         MR. GORSKI:         Within a year you're p r e d i c t i n g
 5   that, r i g h t ?
 6          MR. PRINCE:        We're going to leave t h i s .                This
 7   i s s t a y i n g i n p l a c e as a stop gap but the p r e d i c t i o n was
 8   a year i n the f e a s i b i l i t y study stage.
 9          MR. GORSKI:        The e n t i r e s i t e should be a
10   d r i n k i n g water standard w i t h i n a year a f t e r           excavation,
11   i s the goal?
12          MR. PRINCE:        That's the goal.              Thank you f o r
13   l e a v i n g me that' window to have i t not be e n t i r e l y t r u e
14   a f t e r a year.
15          MR. ROACH:        I want to get back to the                  very
16   f i r s t question    about the e x t r a c t i o n w e l l s and t h i s
17   gentleman s a i d there i s one on h i s property.                      Does that
18
     mean that you're going to maybe excavate across Sharp
19
     Road onto h i s property?
20
            MR. BERGMAN:         That's a monitor w e l l , not an
21
     extraction.
22
            MR. ROACH:        So t h a t ' s not an e x t r a c t i o n
23
     level?     That's what I'm saying.                  No e x t r a c t i o n w e l l s on
24
     the west s i d e of Sharp Road, c o r r e c t ?
25
            MR. PRINCE:         That's c o r r e c t .

                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                    R2-0004332

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 149 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 Page 54

1           MR. ROACH:         So we, who a r e l i v i n g i n Legacy-

2    Oaks, a r e b r e a t h i n g a s i g h of r e l i e f .    We a r e not

3    included i n t h i s p r o j e c t ; am I c o r r e c t ?

4           MR. PRINCE:          Correct.

 5          MR. BLUME:         When the p l a n i s developed,

 6   whatever remediation i s chosen, w i l l a p a r t of i t be

 7   i n s t a l l a t i o n or r e - i n s t a l l a t i o n of monitoring w e l l s that

 8   got d i s t u r b e d so that you can do the t e s t i n g to know what

 9   your l e v e l s of contamination are?

10          MR. PRINCE: Yes.
11          MR. BERGMAN:          I t may not be i n the same exact
12   locations.
13           MR. BLUME:        I t i s going to depend on what i s
14   done and how i t ' s done.            I mean, you know, f o l k s a r e
15   r i g h t f u l l y concerned about ground water contamination and
16   how a r e you going to know i t ' s c l e a n and how you're going
17   to know you're going to do more t e s t i n g , you w i l l make
18   a v a i l a b l e to the p u b l i c and the township so that w e ' l l
19   have some confidence you d i d get that chunk of gunk.
20           MR. SOLDEN:         I'm L a i n Solden.        I'm
21   representing        K r i s t a E n t e r p r i s e s which i s the property
22   j u s t to the north adjacent to i t , a l s o another property
23   on 100 Sharp Road.             Obviously we have a concern about
24   airborne s o i l .       The 100 Sharp Road s i d e which p r e v a i l i n g
25   winds g e n e r a l l y go from north to south towards our


                             Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
      West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                 R2-0004333

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 150 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                   Page 55

1    property.        We have s e v e r a l employees, f i e l d employees

2    that a r e i n contact w i t h t r u c k s and t r a i l e r s and

3    equipment, e t c e t e r a , on a d a i l y b a s i s .        As w e l l as our
4    o f f i c e b u i l d i n g we have the a b i l i t y , we b r i n g f r e s h a i r
5    in.     We change the a i r over every ten hours i n our
6    buildings.
7            We have a concern that i f something r e a l l y
 8   does blow up we can have a p o t e n t i a l somewhere i n the
 9   neighborhood of 150 to 200 of our employees to be exposed
10   to t h i s .    So we have a concern as to the s a f e t y of our
11   people a l s o investment i n our p r o p e r t i e s which exceeds
12   over eight m i l l i o n s d o l l a r s on one s i t e .        And we a l s o
13   have a vacant property as a p o t e n t i a l f o r development of
14   over three-and-a-half to four m i l l i o n .
15           So obviously we have a v e s t e d i n t e r e s t on the
16    s t r e e t and we j u s t want to make sure that i t ' s s a f e f o r
17   us, i n a d d i t i o n to we have a tremendous amount of t r a f f i c
18    i n and out of our s i t e .          And hoping there i s no i s s u e s
19    and c o n f l i c t with the t r u c k s going i n and out.               Obviously
20   we're used to being on c o n s t r u c t i o n s i t e s .           One of our
21    functions a r e —         we a r e developers.           So we understand
22    construction.          We understand i n t r i c a c i e s of making these
23    things work.         I j u s t want f o r the record to p l a c e a                      !
24    concern f o r our employees with dust and preserve the
25    value of our p r o p e r t i e s .


                               Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                   R2-0004334

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 151 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                   Page 56

1            MR. PRINCE:        Thank you.         Appreciate i t .

2            MS. LONEY:        Are there any f u r t h e r questions?

3    Well, I would l i k e to thank you a l l f o r coming out

4    again.      For those who d i d not r e c e i v e the m a i l i n g and you

5    signed i t i n the back could you j u s t make an a s t e r i s k

6    next to your name so I know to add you to our m a i l i n g

7    list.      Again, the comment period c l o s e s on the 12th of

8    August and so you can e-mail or send us a s n a i l mail

 9   v e r s i o n of your comments or fax them.                 A l l right.       Thank

10   you a l l f o r coming.

11            (Whereupon, the hearing concluded                  8:09 p.m.)

12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25


                               Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                                   R2-0004335

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 152 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                Page 57
 1     C E R T I F I C A T I O N
 2

 3         I , Micheline Brown, a Court Reporter and
 4   Notary Public f o r the Commonwealth Of
 5   Pennsylvania, do hereby c e r t i f y the foregoing to
 6   be a true and accurate t r a n s c r i p t of my o r i g i n a l
 7   stenographic notes taken a t the time and place
 8   herein before s e t forth.
 9

10

11

12

13

14                                                          Micheline Brown
15                                                          Court Reporter
16                                                          Notary Public
17                                                          DATED:     July 24, 2013
18

19              (The foregoing c e r t i f i c a t i o n of t h i s
20   transcript does not apply to any reproduction of
21   the same by any means, unless under the d i r e c t
22   control and/or supervision of the -certifying
23   shorthand reporter.)
24



                           Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018               (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063


                                                                               R2-0004336

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 153 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX IV - ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX




                                      R2-0004337

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 154 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                                        DRAFT
                                                                                                     09/19/2013                                     REGION ID 02
           Site Name ELLIS PROPERTY
           CERCLISID NJD980529085
                OUID 01
                 SSID 02D9



                                                                    Image
                                                                    Count     Doc Type     Beginning Bates    Ending Bates        Addressee Name     Addressee Organization         Author Name             Author OrganiiatJon
DodO       Doc Date  Title
          06/14/2013 COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE                       4      (INDEX)                                       (1                     II                        LI                         [US ENVIRONMENTAL
682 20S
                     RECORD INDEX FOR OU1 FOR THE ELUS                                                                                                                                                   PROTECTION AGENCY)
                     PROPERTY SITE
                                                                                                                                                                              LI                         [EPA, REGION 2|
101537    01/01/1111 ELLIS PROPERTY SITE, ADMINISTRATIVE                3      [INDEX]
                                                                                                                             n                      []
                     RECORD, INDEX OF DOCUMENTS

                                                                                                                                                    II                        LI                         [EPA, REGION 2|
111920    01/01/1111 ELUS PROPERTY SITE, ADMINISTRATIVE                 1      (INDEX]                                       a
                     RECORD FILE UPDATE, INDEX OF
                     DOCUMENTS
111869    05/06/1986 Report Ellis Property Health and Safety           12     (REPORT]     R2-0000001        R2-0000012      [RICHARDSON, FRANK |   [NJ DEPT OF               [CLAVPOOMOHN E]            [RoyF Weston,Inc]
                     Plan, prepared by Roy F Weston, Inc.                                                                                           ENVIRONMENTAL
                     May 1986                                                                                                                       PROTECTION)
111853    06/01/1986 Report Field Sampling Plan for the Ellis         108     (REPORT)     R2-0000013        R2-O000120      II                     (1                        [,]                         (ROY F WESTON, INC ]
                                                                                            i
                     Property RI/FS,'Evesham Township, New
                     lersey, prepared by Roy F Weston, Inc,
                     June 1986
111854    02/01/1987 Report QA/QC Project Management Plan             114     (REPORT]     R2-OO0O121        R2-O0OO234      II                     II                        LI                          (ROY F WESTON, INC ]
                     for the Ellis Property, Evesham Township,
                     New lersey, prepared by Roy F Weston,
                     Inc,Feb 1987
111852    06/27/1988 Memorandum Ellis Property Site,                   18   [MEMORANDUM)   R2-O00O23S        R2-O0OO252      [RICHARDSON, FRANK)    (NJ DEPT OF               [DECICCO, ANNE ]            [NJ DEPT OF
                     Proposed Phase II Sampling Plan,                                                                                               ENVIRONMENTAL                                         ENVIRONMENTAL
                      prepared by Anne Hayton, lune 1988                                                                                            PROTECTION]                                           PROTECTION)


111858    12/01/1988   Report Remedial Investigation Report,          693     [REPORT]     R2-O00O253        R2-0000945      II                     []                        LI                          [ROY F WESTON, INC I
                       Ellis Property Site (Phase 1), prepared by
                       Roy F Weston, Inc, December 1988

111855    01/01/1990   Report Proposal for Remedial                    77      [REPORT)    R2-0000946        R2-O0O1O22      II                     II                        LI                          (ROY F WESTON, INC ]
                       Investigation at the Ellis Property Site,
                       prepared by Roy F Weston, Inc, January
                       1990
111864    06/20/1990   Report Health Assessment for Ellis              12      (REPORT]    R2-0001023        R2-0001034      LI                     [AGENCY FOR TOXIC         LI                          [ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH
                       Property, prepared by ATSDR, lune 1990                                                                                       SUBSTANCES AND                                        SERVICE, NEW JERSEY
                                                                                                                                                    DISEASES REGISTRY]                                    DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH]


111867    08/01/1990 Guidance A Guide on Remedial Actions               5      (REPORT)    R2-000103S        R2-0001039      II                     II                        LI                          [EPA)
                     at Superfund Sites with PCB
                     Contamination, prepared by EPA, August
                     1990
 111856   01/01/1991 Report Final Field Sampling - Quality            188      (REPORT]    R2-0001040        R2-0001227      II                     II                        LI                          (ROY F WESTON, INC ]
                     Assurance Pro|ect Plan for the Ellis
                     Property Site, Medford, New Jersey,
                     prepared by Roy F Weston Inc, January
                     1991




                                                                                                              Page 1 of 4                                                 llllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll
                                                                                                                                                                                    622805

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R2-0004338

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 155 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                              ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                                      DRAFT
                                                                                                   09/19/2013                                   REGION ID 02
          Site Name ELUS PROPERTY
          CERCLISID NJ0980529085
               OUID 01
                SSID 0209
              Action


                                                                  Image
DodD      Doc Date  THte                                          Count     Doc Type     Beginning Bates   Ending Bates        Addressee Name    Addressee Organization         Author Name         Author Organization
111859   07/01/1991 Report Preliminary Data Report, Ellis           116     (REPORT]     R2-0001228      R2-0001343       11                    []                        LI                     [NJ DEPT OF
                    Property Phase II Remedial Investigation,                                                                                                                                    ENVIRONMENTAL
                    prepared by NJDEPE, Jury 1991                                                                                                                                                PROTECTION)

111862   01/01/1992   Report A Stage 1A Archeological Survey         38     [REPORT]     R2-0001344      R2-0001381       LI                    (NJ DEPARTMENT OF      [CRIST, THOMAS,           [JOHN MILNER
                      of the ElliS Property Site, prepared by                                                                                   ENVIRONMENTAL          MCCARTHY, JOHN)           ASSOCIATES, INC ]
                      JohnP McCarthy and Thomas AJ Crist,                                                                                       PROTECTION AND ENERGY,
                      1992                                                                                                                      ROY F WESTON, INC ]

111866   01/01/1992   Memorandum Update on OSWER Soli                 4   [MEMORANDUM]   R2-OO01382      R2-0001385       LI                    [ADDRESSEES]              (CLAY, DON R]          [EPA|
                      Lead Cleanup Guidance, prepared by
                      EPA, 1992
111870   03/02/1992   Report Ellis Property Site RI/FS, Data         63     [REPORT]     R2-0001386      R2-0001448       [BRAUN, GERALD ]      (NJ DEPT OF            [VELEZ, VICTOR G]         [ROY F WESTON, INC.]
                      Analysis/Validation, prepared by Roy F                                                                                    ENVIRONMENTAL
                      Weston, Inc, March 1992                                                                                                   PROTECTION]
111860   04/01/1992   Report Phase II Remedial Investigation        855     [REPORT]     R2-0001449      R2-OOO2303       LI                    [NJ DEPARTMENT OF      [CORBIN, M , VELEZ, V ]   [RoyF Weston,Inc]
                      Report for the Ellis Property Site,                                                                                       ENVIRONMENTAL
                      prepared by Roy F Weston, Inc, April                                                                                      PROTECTION AND ENERGY]
                      1992
111861   04/01/1992   Report Wetland Delineation Report, Ellis       29     [REPORT]     R2-OO023O4      R2-0002332       II                    1)                        [SACCO, JOHN)          (NJ DEPARTMENT OF
                      Property, prepared by John Sacco,                                                                                                                                          ENVIRONMENTAL
                      NJDEPE, April, 1992                                                                                                                                                        PROTECTION AND ENERGY]

111863   04/01/1992   Report Feasibility Study Report for the       333      [REPORT]    R2-0002333      R2-0002665       L)                    [NJ DEPARTMENT OF      [CORBIN, M , VELEZ, V |   IRoyF Weston, Inc I
                      Ellis Property Site prepared by Roy F                                                                                     ENVIRONMENTAL
                      Weston, Inc, April 1992                                                                                                   PROTECTION AND ENERGY]

111857   04/06/1992   Memorandum to Gerald Braun from                48   [MEMORANDUM]   R2 0002666      R2-OO02713       [BRAUN, GERALD |      [NJ DEPT OF               [KUNE, CAREN ]         |NJ DEPT OF
                      Caren Kline, Re Well Point Installation                                                                                   ENVIRONMENTAL                                    ENVIRONMENTAL
                      and Sampling Event, Ellis Property, April                                                                                 PROTECTION)                                      PROTECTION AND ENERGY)
                      1992
111865   04/12/1992   Report Baseline Risk Assessment for Ellis     478      [REPORT]    R2-0002714      R2-0003191       LI                    [NJ DEPARTMENT OF      [BHATLA, M N, VELEZ, V)   [ROY F WESTON, INC, Roy
                      Property Site, prepared by Roy F                                                                                          ENVIRONMENTAL                                    F Weston, Inc)
                      Weston, Inc, Apnl 1992                                                                                                    PROTECTION AND ENERGY]

111876   04/29/1992   Letter From Richard Ho, USEPA to Gerald         3      [LETTER]    R2-0003192      R2-0003194       [BRAUN, GERALD ]      [NJ DEPT OF               [HO, RICHARD)          (EPA, REGION 2)
                      Braun, NJDEPE "Comments on Baseline                                                                                       ENVIRONMENTAL
                      Risk Assessment and Risk Based Soil                                                                                       PROTECTION)
                      Remediation Levels for the
                      Administrative Record", April 29,1992

111868   05/01/1992   Proposed Plan Ellis Property Superfund         15       [PLAN]     R2-0003195      R2-O0O3209       D                     11                        1.1                    [EPA)
                      Site, prepared by EPA, May 1992




                                                                                                          Page 2 of 4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   R2-0004339

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 156 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                                DRAFT
                                                                                            09/19/2013                                     REGION ID 02
          Site Name ELUS PROPERTY
          CERCUSID NJD980529085
               OUID 01
                SSID 02D9
              Action


                                                                Image
                                                                Count   Doc Type   Beginning Bates  Ending Bates          Addressee Name    Addressee Organization        Author Name     Author Organization
DocID     Doc Date  Tide
111877   OS/29/1992 Letter From Richard Ho, USEPA to Gerald         2   [LETTER]   R2-OOO3210      R2-O003211         (BRAUN, GERALD ]     [NJ DEPT OF               [HO, RICHARD]      (EPA, REGION 2]
                    Braun, NJDEPE "Clarification of Risk                                                                                   ENVIRONMENTAL
                    Based Soil Cleanup Levels"                                                                                             PROTECTION]
99984    09/30/1992 Report Declaration Statement, Record of        97   [REPORT]   R2-0003212     R2-0003308          D                    []                        LI                 |EPA, REGION 2]
                    Decision, Ellis Property, Evesham and
                    Medford Townships, Burlington County,
                    New Jersey, prepared by U S
                    Environmental Protection Agency, Region
                    2, September 30,1992

111925   09/30/1992   Letter to Mr Constantine Sidamon-             2   [LETTER]   R2-0003309     R2-0003310          [SIDAMON-ERISTOFF.   [EPA, REGION 2]           [WEINER, SCOTT)    [NJ DEPT OF
                      Eristof, Administrator, U S                                                                     CONSTANTINE ]                                                     ENVIRONMENTAL
                      Environmental Protection Agency, Region                                                                                                                           PROTECTION]
                      2, from Mr Scott A. Welner,
                      Commissioner, State of New Jersey,
                      Department of Environmental Protection
                      and Energy, re The Department of

205086   09/01/1995   STAGE IB ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY               25   [REPORT]                                      L]                   [ACRES INTERNATIONAL      LI                 [ARCHAEOLOGICAL &
                      FOR THE ELLIS PORPERTY SITE                                                                                          CORP]                                        HISTORICAL
                                                                                                                                                                                        CONSULTANTS, INC ]
                                                                                                                                           I]                        LI                 [EPA, REGION 2]
139686   09/29/2005   FIVE YEAR REVIEW REPORT, ELUS                28   [REPORT]
                                                                                                                      a
                      PROPERTY SUPERFUND SITE,
                      BURUNGTON COUNTY, EVESHAM AND
                      MEDFORD TOWNSHIPS, NEW JERSEY

684225   09/01/2006   REMEDIATION SYSTEM EVALUATION                37   [REPORT]   R2-O0O3311      R2-0003347         LI                   [US ENVIRONMENTAL         LI                 [DYNAMAC CORP, GEO
                      FINAL REPORT FOR THE ELUS PROPERTY                                                                                   PROTECTION AGENCY]                           TRANS INC]
                      SUPERFUND SITE
123784   11/01/2007   REVISEO PREUMINARY PDI RESULTS              316   [REP6RT]   R2-0003348      R2-0003663         LI                   (STATE OF NEW JERSEY,     LI                 [THE LOUIS BERGER
                      REPORT FOR THE ELUS PROPERTY SITE                                                                                    DEPARTMENT OF                                GROUP, INC ]
                                                                                                                                           ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                                                           PROTECTION]
         05/01/2009   TECHNOLOGY EVALUATION REPORT FOR            169   [REPORT]   R2-0003664      R2-0003832         LI                   [STATE OF NEW JERSEY,     LI                 (THE LOUIS BERGER
123785
                      THE ELUS PROPERTY SITE                                                                                               DEPARTMENT OF                                GROUP, INC ]
                                                                                                                                           ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                                                           PROTECTION]
                                                                                                                                           II                        LI                 [EPA, REGION 2]
109724   09/28/2010   SECOND FIVE-YEAR REVIEW REPORT,              33   (REPORT]                                      a
                      ELLIS PROPERTY SUPERFUND SITE,
                      EVESHAM AND MEDFORD TOWNSHIPS,
                      NEW JERSEY, BURUNGTON COUNTY                                                                -
                                                                                                   R2-000401S                              [STATE OF NEW JERSEY]     LI                 [THE LOUIS BERGER
123774   06/01/2013   FOCUSED FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT            183   (REPORT]   R2-O003833
                                                                                                                      u                                                                 GROUP, INC ]
                      FOR THE ELLIS PROPERTY SITE




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 4




                                                                                                                                                                                                          R2-0004340

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 157 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                                 DRAFT
                                                                                              09/19/2013                                  REGION ID 02
          Site Name ELLIS PROPERTY
          CERCLISID NJD980529085
               OUID 01                             >
                SSID 02D9
              Action


                                                           Image
DodD      Doc Date    Title                                Count      Doc Type      Beginning Bates  Ending Bates        Addressee Name    Addressee Organization        Author Name            Author Organization
686646   06/13/2013   UPDATED MONITORING WELL SAMPUNG         64   (CHART /TABLE]   R2-0004016      R2-0004079      11                    11                        II                     II
                      DATA AND TREATMENT PLANT DATA FOR
                      THE ELUS PROPERTY SITE

686647   07/10/2013   PROPOSED PLAN OU1 FOR THE ELLIS         18       (PLAN)       R2-0004080     R2-0004097       D                     U                         LI                     |US ENVIRONMENTAL
                      PROPERTY SITE                                                                                                                                                        PROTECTION AGENCY]
205087   07/16/2013   CORRESPONDENCE REGARDING REVIEW          1      (LETTER]                                      |HO, RICHARD ]        |EPA]                     (FERREIRA, STEVEN J]   |EPA|
                      OF THE INFORMATION PERTAINING TO
                      THE CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEYS
                      CONDUCTED AT THE SITE FOR THE ELUS
                      PROPERTY SITE




                                              J




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 4




                                                                                                                                                                                                              R2-0004341

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 158 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX V - STATE L E T T E R OF CONCURRENCE




                                          R2-0004342

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 159 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                           Jiterie of Jfe&r Iferssg
                                       DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
CHRIS CHRISTIE                               SITE REMEDIATION PROGRAM                                           BOB MARTIN
Governor                                           Mail Code 401-06                                             Commissioner
                                                     P 0 Box 420
KIM GUADAGNO                                 Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0420
Lt Governor                                      Tel.*: 609-292-1250
                                                  Fax # 609-777-1914




                                                                                  September 27,2013

       Mr. Walter Mugdan, Director
       Emergency and Remedial Response Division
       U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
       Region 13
       290 Broadway
       New York, NY 10007-1866

       Re:    Ellis Property Superfund Site
              Record of Decision Amendment
              EPAID#NJD980529085
              DEP PI#G000042009

       Dear Mr. Mugdan:

       The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) completed its review of the
       "Record of Decision Amendment, Ellis Property Superfund Site, Evesham Township, Burlington
       County, New Jersey" prepared by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Region II in
       September 2013 and concurs with the selected remedy to address contaminated soil and
       groundwater at the site. The original ROD addressing contamination at the site was issued on
       September 30,1992.

       DEP supports excavation and off-site removal of contaminated soil and in-situ treatment under
       the selected remedy estimated at a cost of $13.6 million. DEP completed a soil cleanup as
       required by the 1992 ROD and has been operating a groundwater collection and treatment
       system since 2000 at the site. More recently, DEP and EPA have identified a source of volatile
       organic compounds (VOCs), primarily trichloroethylene (TCE) in the subsurface soil at the site
       that requires additional remedial measures. The VOC source contributes to groundwater
       contamination and prevents the groundwater collection and treatment system from restoring the
       aquifer.

       The selected remedy was chosen m accordance with the Comprehensive Environmental
       Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, as amended, and, to the extent practicable, the
       National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan. This decision is based on


                        NewJersev it an Equal Opportunity Employer i Pi tmed on Recvcled Paper and Recyclable




                                                                                                                R2-0004343

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 160 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

is necessary to protect the public health or welfare and the environmentfromactual releases of
hazardous substances into the environment.

The components of the amended remedy include:

     •   Excavation and off-site disposal of TCE contamination in the residual source area, and
         contaminated soil in the plume area;
     •   Implementation of in-situ treatment, where appropriate, to complement excavation;
     •   Continued operation of the existing collection and treatment system for a period of time
         (estimated to be one year) to evaluate the effectiveness of continued operation of the
         system to reduce residual groundwater contamination;
     •   Monitoring of groundwater, and,
     •   Continuation of institutional controls to restrict use of contaminated groundwater until
         remediation goals are achieved.

DEP appreciates the opportunity to participate in the decision making process to select an
appropriate remedy and is looking forward to future cooperation with EPA in remedial acton at
this site.

If you have any questions, please call me at 609-292-1250.




C:       Ken Kloo, Director, Division of Remediation Management, DEP
         Ed Putnam, Assistant Director, Publicly Funded Response Element, DEP
         Carole Petersen, Chief, New Jersey Remediation Branch, EPA Region II




                                                                      t




                                                                                            R2-0004344
