LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: RECORD OF DECISION; REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVE SUGGESTION (DOCUMENTS REVIEWED; SELECTED REMEDY; ACTION APPROVAL; DESCRIPTION OF SELECTED REMEDY.)
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/272479
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 140c43924194d8848e37cba8dd270574bb8f50fa9a58f5c0dbb377a870eae6f2
Source PDF pages: 2
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

•                           RECORD OF DECISION
                      REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVE SELECTION
                                                                  103866



    -
    Site
    Lipari Landfill, Mantua Township, New Jersey
    Documents Reviewed
    I am basing my decision primarily on the following documents,
    which describe the analysis of cost-effectiveness of remedial
    alternatives for the Lipari Landfill site:
         - Treatability Study of Contaminated Groundwater from the
           Lipari Landfill, Radian Corporation:
         - On-Site Feasibility Study for Lipari Landfill, Camp,
           Dresser & McKee, Inc.:
         - On-Site Hydrogeological Remedial Investigation of Lipari
           Landfill, Camp, Dresser & McKee, Inc.;
         - Summary of Remedial Alternative Selection, Lipari Landfill;


•        - Staff summaries and recommendations:
         - Responsiveness Summary for the Lipari Landfill.
    Description of Selected Remedy
    1.     Install groundwater/leachate extraction and injection wells
           within the containment system for dewatering and flushing
           of the system.
    2.     Pump and treat the groundwater/leachate from within the
           containment system until it reaches an elevation of approx-
           imately 100 feet above Mean Sea Level (Upper Cohansey).
           The treatment preference for collected leachate is on-site
           pretreatment and discharge to the POTW. Implementation
           is dependent on timely approval by the State of New Jersey
           and the local POTW. If such approval is not provided, the
           leachate may be treated on-site and discharged to nearby
           surface waters, or transported off-site for treatment at
           a permitted hazardous waste facility.
    3.     Install and monitor groundwater wells downgradient of the
           site within the Kirkwood Aquifer.                                       M
                                                                                  0
                                                                                   I
                                                                                  I'
                                                                                  0
                                                                                  0
                                                                                   I




•
                                                                                  ~
                                                                                  \0
                                                                                  0



                                                                           037
                                                                          272479
                                                                      llllllllmllmllllllll

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

•   4.
                                 -2-

         Flush the containment system to cleanse the encapsulated
         material of water-borne contaminants. This operation
         will be coordinated with any off-site remedial action,
         especially with regard to leachate treatment. An estimated
         15 years is required to remove 90\ of the water-borne
         contaminants from the groundwater within the containment
         system. Throughout the operation, regular evaluations will
         be made to determine the effectiveness of the flushing
         program1 as well as, the need to continue this program or
         to take other actions.
    s.   The flushing operation will achieve the reduction of
         contaminants in the containment system to the limits of
         its technology. Should it be determined that the result-
         ing groundwater does not meet applicable standards, then
         pumping and treatment of the groundwater/leachate from
         within the containment system will be maintained, after
         the flushing operation is terminated, to control lower
         water levels within the system than outside.
    Declarations
    Consistent with the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
    Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA), and the


•   National Contingency Plan (40 CFR Part 300), I have determined
    that flushing the containment system and monitoring the
    Kirkwood Aquifer groundwater constitute the selected Phase II
    on-site remedial alternative for the Lipari Landfill site.
           '
    The State of New Jer•ey has been consulted and agrees with
    the proposed remedy. A determination of potential Phase II
    off-site remedial actions to mitigate potentially contaminated
    off-site areas will be made in the near future.
    The action being taken is appropriate when balanced against
    the availability of Trust Fund monies for use at other sites.
    In addition, flu.shing the containment system and monitoring
    of the Kirkwood Aquifer are cost-effective, implementable and
    technically sound when compared to other remedial action
    alternatives, and are necessary and adequate to protect
    public health, welfare and the environment.




    Date
                                  Qk1lj1)
                                       Dagg~
                                            41
                                 Christopher J.
                                 Regional Administrator




•                                                                     038
