LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: RECORD OF DECISION FOR OU1 FOR THE FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY SITE
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/377092
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 0537f7bba2658b2d3011ac2263c46a515532eaaf686b4dc5c0d0ff49495326a6
Source PDF pages: 127
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         RECORD OF DECISION

             Operable Unit One
  Former Kil-Tone Company Superfund Site
      Cumberland County, New Jersey




United States Environmental Protection Agency
                   Region 2
             New York, New York
               September 2016




                                                *377092*
                                                  377092

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               DECLARATION STATEMENT
                                 RECORD OF DECISION


SITE NAME AND LOCATION

Former Kil-Tone Company Superfund Site
Cumberland County, New Jersey.

Superfund Site Identification Number: NJN000200874
Operable Unit 1

STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

This Record of Decision (ROD) documents the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s
(EPA’s) selection of a remedy for Operable Unit 1 (OU1) at the Former Kil-Tone Company
Superfund Site (site) located in the City of Vineland, Cumberland County, New Jersey, which
was chosen in accordance with the requirements of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA), as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601-9675 and
the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 C.F.R. Part
300. This decision document explains the factual and legal basis for selecting a remedy to
address contamination at the site. The attached index (see Appendix III) identifies the items that
comprise the administrative record upon which the selected remedy is based.

The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) was consulted on the
proposed remedy in accordance with CERCLA Section 121(f), 42 U.S.C. § 9621(f), and concurs
with the selected remedy (see Appendix IV).

ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE

Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from the site, if not addressed by
implementing the response action selected in this ROD, may present an imminent and substantial
endangerment to public health, welfare or the environment.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY

The selected remedy described in this document addresses a discrete portion of the site involving
contaminated soil at residential properties in the vicinity of the former Kil-Tone Company
property on East Chestnut Avenue in the City of Vineland, New Jersey. This is the first of at
least four planned remedial phases, or operable units, for the site. EPA anticipates that a second
operable unit will address contaminated soil on the former Kil-Tone Company property itself,
and other commercial/industrial properties and public areas, as necessary, in the vicinity of the
former Kil-Tone Company property. A third operable unit will address contaminated
groundwater associated with the site, and a fourth operable unit will address contaminated
sediment and surface water along the Tarkiln Branch to the confluence of the Parvin Branch, and
further downstream, as necessary, based on the results of ongoing investigations. Soil and

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

residential properties along the affected surface water areas will either be addressed as part of the
fourth operable unit or as a separate fifth operable unit.

The major components of the remedy selected for OU1 include the following:

      Excavation of an estimated 21,000 cubic yards of soil contaminated primarily with
       arsenic and lead from approximately 57 residential properties in the vicinity of the former
       Kil-Tone Company property;
      Off-site disposal of excavated contaminated soil, and backfilling of excavated areas with
       clean fill; and
      Restoration of the affected properties.

Excavation activities associated with remediation may require the demolition and replacement of
temporary structures such as sheds and garages and the removal and replacement of asphalt and
driveways. Excavation of the contaminated material may also require the temporary relocation of
residents.

Additional properties nearby or adjacent to the known OU1 properties may be identified during
the design and/or implementation of the selected remedy that require remediation because of
contamination associated with the site; these will be incorporated into the selected remedy.

The environmental benefits of the selected remedy may be enhanced by consideration, during
the remedy design or implementation, of technologies and practices that are sustainable in
accordance with EPA Region 2’s Clean and Green Energy Policy.

The estimated present-worth cost of the selected remedy is $8,774,000.


DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

The selected remedy meets the requirements for remedial actions set forth in CERCLA Section
121, 42 U.S.C. § 9621, because it: 1) is protective of human health and the environment; 2)
meets a level or standard of control of the hazardous substances, pollutants and contaminants
which at least attains the legally applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements under
federal and state laws; 3) is cost-effective; and 4) utilizes permanent solutions and alternative
treatments (or resource recovery) technologies to the maximum extent practicable. In addition,
Section 121 of CERCLA includes a preference for remedies that employ treatment that
permanently and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity or mobility of hazardous substances as
a principal element (or requires a justification for not satisfying the preference). Treatment is not
a principal element of the remedy selected herein because the majority of the excavated soil will
not require treatment to meet the requirements of off-site disposal. However, some of the
contaminated soil may require treatment prior to land disposal at an off-site facility. Off-site
treatment, if required, would reduce the toxicity of the contaminated soil prior to land disposal.
A five-year review will not be required because the selected remedy will not result in hazardous
substances, pollutants, or contaminants remaining on affected properties above levels that allow


                                                 ii

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, and it is anticipated that the remedy will take less
than five years to implement.

ROD DATA CERTIFICATION              CHECKLIST

The following information is included in the Decision Summary section of this ROD. Additional
information can be found in the administrative record for the site.

       •   Chemicals of concern and their respective concentrations may be found in the
           "Summary of Remedial Investigation" section.

       •   Baseline risk represented by the chemicals of concern may be found in the "Summary
           of Site Risks" section.

       •   A discussion of remediation goals may be found in the "Remedial Action Objectives"
           section.

       •   A discussion of principal threat waste may be found in the "Principal Threat Waste"
           section.

       •   Current and reasonably anticipated future land use assumptions are discussed in the
           "Current and Potential Future Site and Resource Uses" section.

       •   Estimated capital, annual operation and maintenance (O&M) and total present worth
           costs are discussed in the "Description of Remedial Alternatives" section.

       •   Key factors that led to selecting the remedy (i.e., how the selected remedy provides
           the best balance of tradeoffs with respect to the balancing and modifying criteria,
           highlighting criteria key to the decision) may be found in the "Comparative Analysis
           of Alternatives" and "Statutory Determinations" sections.




Walter E. Mugdan, Director
                                                        ¥.b..v /~
                                                               Date
                                                                                to/~

Emergency & Remedial Response Division
EP A - Region 2




                                                 111

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

          DECISION SUMMARY

             Operable Unit 1
      Former Kil-Tone Company Site
      Cumberland County, New Jersey




United States Environmental Protection Agency
                   Region 2
             New York, New York
               September 2016

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                              PAGE

SITE NAME AND LOCATION .................................................................................................... 1
SITE DESCRIPTION ..................................................................................................................... 1
SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES .............................................................. 2
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION ................................................................................................ 3
SCOPE AND ROLE OF THIS OPERABLE UNIT ....................................................................... 4
PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS AND EARLY RESPONSE ACTIONS ............................ 4
RESULTS OF THE REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION ................................................................... 5
CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES ................................. 7
SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS ........................................................................................................ 7
REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES ......................................................................................... 12
DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES .................................................................. 13
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES ................................................................ 15
PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE .................................................................................................. 20
SELECTED REMEDY ................................................................................................................. 21
STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS .......................................................................................... 22
DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES ............................................................... 24




APPENDICES

APPENDIX I                     FIGURES
APPENDIX II                    TABLES
APPENDIX III                   ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX
APPENDIX IV                    STATE LETTER
APPENDIX V                     RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE NAME AND LOCATION

The Former Kil-Tone Company Site (site), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Superfund Site Identification Number NJN000200874, is located in the City of Vineland,
Cumberland County, New Jersey. The selected remedy described herein addresses a discrete
portion of the site involving contaminated soil at residential properties in the vicinity of the
former Kil-Tone Company property on East Chestnut Avenue (see Appendix I, Figure 1). EPA is
the lead agency and the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) is the
support agency.

SITE DESCRIPTION

The former Kil-Tone Company property encompasses approximately 4.076 acres at 527 East
Chestnut Avenue in a mixed residential and commercial area that has been identified as a
community with environmental justice concerns. The former Kil-Tone Company property was
used for pesticide manufacturing from the late 1910s until the 1930s. Contaminated soil has been
identified on the property itself, at various residential and commercial properties surrounding the
former Kil-Tone Company property, and in soil, sediment, surface water and groundwater
downgradient of the property. This decision document focuses on the residential properties
located near the former Kil-Tone Company property; other properties and media are still under
investigation and will be addressed under future decision documents. The former Kil-Tone
Company property is bordered to the north by East Chestnut Avenue; to the east by South Sixth
Street; to the south by Paul Street; and to the west by South East Boulevard followed by railroad
tracks. The railroad tracks are used for transporting freight. Residential and commercial
properties are located throughout the area (see Appendix I, Figures 2 and 3).

Residential properties in the area range in lot size and date of construction. The smallest lots are
less than 0.05 acre, while the largest lots are up to 0.5 acre. The oldest homes were built in 1890.
The newest homes were constructed as recently as 1999. The majority of the properties contain
single-family homes. In addition, there are approximately 10 homes that are duplex construction,
in which two housing units share a common central wall. Most of the yards associated with the
properties have a lawn, landscaping, and impervious surfaces that include driveways, sidewalks,
and patios. There are several commercial properties within and among the residential properties
including a fuel distribution facility, a transmission service company, a salon, a restaurant, and a
market. In addition, there are a few vacant lots and uninhabited properties within and among the
residential properties.

A storm sewer catch basin located in the northwestern corner of the former Kil-Tone Company
property receives storm water from the entire four-acre property and discharges into the head of
the Tarkiln Branch located across South East Boulevard about 400 feet west of the property. The
Tarkiln Branch is a tributary of the Parvin Branch which flows into the Maurice River located
approximately 3.5 miles from the site. The Maurice River eventually flows into Union Lake six
miles downstream of the entrance of Parvin Branch.




                                                 1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES

The Kil-Tone Company (Kil-Tone) began operations at the property located at East Chestnut
Avenue in Vineland, New Jersey on or about 1916. Kil-Tone manufactured, among other things,
the pesticide lead arsenate. In the mid-1920s, Kil-Tone was acquired by John Lucas & Company
forming the Lucas Kil-Tone Company. The Lucas Kil-Tone Company absorbed the former Kil-
Tone Company pesticide operations and continued manufacturing arsenic-based pesticides on the
property. Around 1930, John Lucas & Company was acquired by the Sherwin Williams
Company. Lucas Kil-Tone operated as a subsidiary of Sherwin Williams until they ceased
operations at the property in the 1930s. Sanborn maps from 1919 and 1925 were used to identify
the original site buildings used by the former Kil-Tone Company to manufacture pesticides.
Buildings identified on the Sanborn maps included an acid plant, tank room, engine room, and
manufacturing building for grinding, mixing and pressing, and storage. A laboratory was
constructed after 1919 on the southwest corner of the property.

Lead arsenate is a pentavalent form of inorganic arsenic, which exists normally as white crystals
with no discernible odor, contains about 22 percent arsenic and is slightly soluble in cold water.
Inorganic arsenicals are known to be acutely toxic. Lead arsenate was the most extensively used
of the arsenical insecticides. Information obtained from the Vineland Chamber of Commerce and
the New Jersey Experiment Stations that dates between 1917 and 1926 indicates that specific
products manufactured by the former Kil-Tone Company included Green Cross Dry Powdered
Arsenate of Lead, Green Cross Standard Arsenate of Lead (paste), Green Cross Sulpho-arsenate
Powder, Green Cross Sulphur and Arsenate of Lead Mixture, Modified Kil-Tone, Improved Kil-
Tone, Fruit Kil-Tone, Bordeaux Mixture, Dry Powdered Arsenite of Zinc, and Beetle Mort.
Based on the timeframe during which the former Kil-Tone Company operated, these products
were regulated under the Insecticide Act of 1910. In September 1932, the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA) issued a Notice of Judgment under the Insecticide Act against the Lucas
Kil-Tone Company for the adulteration and misbranding of Bordo (lead arsenate) and Green
Cross Nico-Tone. In this judgment, the Lucas Kil-Tone Company pleaded guilty and paid a $490
fine. This action involved shipments of Bordo Lead Arsenate and Green Cross Nico-Tone that
contained ingredients (for example calcium arsenate) that were not declared on the label and
greater percentages of arsenic in water soluble form than declared on the label. In 1929 and
1930, Lucas Kil-Tone also was issued a Notice of Judgment for adulteration and misbranding of
Green Cross Beetle Mort. The products contained ingredients that were inconsistent with the
label including, a greater amount of water-soluble arsenic expressed as metallic. Lucas Kil-Tone
continued to operate at the property until about 1933. Since Lucas Kil-Tone ceased operations,
the property has undergone several property transfers. The 1949 and 1968 Sanborn maps indicate
that the Uddo Taormina Company Food Products occupied the property and the configurations
of the buildings had changed. Since that time, several entities have operated on the property. The
property is currently owned by Urban Manufacturing, LLC, which purchased the property in
2008. Urban Sign & Crane, Inc., is the current tenant, and its operation includes the fabrication
and installation of commercial signage.

The LERCO Company property is located directly across East Chestnut Avenue from the former
Kil-Tone Company property. A fuel distribution facility operated on the LERCO property since
the 1930s but is no longer in use. In 1989, a release of petroleum hydrocarbons was reported to

                                                2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

NJDEP during the removal of a 20,000-gallon underground storage tank (UST) at the LERCO
property. Since 1989, LERCO has performed remedial investigation activities on its property,
which included removal of several USTs, aboveground storage tanks, light non-aqueous phase
liquid remediation, and soil and groundwater sampling. Soil and groundwater sampling
performed on the LERCO property identified high concentrations of benzene, toluene,
ethylbenzene, and xylenes, as well as arsenic and lead. Arsenic was identified at concentrations
up to 20,500 milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg) and lead up to 28,700 mg/kg. The soil
exceedances for arsenic and lead were mainly detected in the 1.5 to 2 feet and 4.5 to 5 feet below
ground surface (bgs) soil sampling intervals, along the western and southern property
boundaries. Since the initial investigation, several soil sampling events have been conducted at
the LERCO property by environmental consulting companies, including Aqua-tex and RT
Environmental. RT Environmental indicated that the metal compounds identified were not
associated with the LERCO site operations. RT Environmental also stated that historical
operations on the LERCO site support that it has always been operated as a fueling station, with
no evidence that they would have generated arsenic or lead wastes. The presence of arsenic in
conjunction with lead indicated that it is likely that some portion of the lead contamination may
not be petroleum-related.

In August 2014, NJDEP initiated a site investigation to determine if the lead and arsenic
contamination could be attributed to the historic operations at the former Kil-Tone Company
property. The NJDEP investigation found arsenic on the former Kil-Tone Company property at
concentrations as high as 740 mg/kg in the top six inches of soil and at concentrations as high as
5,800 mg/kg at depth (3.5 to 4 feet bgs). Groundwater samples collected from temporary well
points on the former Kil-Tone Company property showed arsenic concentrations from 8.1
micrograms per liter (μg/L) to 14,000 μg/L. This discovery prompted NJDEP to refer the site to
EPA on November 14, 2014. The site was proposed to the National Priorities List (NPL) on
September 30, 2015 and was added to the NPL on April 5, 2016.

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

EPA has worked closely with local residents, public officials and other interested members of the
community since residential sampling started at the site in 2014. Work is occurring in a
residential community and directly affects residential properties, so the level of interest is high.
This section of Vineland is primarily Spanish-speaking. As such, a bilingual community
involvement coordinator is involved with the site.

The Proposed Plan for OU1 of the site was released for public comment on July 13, 2016. The
Proposed Plan and other site-related documents were made available to the public in the
administrative record file maintained at the Vineland City Library, 1058 East Landis Avenue in
Vineland, New Jersey and at the EPA Region 2 Superfund Records Center located at 290
Broadway, New York, New York (see Appendix III). The administrative record file is also
available online at http://www.epa/gov/superfund/former-kil-tone.

The notice of availability of these documents was published in the Press of Atlantic City
newspaper on July 13, 2016. Notice was also published in Nuestra Comunidad, a Spanish



                                                 3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

language newspaper. Both English and Spanish versions of the Proposed Plan were made
available. The public comment period lasted 30 days and closed on August 12, 2016.

A public meeting was held on August 2, 2016, at the Gloria M Sabater Elementary School, 301
Southeast Boulevard in Vineland, New Jersey to discuss the findings of the Remedial
Investigation (RI) and the Focused Feasibility Study (FFS) and to present EPA’s plan to the
community. At this meeting, EPA representatives answered questions about the RI/FFS and the
remedial alternatives. Comments that were received by EPA at the public meeting and in writing
during the public comment period are addressed in the Responsiveness Summary (see Appendix
V).

SCOPE AND ROLE OF THIS OPERABLE UNIT

Due to the large area, the different media affected by contamination, the complexity of multiple
properties and varying land uses, EPA is addressing the cleanup of the site in several phases, or
operable units (OUs). This ROD addresses the first operable unit associated with the site and
addresses contaminated soils on residential properties in the vicinity of the former Kil-Tone
Company property only. Future OUs will address contamination at the former Kil-Tone
Company property itself, other non-residential properties with contaminated soil, contaminated
groundwater, contaminated surface water and contaminated sediment. Investigations for these
other OUs are either ongoing or will be initiated at a later date.

The number of properties referenced in this ROD, which require a CERCLA response action is
an estimate used to calculate the approximate costs of the cleanup alternatives. The precise
number of residential properties that will require soil remediation under the OU1 remedy will be
determined upon completion of additional soil sampling activities to be conducted during the
remedial design and possibly refined during implementation of the remedial action.

PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS AND EARLY RESPONSE ACTIONS

In January and February 2015, EPA completed soil sampling on 27 residential properties located
near the former Kil-Tone Company property, as well as in three background locations. Soil
borings were installed at each residential property to a maximum depth of two feet below the
ground surface, from the following depth intervals: 0-2 inches, 2-6 inches, 6-12 inches and 12-24
inches. Analytical results show elevated concentrations of lead and arsenic exceeding the NJDEP
Residential Direct Contact Soil Remediation Standards (RDCSRS) of 400 mg/kg for lead and 19
mg/kg for arsenic.

EPA then expanded the residential soil sampling program to include additional residential
properties to determine the extent of contamination. From June 8 to July 1, 2015, soil sampling
was completed at an additional 35 homes. Approximately 815 soil samples were collected, and
concentrations of lead and arsenic exceeding the NJDEP RDCSRS were found at 30 residential
properties. During this event, a population of soil samples was collected from eight residential
properties and analyzed for Target Compound List (TCL) volatile organic compounds (VOCs),
semi-volatile organic compounds (SVOCs), pesticides, and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) to
fully characterize the nature and extent of contamination and ensure that all possible

                                                4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

contaminants of potential concern were identified. Analytical results show elevated
concentrations of pesticides (dieldrin, heptachlor epoxide) and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
(PAHs) (benzo(a)pyrene, benzo(a)anthracene, and benzo(b)fluoranthene) exceeding the
RDCSRS.

In February 2016, EPA conducted additional residential soil sampling to refine the horizontal
and vertical extent of soil contamination at the site. EPA sampled 27 residential properties
located north, south, and east of the former Kil-Tone Company property. All but two of these
properties were sampled during previous sampling events. These two additional properties are
located near the site and access in order to conduct sampling was delayed. Soil samples were
collected to help determine vertical extent of soil contamination and targeted depth intervals at
the following six depth intervals at each boring location: 0-2, 2-24, 24-36, 36-48, 48-60, and 60-
72 inches below ground surface. All samples were analyzed for TAL metals. In addition, a subset
of the soil samples were analyzed for TCL VOCs, SVOCs, pesticides and PCBs.

Early Response Actions

In April 2016, EPA’s removal program began immediate actions to prevent exposure to lead and
arsenic contamination identified in surface soil at concentrations as high as 5,700 mg/kg and
1,000 mg/kg, respectively, at residential properties located near the former Kil-Tone Company
property. The removal program’s action level for arsenic is 67 mg/kg rather than NJDEP’s
standard of 19 mg/kg; NJDEP’s RDCSRS for arsenic is consistent with statewide background
concentrations. The removal program’s action level for lead is the same as NJDEP’s RDCSRS of
400 mg/kg. Out of the 57 properties that are currently known to exceed NJDEP’s RDCSRS for
arsenic and/or lead, 26 properties exceeded the removal action level for arsenic and/or lead.
Pesticides and PAHs were not detected above removal action levels. EPA’s removal action
consisted of the placement of six inches of topsoil on top of these 26 properties, with instructions
to property owners and/or residents to not disturb this layer until a permanent remedy could be
implemented. These preventative measures were completed in June 2016 on residential
properties in the vicinity of the former Kil-Tone Company property, and are on-going at
additional residential properties located in the floodplain of the Tarkiln Branch. Final reports
about the work that was conducted at these properties will be added to the administrative record
once they are completed. In addition, a soil cover is being placed over the former Kil-Tone
Company property itself to prevent further migration of contamination from the property until a
permanent remedy can be implemented.

RESULTS OF THE REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION

Site Geology and Hydrogeology

The topography of the site area is generally flat. The United States Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service, Soil Survey of Cumberland County, New Jersey states that the site is
located on Downer and Auro loamy sands. The Downer loamy sands are formed from
fluviomarine deposits, located on river basins or hills. The Auro loamy sands occur with low
hills and ancient stream terraces. The permeability is moderately slow to moderate for these soil
associations. Parent material is described as loamy and gravelly alluvium. Much of the area is

                                                 5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

covered by houses, streets, driveways, buildings, parking lots, and urban construction. During
sampling activities, the soil types observed at the background and the residential areas included
coarse sands, coarse sandy loams, coarse loamy sands, coarse sandy clays, coarse loamy sand
and sand. In addition, background and residential soil samples collected during the residential
soil sampling events were analyzed for grain size. The grain size analysis indicated that the
background and residential soil samples are primarily sand. The percentage of sand in the
background soil samples ranged from 61.4 percent to 63.9. The percentage of sand in the
residential soil samples ranged from 54.4 percent to 85 percent. The grain size analysis indicated
that the background and residential soil samples also contained silt, clay, and colloids. During
sampling activities, fill material was routinely encountered in some of the soil borings. The fill
material included concrete, red brick, coarse sand, coarse black sand, coarse orange and orange
black sand with asphalt, brick and rock shards, plastic, terra cotta, dark brown soil fill, various
types of variegated dark brown soil and fill, coal fragments, coal ash, silt, small shards of coal,
porcelain, slag and trash.

Site Characterization Summary and Results

The preliminary sampling that was initiated in January 2015 was used to help delineate the
nature and extent of contamination. To date, thousands of environmental samples have been
collected from soil, sediment, groundwater and surface water. Sampling has occurred on publicly
owned and commercial and residential properties. The focus of this decision document is
contaminated soil at residential properties in the vicinity of the former Kil-Tone Company
property.

Soil samples collected from residential properties were analyzed for metals, VOCs, SVOCs,
including PAHs, pesticides, and PCBs. The analytical results of residential soil samples were
compared to NJDEP’s RDCSRS. Based on the residential sampling data, lead and arsenic were
detected most frequently and at the greatest concentration above New Jersey RDCSRS of 400
mg/kg and 19 mg/kg, respectively. Soil samples had concentrations of arsenic and lead up to
1,000 mg/kg for arsenic and 5,700 mg/kg for lead. All VOCs were detected at levels below both
NJDEP RDCSRSs and EPA risk-based levels. All metals other than lead and arsenic, all SVOCs,
with the exceptions of three PAHs, and all but two pesticides were also detected below these two
benchmarks. All analytical data are available in the RI and RI Addendum reports in the
administrative record.

The pesticides found at the residential properties at concentrations above their RDCSRS (and
their respective standard) are dieldrin (0.04 mg/kg) and heptachlor epoxide (0.07 mg/kg).
Maximum concentrations were found to be 0.49 mg/kg for dieldrin and 0.38 mg/kg for
heptachlor epoxide. The PAHs found at concentrations above their RDCSRS (and their
respective standards) are benzo(a)pyrene (0.2 mg/kg), benzo(a)anthracene (0.6 mg/kg), and
benzo(b)fluoranthene (0.6 mg/kg); these were detected at concentrations as high as 0.81 mg/kg,
2.1 mg/kg, and 2.2 mg/kg, respectively. These pesticides and PAHs were found less frequently
than arsenic and lead at the residential properties at concentrations above RDCSRS.

Contamination is primarily found in shallow soil on residential properties, though some areas of
deeper contamination were identified. Shallow soil is generally defined as the 0-2 foot depth

                                                 6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

interval, and the maximum depth of soil sampling was 6 feet. The estimated volume of soil to be
addressed is approximately 21,000 cubic yards, though this volume may increase during
planning and/or implementation of the remedial action if additional contamination associated
with the site is found.

Contaminated soil on the residential properties is likely the result of surface water runoff and air
dispersion from the former Kil-Tone Company property.

The RI report for OU1 of the site was finalized in July 2016.

CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES

The OU1 properties are zoned for residential use. Future land use is expected to remain the same.
Future operable units will address other properties and media. A discussion of their current and
potential future site and resource use will be included in those decision documents, as
appropriate.

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS

As part of the RI/FFS, a baseline risk assessment was conducted to estimate the current and
future effects of contaminants on human health and the environment. A baseline risk assessment
is an analysis of the potential adverse human health and ecological effects of releases of
hazardous substances from a site in the absence of any actions or controls to mitigate such
releases, under current and future land uses. The baseline risk assessment includes a human
health risk assessment (HHRA) and an ecological risk assessment. It provides the basis for
taking action and identifies the contaminants and exposure pathways that need to be addressed
by the remedial action. This section of the ROD summarizes the results of the baseline risk
assessment for the site.

Human Health Risk Assessment

A four-step process is utilized for assessing site-related human health risks for a reasonable
maximum exposure scenario: Hazard Identification – uses the analytical data collected to
identify the contaminants of potential concern at the site for each medium, with consideration of
a number of factors explained below; Exposure Assessment - estimates the magnitude of actual
and/or potential human exposures, the frequency and duration of these exposures, and the
pathways (e.g., ingesting contaminated well-water) by which humans are potentially exposed;
Toxicity Assessment - determines the types of adverse health effects associated with chemical
exposures, and the relationship between magnitude of exposure (dose) and severity of adverse
effects (response); and Risk Characterization - summarizes and combines outputs of the
exposure and toxicity assessments to provide a quantitative assessment of site-related risks. The
risk characterization also identifies contamination with concentrations which exceed acceptable
levels, defined by the NCP as an excess lifetime cancer risk greater than 1 x 10-6 – 1 x 10-4, an
excess of lifetime cancer risk greater than 1 x 10-6 (i.e., point of departure) combined with site-
specific circumstances, or a Hazard Index greater than 1.0; contaminants at these concentrations
are considered contaminants of concern (COCs) and are typically those that will require

                                                 7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

remediation at the site. Also included in this section is a discussion of the uncertainties
associated with these risks.

Hazard Identification

In this step, the contaminants of concern in soil were identified based on such factors as toxicity,
frequency of detection, fate and transport of the contaminants in the environment, concentration,
mobility, persistence and bioaccumulation. Analytical information that was collected to
determine the nature and extent of contamination revealed the presence of arsenic and lead on
residential properties at concentrations of potential concern. Surface soil was the only media
quantitatively evaluated in the HHRA.

This ROD focuses on the residential properties in the immediate vicinity of the Former Kil-tone
Company site. The contaminated media, concentrations detected and concentrations utilized to
estimate potential risks and hazards for the COCs at each property that were quantitatively
assessed are presented in Table 1 (all tables are included in Appendix II). A comprehensive list
of all COCs in surface soils can be found in the BHHRA, entitled “Human Health Risk
Assessment – Former Kil-tone Company Site”, which was completed in May 2016. Lead was
identified as a COC; the relevant subset of information on lead is summarized in Table 7.

Exposure Assessment

Consistent with Superfund policy and guidance, the BHHRA is a baseline human health risk
assessment and therefore assumes no remediation or institutional controls to mitigate or remove
hazardous substance releases. Cancer risks and noncancer hazard indices were calculated based
on an estimate of the reasonable maximum exposure (RME) expected to occur under current and
future conditions at a site. The RME is defined as the highest exposure that is reasonably
expected to occur at a site.

Exposure pathways were identified for each potentially exposed population and each potential
exposure scenario for exposure to surface soil. Exposure pathways assessed in the BHHRA
included current and future incidental ingestion of and dermal contact with contaminated soil by
adult and child residents. A summary of the exposure pathways included in the baseline human
health risk assessment can be found in Table 2. Typically, exposures are evaluated using a
statistical estimate of the exposure point concentration, which is usually an upper-bound estimate
of the average concentration for each contaminant, but in some cases may be the maximum
detected concentration, or, when evaluating lead, the arithmetic mean concentration. A summary
of the exposure point concentrations for the site-related COCs in surface soil can be found in
Table 1, while a comprehensive list of the exposure point concentrations for all COCs can be
found in the BHHRA.

Toxicity Assessment

In this step, the types of adverse health effects associated with contaminant exposures and the
relationship between magnitude of exposure and severity of adverse health effects were

                                                  8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

determined. Potential health effects are contaminant-specific and may include the risk of
developing cancer over a lifetime or other noncancer health effects, such as changes in the
normal functions of organs within the body (e.g., changes in the effectiveness of the immune
system). Some contaminants are capable of causing both cancer and noncancer health effects.

Under current EPA guidelines, the likelihood of carcinogenic risks and noncancer hazards due to
exposure to site chemicals are considered separately. Consistent with current EPA policy, it was
assumed that the toxic effects of the site-related chemicals would be additive. Thus, cancer and
noncancer risks associated with exposures to individual COCs were summed to indicate the
potential risks and hazards associated with mixtures of potential carcinogens and non-
carcinogens, respectively.

Toxicity data for the HHRA were provided by the Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS)
database, the Provisional Peer Reviewed Toxicity Database (PPRTV), or another source that is
identified as an appropriate reference for toxicity values consistent with EPA guidance
(http://www.epa.gov/oswer/riskassessment/pdf/tier3-toxicityvalue-whitepaper.pdf). This
information is presented in Table 3 (Noncancer Toxicity Data Summary) and Table 4 (Cancer
Toxicity Data Summary). Additional toxicity information for all COCs is presented in the
BHHRA.

Risk Characterization

Noncarcinogenic health effects were assessed using a hazard index (HI) approach, based on a
comparison of expected contaminant intakes and benchmark comparison levels of intake
(reference doses, reference concentrations). Reference doses (RfDs) and reference concentrations
(RfCs) are estimates of daily exposure levels for humans (including sensitive individuals) which
are thought to be safe over a lifetime of exposure. The estimated intake of chemicals identified in
environmental media (e.g., the amount of a chemical ingested from contaminated soil) is
compared to the RfD or the RfC to derive the hazard quotient (HQ) for the contaminant in the
particular medium. The HI is obtained by adding the hazard quotients for all compounds within a
particular medium that impacts a particular receptor population.

The HQ for oral and dermal exposures is calculated as below. The HQ for inhalation exposures
is calculated using a similar model that incorporates the RfC, rather than the RfD.

HQ = Intake/RfD

Where:         HQ = hazard quotient
               Intake = estimated intake for a chemical (mg/kg-day)
               RfD = reference dose (mg/kg-day)

The intake and the RfD will represent the same exposure period (i.e., chronic, subchronic, or
acute).

The key concept for a noncancer HI is that a “threshold level” (measured as an HI of less than 1)
exists at which noncancer health effects are not expected to occur.

                                                9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

As previously stated, the HI is calculated by summing the HQs for all chemicals for likely
exposure scenarios for a specific population. An HI greater than 1 indicates that the potential
exists for noncarcinogenic health effects to occur as a result of site-related exposures, with the
potential for health effects increasing as the HI increases. When the HI calculated for all
chemicals for a specific population exceeds 1, separate HI values are then calculated for those
chemicals which are known to act on the same target organ. These discrete HI values are then
compared to the acceptable limit of 1 to evaluate the potential for noncancer health effects on a
specific target organ. The HI provides a useful reference point for gauging the potential
significance of multiple contaminant exposures within a single medium or across media. A
summary of the non-carcinogenic hazards associated with these chemicals for each exposure
pathway is contained in Table 5.

As shown in Table 5, when separated by target organ, the HI for noncancer health effects
exceeded EPA’s threshold value of 1 for the child resident at two of the residential locations that
were assessed. The soil HIs at these residences ranged from 2 to 16. At one residence, the adult
HI of 2 just exceeded EPA’s threshold value. The noncancer hazards were mainly attributable to
ingestion of arsenic-contaminated surface soils.

For carcinogens, risks are generally expressed as the incremental probability of an individual
developing cancer over a lifetime as a result of exposure to a carcinogen, using the cancer slope
factor (SF) for oral and dermal exposures and the inhalation unit risk (IUR) for inhalation
exposures. Excess lifetime cancer risk for oral and dermal exposures is calculated from the
following equation, while the equation for inhalation exposures uses the IUR, rather than the SF:

Risk = LADD x SF

Where:         Risk = a unitless probability (1 x 10-6) of an individual developing cancer
               LADD = lifetime average daily dose averaged over 70 years (mg/kg-day)
               SF = cancer slope factor, expressed as [1/(mg/kg-day)]

These risks are probabilities that are usually expressed in scientific notation (such as 1 x 10-4).
An excess lifetime cancer risk of 1 x 10-4 indicates that one additional incidence of cancer may
occur in a population of 10,000 people who are exposed under the conditions identified in the
Exposure Assessment. Again, as stated in the NCP, the acceptable risk range for site-related
exposure is 10-6 to 10-4.

As shown in Table 6, an exceedance of the target risk range was predicted at one residential
location. The estimated cancer risk at this property for residents (child and adult) was 2 x 10-4.
The cancer risk was primarily due to ingestion of and dermal contact with arsenic in surface soil.
The estimated risks from COCs at the other two properties were within the acceptable risk range.

Lead

Lead was detected on residential properties at elevated concentrations. Because there are no
published quantitative toxicity values for lead, it is not possible to evaluate risks from lead

                                                 10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

exposure using the same methodology as for the other COCs. However, since the toxicokinetics
(the absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion from the body) of lead are well
understood, lead is evaluated based on blood lead concentrations. The lead concentrations in
surface soil at the targeted properties in proximity to the former Kil-Tone Company property
were qualitatively assessed by comparing the average lead concentrations found on each property
to EPA’s residential soil screening level of 400 mg/kg. This lead soil screening value
corresponds to a modelled estimate of 5% of the population with a blood lead level greater than
10 ug/dl. As summarized in Table 7, the mean lead concentrations at two of the residential
properties exceeded EPA’s residential soil screening level of 400 mg/kg.

In summary, arsenic was identified as the COC which contributed to unacceptable noncancer
hazards and cancer risks at the targeted residential properties. Qualitative screening identified
lead as an additional COC. The noncancer hazards and cancer risks from all COCs can be found
in the final HHRA.

Uncertainties

The procedures and inputs used to assess risks in this evaluation, as in all such assessments, are
subject to a wide variety of uncertainties. In general, the main sources of uncertainty include:

•      environmental chemistry sampling and analysis
•      environmental parameter measurement
•      fate and transport modeling
•      exposure parameter estimation
•      toxicological data.

Uncertainty in environmental sampling arises in part from the potentially uneven distribution of
chemicals in the media sampled. Consequently, there is significant uncertainty as to the actual
levels present. Environmental chemistry-analysis error can stem from several sources including
the errors inherent in the analytical methods and characteristics of the matrix being sampled.

Uncertainties in the exposure assessment are related to estimates of how often an individual
would actually come in contact with the chemicals of concern, the period of time over which
such exposure would occur, and in the models used to estimate the concentrations of the
chemicals of concern at the point of exposure.

Uncertainties in toxicological data occur in extrapolating both from animals to humans and from
high to low doses of exposure, as well as from the difficulties in assessing the toxicity of a
mixture of chemicals. These uncertainties are addressed by making conservative assumptions
concerning risk and exposure parameters throughout the assessment. As a result, the risk
assessment provides upper-bound estimates of the risks to populations near the sites, and is
highly unlikely to underestimate actual risks related to the site.

For the dermal exposure to soil pathway, there are also uncertainties, such as a) not all chemicals
have scientifically established dermal absorption values for soil and therefore may be left out of
the quantitative assessment, b) sometimes soil to skin adherence factors do not match exactly

                                                11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

with site conditions and c) exposed skin surface area and exposure frequency may change
seasonally, which may not be adequately accounted for in the exposure parameters used to
represent the RME scenario.

Additional noteworthy sources of uncertainty in this HHRA include the following:

Due to the small number of samples collected from property 010, Pro UCL-derived exposure
point concentrations could not be calculated, therefore the maximum concentrations of COCs
found on each property were used as EPCs (with the exception of lead). Using maximum
concentrations as the EPCs for risk calculations is a conservative assumption and will likely
overestimate hazards and risks at this property.

The inhalation pathway was not quantitatively evaluated in this HHRA since the targeted
property size was small, the amount of exposed soil on each property was minimal, and no
volatile contaminants were retained as COCs. The exclusion of this pathway could have
underestimated hazards and risks from nonvolatile COCs.

More specific information concerning public health risks, including a quantitative evaluation of
the degree of risk associated with various exposure pathways, is presented in the risk assessment
report.

Ecological Risk Assessment

Since OU1 focuses on residential properties, no ecological risk assessment was conducted.
However, ecological risk assessments will be performed for future operable units.

Basis for Taking Action

Based on the results of the quantitative human health risk assessment, EPA has determined that
actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from the site, if not addressed by the
response action selected in this ROD, may present a current or potential threat to human health.

REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES

Remedial action objectives are specific goals to protect human health and the environment.
These objectives are based on available information and standards such as applicable or relevant
and appropriate requirements (ARARs), to-be-considered (TBC) guidance and site-specific risk-
based levels and background (i.e. reference area) concentrations. The following RAOs were
established for OU1 of the site:

      Prevent potential current and future unacceptable risks to human receptors resulting from
       direct contact with contaminated soil.
      Prevent migration of site contaminants from the OU1 properties to other areas via
       overland flow and air dispersion.




                                               12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Remediation Goals

EPA has adopted the preliminary remediation goals identified in the Proposed Plan as the final
Remediation Goals (RGs) for OU1 of the site. The soil remediation goals for COCs are
consistent with New Jersey RDCSRS. The remediation goals for OU1 are as follows:

                Constituent in Soil                     Cleanup Goal (mg/kg)
                       Lead                                     400
                      Arsenic                                    19
                      Dieldrin                                  0.04
                Heptachlor epoxide                              0.07
                  Benzo(a)pyrene                                0.2
                Benzo(a)anthracene                              0.6
               Benzo(b)fluoranthene                             0.6
       Note: mg/kg = milligrams per kilogram

The impact to groundwater from the COCs in the soil was not evaluated as part of the OU1 RI,
but given that the contamination is primarily located in the top two feet of soil, this is not
anticipated to be an issue for this OU. Groundwater, and potential impact to groundwater, will be
evaluated as part of a future OU.

DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

CERCLA Section 121(b)(1), 42 U.S.C. § 9621(b)(1), mandates that remedial actions be
protective of human health and the environment, be cost-effective, and use permanent solutions,
alternative treatment technologies, and resource recovery alternatives to the maximum extent
practicable. Section 121(b)(1) also establishes a preference for remedial actions which employ,
as a principal element, treatment to reduce the volume, toxicity, or mobility of the hazardous
substances, pollutants, and contaminants at a site permanently and significantly. CERCLA
Section 121(d), 42 U.S.C. § 9621(d), further specifies that a remedial action must attain a level
or standard of control of the hazardous substances, pollutants and contaminants, which at least
attains ARARs under federal and state laws, unless a waiver can be justified.

Remedial alternatives for OU1 of the site are summarized below. Capital costs are those
expenditures that are required to construct a remedial alternative. Operation and maintenance
(O&M) costs are those post-construction costs necessary to ensure or verify the continued
effectiveness of a remedial alternative and are estimated on an annual basis. Present worth is the
amount of money which, if invested in the current year, would be sufficient to cover all the costs
over time associated with a project, calculated using a discount rate of seven percent and up to a
30-year time interval. Construction time is the time required to construct and implement the
alternative and does not include the time required to design the remedy, negotiate performance of
the remedy with the responsible parties, or procure contracts for design and construction.
Detailed information regarding the alternatives can be found in the 2016 Focused Feasibility
Study Report (FFS Report).



                                               13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The remedial alternatives evaluated for OU1 were limited for several reasons. The affected
residential properties are primarily located in well-established neighborhoods where space is
limited; consequently, on-site remedies that involve treatment were not considered. In addition,
since no principal threat wastes are associated with OU1, utilizing treatment of the contaminated
soil as a principal element was not the focus of any of the alternatives developed for OU1.

Alternative 1 - No Action

The NCP requires that a “No Action” alternative be evaluated to establish a baseline for
comparison with other remedial alternatives. Under this alternative, no action would be taken to
remediate the contaminated soil at residential properties.


Total Capital Cost:                   $0
Annual O&M:                           $0
Present Worth Cost:                   $0
Construction Timeframe:               0 years

Alternative 2 – Limited Soil Excavation, Soil Cover and Institutional Controls

Under this alternative, soil at concentrations above remediation goals would be excavated to six
inches and clean soil would be placed over contaminated soil to minimize direct contact. In
addition, institutional controls (deed notices) would be implemented to prevent human exposure
by regulating future use of contaminated areas within the properties. The deed notices would
require maintenance of the cover material and restrictions on excavation of the property.
Contaminated soil at residential properties would be excavated to 6 inches below ground surface
and disposed of at a permitted off-site disposal facility. Following removal of the top 6 inches of
surface soil, a geotextile fabric layer would be placed to act as a visual marker and covered with
6 inches of clean fill and sodded. No pavement or structures would be removed for this
alternative.

After construction, the soil cover would be graded and vegetated with grass; plants with deep
root systems would not be planted on the capped area. A deed restriction would notify residents
that contaminated soils remain on the property, and provide notification of future use restrictions
and maintenance requirements. The capped area would require inspection on a periodic basis.
Implementation of this alternative would entail the following major steps:

•      Site preparation
•      Tree and vegetation removal, as necessary, to excavate contaminated soil
•      Limited excavation
•      Particulate monitoring and dust suppression
•      Waste characterization sampling
•      Transportation
•      Off-site disposal
•      Site restoration
•      Maintenance

                                                14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Since this alternative results in contaminants remaining on site above acceptable levels, a review
of the action at least every five years would be required.

Total Capital Cost:           $1,920,000
Annual O&M:                   $3,544
Present Worth Cost:           $1,924,000
Construction Time Frame:      1 year

Alternative 3 – Excavation with Off-site Disposal

Under this alternative, contaminated soils exceeding the remediation goals would be excavated.
Excavated soils would be transported and disposed off-site. Implementation of this alternative
would entail the following major components:

        Site preparation
        Tree and vegetation removal, as necessary, to excavate contaminated soil
        Demolition and replacement of sheds and garages, as necessary, to excavate
         contaminated soil
        Removal and replacement of asphalt and concrete paved driveways, as necessary, to
         excavate contaminated soil
        Excavation
        Particulate monitoring and dust suppression
        Waste characterization sampling
        Transportation
        Off-site disposal
        Confirmatory sampling
        Site restoration
        Maintenance of restored vegetation

Excavated soil would be sampled to determine if soils would be disposed of as either hazardous
waste or non-hazardous waste. Treatment of soil, if needed, would be conducted at and by the
approved disposal facility.

If the excavation encounters the water table, management of the water and saturated soils would
need to be addressed.

Total Capital Cost:                   $8,773,059
Annual O&M:                           $927
Present Worth Cost:                   $8,774,000
Construction Time Frame:              1 year

COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES

In selecting a remedy for a site, EPA considers the factors set forth in Section 121 of
CERCLA 42 U.S.C. § 9621, and conducts a detailed analysis of the viable remedial alternatives

                                                15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

pursuant to Section 300.430(e)(9) of the NCP, 40 C.F.R § 300.430(e)(9), EPA’s Guidance for
Conducting Remedial Investigations and Feasibility Studies, OSWER Directive 9355.3-01, and
EPA’s A Guide to Preparing Superfund Proposed Plans, Records of Decision, and Other
Remedy Selection Decision Documents, OSWER 9200.1-23.P. The detailed analysis consists of
an assessment of the individual alternatives against each of the nine evaluation criteria at 40
C.F.R. § 300.430(e)(9)(iii) and a comparative analysis focusing upon the relative performance of
each alternative against those criteria.

A comparative analysis of these alternatives based upon the nine evaluation criteria noted below
follows.

Threshold Criteria – The first two criteria are known as “threshold criteria” because they are
the minimum requirements that each response measure must meet in order to be eligible for
selection as a remedy.

1. Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment
Overall protection of human health and the environment determines whether an alternative
eliminates, reduces, or controls threats to public health and the environment through
institutional controls, engineering controls, or treatment.

Alternative 1, the no action alternative, is not protective of human health and the environment
because it does not eliminate, reduce, or control risk of exposure to contaminated soils through
off-site disposal, engineering controls, or institutional controls.

Alternative 2 would provide protection to property owners/occupants from future exposure to
contaminated soils through the placement of cover material over the contaminated soils and
through institutional controls, such as land use restrictions and public education. However,
contaminated soils would remain in place on the properties above the remediation goals.

Alternative 3 would remove contaminated soils, with concentrations above the remediation goals
and would, therefore, be protective of both human and environmental receptors. There would be
no local human health or environmental impacts associated with off-site disposal because the
contaminants would be removed from the properties, to a secure, appropriate location.

2. Compliance with applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs)
Section 121 (d) of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. § 9621(d), and Section 300.430(f)(1)(ii)(B) of the NCP,
40 CFR §300.430(f)(1)(ii)(B), require that remedial actions at CERCLA sites at least attain
legally applicable or relevant and appropriate Federal and State requirements, standards,
criteria and limitations which are collectively referred to as “ARARs,” unless such ARARs are
waived under Section 121(d)(4) of CERCLA.

Compliance with ARARs addresses whether a remedy will meet all of the applicable or relevant
and appropriate requirements of other Federal and State environmental statutes or provides a
basis for invoking a waiver.

A complete list of ARARs can be found in Table 8 in Appendix II.

                                                16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 1, since ARARs apply to actions taken, they are not applicable to the no action
alternative.

Alternative 2 provides compliance with Chemical-specific ARARs because the soil cover and
institutional controls would be effective in preventing exposure to the contaminants. Location-
specific ARARs and Action-specific ARARs would both be met by proper design and
implementation of the respective components such as general construction standards and waste
handling requirements. The Location-specific ARARs and Action-specific ARARs for the
disposal phase would be met with proper waste management on-site and selection of appropriate
disposal facilities.

Alternative 3 provides compliance with Chemical-specific ARARs by removing contaminated
soil above New Jersey RDCSRS. Location and Action-specific ARARs would be met during the
construction phase by proper design and implementation of the action such as general
construction standards and waste handling requirements. The Location-specific ARARs and
Action-specific ARARs for the disposal phase would be met with proper waste management on-
site and selection of appropriate disposal facilities.


Primary Balancing Criteria – The next five criteria, criteria 3 through 7, are known as
“primary balancing criteria”. These criteria are factors by which tradeoffs between response
measures are assessed so that the best options will be chosen, given site-specific data and
conditions.


3. Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence
Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence considers the ability of an alternative to maintain
protection of human health and the environment over time.

Alternative 1 provides no long-term effectiveness or permanence.

Alternative 2 would not be as permanent or as effective over the long term as Alternative 3 since
contaminated soil would remain at the properties with concentrations above the remediation
goals, and deed restrictions would not eliminate potential future health risks to property
owners/occupants associated with exposure to contaminated surface soils. Application of a deed
notice requires that the property owner place a deed notice on their property. Consent to place a
deed notice on residential properties may be difficult to obtain partly because, notwithstanding
the presence of contamination on their properties, some residential homeowners may perceive
that deed notices may affect property values. In addition, monitoring and enforcing use
restrictions imposed through deed notices requires dedicated resources. Soil covers could be
breached by home owners when performing activities generally associated with residential use,
such as tree planting, installation of fencing and installation of subsurface drains, though the use
of a geotextile layer as a marker would mitigate help mitigate that risk.

Alternative 3 would provide long-term effectiveness and permanence by removing contaminants
from residential properties and providing secure disposal of excavated soil at appropriate

                                                 17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

permitted facilities. Off-site treatment, where necessary, and disposal at a secure, permitted
hazardous waste facility for contaminated soil is reliable because the design of such facilities
includes safeguards and would ensure the reliability of the technology and the security of the
waste material. In addition, upon completion of the remedy for Alternative 3, the affected
properties would be suitable for unrestricted residential use. Long-term monitoring and
maintenance of the residential properties and CERCLA five-year reviews would not be required.

4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume through Treatment
Reduction in Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume of Contaminants through Treatment evaluates an
alternative's use of treatment to reduce the harmful effects of principal contaminants, their
ability to move in the environment and the amount of contamination present.

Alternative 1 would not reduce the toxicity, mobility or volume of contaminated soil, since the
soil would remain in place.

Alternative 2 would not provide reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume of contamination
through treatment.

Alternative 3 would not provide reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume of contamination at
the properties through treatment.

5. Short-Term Effectiveness
Short-term Effectiveness considers the length of time needed to implement an alternative and the
risks the alternative poses to workers, residents and the environment during implementation.

Alternative 1 poses no short-term adverse impacts to the community.

Alternative 2 would be effective in the short term since contaminated soil would not be
significantly disturbed during construction activities. Under this alternative, any potential
environmental impacts associated with the excavation of soil would be minimized with the
proper installation and implementation of dust and erosion control measures, by performing
excavation with appropriate health and safety measures, and by using a lined temporary staging
area. Appropriate transportation safety measures would be required during the shipping of the
contaminated soil to approved off-site disposal facilities. Construction of the required
containment system and establishment of the deed notices, could be accomplished in
approximately 1 year.

Alternative 3 involves excavation of contaminated soil and would present a potential for short-
term exposure. As with Alternative 2, under this alternative any potential environmental impacts
associated with the excavation of soil would be minimized with the proper installation and
implementation of dust and erosion control measures, by performing excavation with appropriate
health and safety measures, and by using a lined temporary staging area. Appropriate
transportation safety measures would be required during the shipping of the contaminated soil to
approved off-site disposal facilities. Completion of the required construction for most properties
can be accomplished in approximately 1 year.



                                               18

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Both Alternatives 2 and 3 would result in some short-term impacts to the community, in the form
of vehicular (truck) traffic and noise and dust from construction/excavation activities, although
Alternative 2 (limited removal of soil and bringing soil in to construct a soil cover) would
generate less truck traffic than Alternative 3 (removing contaminated soil from properties and
bringing soil in to fill excavated areas). Traffic, noise, and dust impacts could be mitigated to
some extent by limiting the construction schedule to daytime hours on weekdays or other timing
as specified by local ordinance. Perimeter air monitoring and dust control measures would be
required to address concerns over exposure to dust during activities.

6. Implementability
Implementability addresses the technical and administrative feasibility of a remedy from design
through construction and operation. Factors such as availability of services and materials,
administrative feasibility, and coordination with other governmental entities are also considered.

Alternative 1 requires no implementation.

Alternative 2 can be implemented; however, the development of protective institutional controls
that would be both enforceable and acceptable to the residential property owners is highly
uncertain. Administrative implementation of Alternative 2 may be significantly impacted by the
need to impose deed notices on residential properties to prevent human exposure by restricting
future use of contaminated areas within the properties. Consent to place a deed notice on
residential properties may be difficult to obtain because these notices would restrict the owners’
use of the property and would not likely be viewed favorably by the owners. Implementation of
Alternative 2 is also complicated to some extent by the need to perform soil cover construction
on residential properties.

Alternative 3 is complicated to some extent by the need to perform excavation and backfilling on
residential properties. Since Alternative 3 results in the removal of contaminated soil, a deed
notice placing restrictions on use of the property would be unnecessary.

7. Cost
Cost includes estimated capital and annual operation and maintenance costs, as well as present
worth cost. Present worth cost is the total cost of an alternative over time in terms of today's
dollar value. Cost estimates are expected to be accurate within a range of +50 to -30 percent
(This is a standard assumption in accordance with EPA guidance).
The estimated capital cost, operation and maintenance (O&M), and present worth costs are
discussed in detail in EPA’s FFS. The cost estimates are based on the best available information.
Alternative 1 has no cost because no activities are implemented. Alternative 3 would include no
operational and maintenance costs beyond the first year of vegetation upkeep. The estimated
capital, O&M present-worth cost over a thirty year period, and total present-worth costs for each
of the alternatives are as follows:




                                                19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Alternative             Capital Cost                  O&M                Present Worth Cost
          1                       $0                         $0                       $0
          2                   $1,920,776                   $3,544                 $1,924,000
          3                   $8,773,059                    $927                  $8,774,000



Modifying Criteria – The final two evaluation criteria, criteria 8 and 9, are called “modifying
criteria” because new information or comments from the state or the community on the
Proposed Plan may modify the preferred response measure or cause another response measure
to be considered.

8. State Acceptance
State Agency acceptance considers whether the State and/or Support Agency agrees with EPA’s
analyses and recommendations.

NJDEP concurs with the selected remedy. A letter of concurrence is attached in Appendix
IV.

9. Community Acceptance
Community Acceptance considers whether the local community agrees with EPA's analyses and
preferred alternative. Comments received on the Proposed Plan are an important indicator of
community acceptance.

On August 2, 2016, EPA held a formal public meeting on the proposed plan for this OU.
All written and oral comments are addressed in detail in Appendix V, which is the
Responsiveness Summary for this ROD. No comments received during the comment period for
the proposed plan expressed disagreement with EPA’s preferred alternative for this OU at the
site.

PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE

The NCP establishes an expectation that EPA will use treatment to address the principal threats
posed by a site wherever practicable (40 CFR §300.430(a)(1)(iii)(A)). Identifying principal
threat wastes combines concepts of both hazard and risk. In general, principal threat wastes are
those source materials considered to be highly toxic or highly mobile which generally cannot be
contained in a reliable manner or would present a significant risk to human health or the
environment should exposure occur. Non-principal threat wastes are those source materials that
generally can be reliably contained and that would present only a low risk in the event of
exposure.

No principal threat wastes have been identified for this discrete portion of the site, identified as
OU1.




                                                 20

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SELECTED REMEDY

Based upon the requirements of CERCLA, the results of the site investigations, the detailed
analysis of the alternatives, and public comments, EPA’s selected remedy to address
contaminated soil at the residential properties is Alternative 3. This alternative includes the
following components:

      Excavation of an estimated 21,000 cubic yards of soil contaminated primarily with
       arsenic and lead from approximately 57 residential properties in the vicinity of the former
       Kil-Tone Company property, off-site disposal of contaminated soil and backfilling with
       clean fill; and,

      Restoration of the affected properties.

Excavation activities associated with remediation may require the demolition and replacement of
structures such as sheds and garages and the removal and replacement of asphalt and driveways.
Excavation of the contaminated material may also require the temporary relocation of residents.

Additional properties nearby or adjacent to the known OU1 properties may be identified during
the design and/or implementation of the selected remedy that require remediation; these will be
incorporated into the selected remedy.

The total estimated present-worth cost for the selected remedy is $8,774,000. A more detailed,
itemized list of costs for the selected remedy may be found in Table 3b of the FFS. The cost
estimates, which are based on available information, are order-of magnitude engineering cost
estimates that are expected to be within +50 to -30 percent of the actual cost of the project.

Expected Outcomes of the Selected Remedy

Implementation of Alternative 3 will eliminate potential pathways of human exposure to
contaminated soils present at the residential properties and will prevent migration of site
contaminants from the OU1 properties to other areas.

Summary of the Rationale for the Selected Remedy

The selection of Alternative 3 provides the best balance of trade-offs among the alternatives with
respect to the evaluation criteria. The selected alternative will be protective of human health and
the environment, complies with Federal and State requirements that are legally applicable or
relevant and appropriate to the remedial action, is cost-effective, and will utilize permanent
solutions and treatment technologies to the maximum extent practicable. NJDEP concurs with
the selected remedy.

Although Alternative 2 would provide some protection from the migration of and exposure to
contaminated soils through the placement of cover material, contaminated soil would remain in
place requiring the implementation of institutional controls on the residential properties and
long-term monitoring and maintenance of the soil covers. Alternative 3 will permanently remove

                                                 21

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

the contaminated soil. The implementation of this selected remedy will employ engineering
controls and safe work practices to mitigate exposure to dust and to protect workers and the local
community.

Although treatment is not a principal element of the remedy, based on sampling performed to
date, some of the contaminated soil may require treatment prior to land disposal at an off-site
facility. Therefore, Alternative 3 may meet the statutory preference for the use of remedies that
employ treatment that reduces toxicity, mobility or volume as a principal element.

The environmental benefits of the selected remedy may be enhanced by consideration, during the
design, of technologies and practices that are sustainable in accordance with EPA Region 2’s
Clean and Green Energy Policy. This will include consideration of green remediation
technologies and practices.

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

EPA has determined that the selected remedy complies with the CERCLA and NCP provisions
for remedy selection, meets the threshold criteria, and provides the best balance of tradeoffs
among the alternatives with respect to the balancing and modifying criteria. These provisions
require the selection of remedies that are protective of human health and the environment,
comply with ARARs (or justify a waiver from such requirements), are cost-effective, and utilize
permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery technologies to
the maximum extent practicable. In addition, CERCLA includes a preference for remedies that
employ treatment that permanently and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity, or mobility of
hazardous substances as a principal element (or justify not satisfying the preference). For the
Former Kil-Tone Company Site, EPA does not believe that on- site treatment of the soils at the
residential properties is practicable or cost-effective. The selected remedy will be more
protective and cost-effective in the long-term than capping since soil excavation is a permanent
solution which will allow the residential properties to be returned to their beneficial re-use and
does not require periodic maintenance. The following sections discuss how the selected remedy
meets these statutory requirements.

Protection of Human Health and the Environment

The Selected Remedy, Alternative 3, will protect human health and the environment through
removal, off-site treatment, if necessary, and disposal. The Selected Remedy will eliminate all
significant direct-contact risks to human health and the environment associated with
contaminated soil on the OU1 residential properties. This action will result in the reduction of
exposure levels to acceptable risk levels within EPA’s generally acceptable risk range of 10-4 to
10-6 for carcinogens and below a HI of 1.0 for noncarcinogens. Implementation of the Selected
Remedy will not pose unacceptable short-term risks.




                                                22

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Compliance with ARARs

The selected remedy complies with Chemical-specific, Location-specific and Action-specific
ARARs. A complete list of the ARARs, TBCs and other guidance that concern the selected
remedy is presented in Appendix II, Table 8.

Cost-Effectiveness

EPA has determined that the selected remedy is cost-effective and represents reasonable value
for the money to be spent. A cost-effective remedy is one whose costs are proportional to its
overall effectiveness (NCP § 300.4309f)(1)(ii)(D)). EPA evaluated the “overall effectiveness” of
those alternatives that satisfied the threshold criteria (i.e. were both protective of human health
and ARAR-compliant). Overall effectiveness is based on the evaluations of long-term
effectiveness and permanence; reduction in toxicity, mobility, and volume through treatment;
and short-term effectiveness. Overall effectiveness was then compared to costs to determine
cost-effectiveness.

Each of the alternatives was subjected to a detailed cost analysis. In that analysis, capital and
annual O&M costs were estimated and used to develop present-worth costs. The estimated
present worth cost of the selected remedy for OU1 is $8,774,000. Although Alternative 2 is less
expensive than the selected remedy, EPA concluded that the long-term effectiveness of
excavation is superior to capping when considering permanent solutions that allow the residential
properties to be returned to full and unrestricted use. EPA believes that the selected remedy’s
additional cost for excavation provides protection of human health and is cost-effective. The
selected remedy is cost-effective as it has been determined to provide the greatest overall
protectiveness for its present-worth cost.

Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment Technologies (or Resource
Recovery) Technologies to Maximum Extent Practicable

EPA has determined that the selected remedy represents the maximum extent to which
permanent solutions and treatment technologies can be utilized in a practicable manner for this
OU. Of those alternatives that are protective of human health and the environment and comply
with ARARs (or provide a basis for invoking an ARAR waiver), EPA has determined that the
selected remedy provides the best balance of trade-offs in terms of the five balancing criteria,
while also considering the statutory preference for treatment as a principal element, the bias
against off-site disposal without treatment, and State/support agency and community acceptance.
Implementation of the selected remedy will eliminate current residents’ exposure to
contaminants at the residential properties and will remove contaminated soil from the residential
properties thereby eliminating the risk to human receptors in the future.

Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element

The selected soil remedy results in the removal of approximately 21,000 cubic yards of
contaminated soil from the residential properties at the site. The soil excavation will provide for
an immediate reduction in the mobility of contaminated soil from the residential properties.

                                                 23

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Although treatment is not a principal element of the remedy, based on sampling performed to
date, some of the contaminated soil may require treatment prior to land disposal at an off-site
facility. However, the majority of the excavated soils will not require treatment to meet the
requirements of off-site disposal facilities. Off-site treatment, if required, would reduce the
toxicity of the contaminated soil prior to land disposal. Based on the concentration of
contaminants in the soil, treatment of the material prior to off-site disposal would not be cost-
effective. This remedy only addresses a portion of the site. Subsequent actions that are planned
to identify and address fully the remaining threats posed by the site may include treatment.

Five-Year Review Requirements

Because this remedy will not result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants
remaining at this OU above health-based levels, the statutory requirement for a five-year review
is not triggered by the implementation of this action.

DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES

The Proposed Plan for OU1 of the Former Kil-Tone Company site was released for a public
comment period on July 13, 2016. The public comment period ran until August 12, 2016. The
Proposed Plan identified Alternative 3 (Excavation and Off-site Disposal) as the preferred
alternative for OU1 of the site. EPA reviewed all written (including electronic formats such as e-
mail) and verbal comments submitted during the public comment period and has determined that
no significant changes to the remedy, as it was originally identified in the Proposed Plan, are
necessary or appropriate.




                                                24

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX I

  Figures

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Former Kil-Tone Company
     Superfund Site



 Figure 1: Site Location

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Former Kil-Tone Company
     Superfund Site




 Figure 2: Site Overview

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

* Not all properties within
the General Study Area         Former Kil-Tone Company
outlined above require
remediation; only those
                                    Superfund Site
properties with elevated
concentrations of COCs will
be addressed.
** The extent of the General
Study Area may expand or
contract based on results of   Figure 3: Operable Unit 1
sampling during design
and/or implementation of the
remedy.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX II

  Tables

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        TABLE 1
                                                          Summary of Chemicals of Concern and
                                                       Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations

Scenario Timeframe: Current/Future
Medium:             Soil
Exposure Medium:    Surface Soil

                                                              Concentration
                                                                Detected                                                       Exposure Point
                                                                                       Concentration       Frequency of                                EPC
    Exposure Point            Chemical of Concern                                                                              Concentration                        Statistical Measure
                                                                                          Units             Detection                                  Units
                                                                                                                                  (EPC)
                                                             Min           Max

FKTC Property 007           Arsenic                           14          1,100            mg/kg               20/20                  533              mg/kg        95% Student’s-t UCL

                            Lead                              140         2,000            mg/kg               20/20                  826              mg/kg          Arithmetic mean



FKTC Property 010           Arsenic                           14            44             mg/kg                 4/4                  44               mg/kg             Maximum

                            Lead                              670         2,500            mg/kg                 4/4                 1,743             mg/kg          Arithmetic mean



FKTC Property 021           Arsenic                           21           100             mg/kg               11/11                  70               mg/kg        95% Student’s-t UCL

                            Lead                              51           440             mg/kg               11/11                  192              mg/kg          Arithmetic mean


95% Student’s-t-UCL – 95% upper confidence limit, Student’s-t statistic (mean, STD)
                                              Summary of Chemicals of Concern and Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
This table presents the chemicals of concern (COCs) and exposure point concentrations (EPCs) for the COCs in soil. The table includes the range of concentrations detected for each COC, as
                  well as the frequency of detection (i.e., the number of times the chemical was detected in the samples collected at the site), the EPC and how it was derived.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                               TABLE 2
                                                                    Selection of Exposure Scenarios

     Scenario                                                                                 Receptor
                           Medium           Exposure Medium          Exposure Point                               Receptor Age         Exposure Route         Type of Analysis
    Timeframe                                                                                Population
                                                                   FKTC Property 007
                                                                                                                  Adult and Child
  Current/Future              Soil              Surface soil       FKTC Property 010           Resident                                     Ing/Der             Quantitative
                                                                                                                 (birth to <6 years)
                                                                   FKTC Property 021
Ing – Ingestion
Der – Dermal
                                                               Summary of Selection of Exposure Pathways
    This table describes the exposure pathways that were evaluated for the risk assessment. Exposure media, exposure points, and characteristics of receptor populations are
                                                                                    included.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       TABLE 3
                                                                           Non-Cancer Toxicity Data Summary
Pathway: Oral/Dermal
                                                                                  Absorp.                                            Primary          Combined                                   Dates of RfD:
                                Chronic/        Oral RfD                                         Adjusted RfD      Adj. Dermal                                             Sources of RfD:
  Chemical of Concern                                        Oral RfD Units      Efficiency                                           Target          Uncertainty
                               Subchronic        Value                                             ( Dermal)        RfD Units                                               Target Organ
                                                                                 (Dermal)                                             Organ        /Modifying Factors

Arsenic                         Chronic          3.0E-04       mg/kg-day            95%             3.0E-04         mg/kg-day          Skin                3                    IRIS               9/1/1991

Lead                              NA               NA             NA                NA                NA               NA               NA                NA                     NA                  NA

Key

IRIS: Integrated Risk Information System
                                                                                 Summary of Toxicity Assessment
This table provides non-carcinogenic risk information which is relevant to the contaminants of concern. When available, the chronic toxicity data have been used to develop oral reference doses (RfDs).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                          TABLE 4
                                                                 Cancer Toxicity Data Summary
Pathway: Oral/Dermal

       Chemical of Concern                  Oral                Units            Adjusted Cancer        Slope Factor Units          Weight of             Source            Date
                                           Cancer                                 Slope Factor                                      Evidence/
                                            Slope                                 (for Dermal)                                   Cancer Guideline
                                           Factor                                                                                  Description


Arsenic                                    1.5E+00           mg/kg-day                1.5E+00                mg/kg-day                   A                 IRIS           06/01/95

Lead                                         NA                  NA                     NA                      NA                      NA                  NA               NA

Key:
A: Known Human Carcinogen
IRIS: Integrated Risk Information System

                                                                        Summary of Toxicity Assessment

This table provides carcinogenic risk information which is relevant to the contaminants of concern. Toxicity data are provided for both the oral and dermal routes of exposure.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                     TABLE 5
                                                    Risk Characterization Summary - Noncarcinogens
Scenario Timeframe:              Current/Future
Receptor Population:             Site Resident
Receptor Age:                    Adult
                                                                                                                                             Non-Carcinogenic Risk
                        Exposure                                                                    Primary Target
       Medium                               Exposure Point             Chemical of Concern
                        Medium                                                                          Organ                                                               Exposure
                                                                                                                               Ingestion                Dermal
                                                                                                                                                                           Routes Total

                                           FKTC Property 007                                                                    1.3+00                  2.7E-01               1.6+00

Soil                   Surface Soil        FKTC Property 010                  Arsenic                     Skin                  1.1-01                   2.2-02               1.3-01

                                           FKTC Property 021                                                                    1.7-01                   3.5-02               2.1-01


Scenario Timeframe:              Current/Future
Receptor Population:             Site Resident
Receptor Age:                    Child
                                                                                                                                             Non-Carcinogenic Risk
                        Exposure                                                                    Primary Target
       Medium                               Exposure Point             Chemical of Concern
                        Medium                                                                          Organ                                                               Exposure
                                                                                                                               Ingestion                Dermal
                                                                                                                                                                           Routes Total

                                           FKTC Property 007                                                                    1.4+01                   1.6+00               1.6+01

Soil                   Surface Soil          FKTC Property 010                Arsenic                     Skin                  1.1+00                   1.1-01               1.2+00

                                           FKTC Property 021                                                                    1.8+00                   2.1-01               2.0+00

                                                            Summary of Risk Characterization - Non-Carcinogens

  The table presents hazard quotients (HQs) for each route of exposure and the hazard index (sum of hazard quotients) for exposure to groundwater containing site-related chemicals. The
                  Risk Assessment Guidance for Superfund states that, generally, a hazard index (HI) greater than 1 indicates the potential for adverse non-cancer effects.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                     TABLE 6
                                      Risk Characterization Summary - Carcinogens
Scenario Timeframe:               Current/Future
Receptor Population:              Site Resident
Receptor Age:                     Lifetime (Adult/child)

  Medium          Exposure            Exposure Point             Chemical of Concern                               Carcinogenic Risk
                  Medium
                                                                                                  Ingestion             Dermal              Exposure
                                                                                                                                           Routes Total

                                    FKTC Property 007                                              1.6E-04              3.5E-05               2.0E-04

Soil             Surface Soil       FKTC Property 010                   Arsenic                    1.4E-05              2.9E-06               1.7E-05

                                    FKTC Property 021                                              2.1E-05              4.5E-06               2.6E-05

                                              Summary of Risk Characterization – Carcinogens

The table presents site-related cancer risks for groundwater exposure. As stated in the National Contingency Plan, the point of departure is 10-6 and the
acceptable risk range for site-related exposure is 10-6 to 10-4. The cancer risk from arsenic in surface soil exceeds the acceptable risk range, indicating
an unacceptable risk from residential exposure to soil.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           TABLE 7
                                                             Risk Characterization Summary – Lead
                                                          Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentration
Scenario Timeframe:                 Current/Future
Receptor Population:                Site Resident
Receptor Age:                       Child

      Medium              Exposure                   Exposure Point                  Chemical of Concern             Exposure Point Concentration1                              Units
                          Medium



                                                  FKTC Property 007                                                                  826                                       mg/kg

Soil                     Surface Soil             FKTC Property 010                            Lead                                 1,743                                      mg/kg

                                                  FKTC Property 021                                                                  192                                       mg/kg
1
    – The lead EPC was the arithmetic mean of all samples collected from the surface soil interval (0-2ft)


                                                                   Summary of Risk Characterization – Carcinogens

Because there are no published quantitative toxicity values for lead, it is not possible to evaluate risks from lead exposure using the same methodology as for the other COCs. However,
since the toxicokinetics (the absorption, distribution, metabolism, an excretion of toxins in the body) of lead are well understood, lead is regulated based on blood lead concentrations. The lead
concentrations on the targeted properties were qualitatively assessed by comparing the lead EPC at each property to EPA’s residential soil screening level, 400 mg/kg. This lead soil screening
value corresponds to a modelled estimate of 5% of the population with a blood lead level greater than 10 ug/dl.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                           TABLE 8
                 Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements (ARARs) & To-Be-Considered (TBC) Guidance
                                                                    Chemical-Specific ARARs
     Action/Media                                      Requirement                                          Prerequisite                     Citation
                                                                                                                                    N.J.A.C. 7:26D, Appendix
                            Residential Direct Contact Soil Remediation Standards. N.J.A.C.
Removal of                                                                                                                          1, Table 1A
                            7:26D Appendix 1 Table 1A lists the cleanup levels.                    Remediation of residential
contaminated soil for
                                   Arsenic – 19 mg/kg                                             contaminated soil
residential use                                                                                                                     Residential Direct Contact
                                   Lead – 400 mg/kg
                                                                                                                                    Soil Remediation Standards
                            National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS). National primary
                            and secondary ambient are quality standards for lead: 0.15 µg/m3,      Remediation area contains lead   40 CFR § 50.16
Air quality standards for   arithmetic mean concentration over a 3-month period
lead                        NJ Air Pollution Control Rules. During any three consecutive months,
                            the arithmetic mean of 24-hour averages of lead concentrations in      Remediation area contains lead   N.J.A.C. 7:27-13.7
                            ambient air shall not exceed 1.5 µg/m3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   Action-Specific ARARs
  Action/Media                                        Requirement                                           Prerequisite                      Citation
                         General Construction Standards — All Land-disturbing Activities (i.e., excavation, clearing, grading, etc.)
Erosion control         Must comply with “The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control       Soil disturbance project as        N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.1 et
during soil             in New Jersey,” 7th Edition, January 2014, issued by the New Jersey         defined by N.J.S.A. 4:24-41        seq.
disturbing activities   Department of Agriculture and effective February 20, 2014.                                                     N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.

                                                                                                                                       Soil Erosion and
                                                                                                                                       Sediment Control Act
Control of storm        Design and performance standards for stormwater management measures.        Major development as               N.J.A.C. 7:8
water runoff from                                                                                   defined in N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2
soil disturbing
                                                                                                                                       Stormwater
activities
                                                                                                                                       Management Rule


                        NJ Water Pollution Control Act Regulations prohibits the discharge of any                                      N.J.A.C. 7:14
                        pollutant into the waters of the State without a valid permit.
                        NJ Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Rules establishes the                                                N.J.A.C. 7:14A
                        framework under which NJDEP regulates the discharge of pollutants to
                        the surface and groundwaters of the State
Discharge of            Discharges of Petroleum and Other Hazardous Substances sets forth                                              N.J.A.C. 7:1E
hazardous               guidelines and procedures to be followed in the event of a discharge of
substance               hazardous substance, and defines hazardous substance in New Jersey.
Right-to-know           NJ Worker and Community Right-to-Know Regulations establishes                                                  N.J.A.C. 7:1G
regulations             procedures by which employers provide chemical inventory reporting to
                        inform employees and communities of the potential hazards in the work
                        place.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                     Action-Specific ARARs
  Action/Media                                         Requirement                                              Prerequisite                  Citation
Confirmation             Regulations Governing the Certification of Laboratories and                                                   N.J.A.C. 7:18
sampling                 Environmental Measurements establishes procedures for laboratories to
                         obtain and maintain certifications and perform sample analysis to ensure
                         analytical and data environmental measurements are of known and
                         defensible quality.
Site Remediation         NJ Technical Requirements for Site Remediation establishes the minimum                                        N.J.A.C. 7:26E
                         technical requirements for the remediation of contaminated sites.
                         NJ Brownfield and Contaminated Site Remediation Act enables legislation                                       P.L. 1997, C. 278
                         for development of remediation standards necessary to protect public
                         health and safety and the environment from discharged hazardous
                         substances and for mandating cleanup of contaminated sites.
Air pollution            NJ Air Pollution Control Rules identify activities which require obtaining                                    N.J.A.C. 7:27
control                  an air permit for construction/operation.
Noise Control            NJ Noise Control Rules prohibits the generation of certain types of noise at                                  N.J.A.C. 7:29
                         specific times and establishes methods to determine compliance.
                Waste Characterization – Primary Waste (e.g., excavated soils and debris) and Secondary Wastes (e.g., contaminated equipment)
Characterization of      Must determine if solid waste is a hazardous waste using the following         Generation of solid waste as   40 CFR § 262.11(a) and
solid waste (all         method:                                                                        defined in 40 CFR 261.2        (b)
primary and                 Should first determine if waste is excluded from regulation under 40
secondary wastes)            CFR 261.4; and                                                                                            N.J.A.C. 7:26G
                            Must then determine if waste is listed as hazardous waste under
                             Subpart D 40 CFR Part 261.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                  Action-Specific ARARs
  Action/Media                                       Requirement                                             Prerequisite                     Citation
                      Must determine whether the waste is (characteristic waste) identified in       Generation of solid waste that    40 CFR § 262.11(c)
                      Subpart C of 40 CFR part 261 by either:                                        is not excluded under 40 CFR
                         (1) Testing the waste according to the methods set forth in Subpart C of    261.4(a)
                      40 CFR part 261, or according to an equivalent method approved by the
                                                                                                                                       N.J.A.C. 7:26G
                      Administrator under 40 CFR 260.21; or
                         (2) Applying knowledge of the hazard characteristic of the waste in light
                      of the materials or the processes used.
                      Must refer to Parts 261, 262, 264, 265, 266, 268, and 273 of Chapter 40 for    Generation of solid waste that    40 CFR § 262.11(d)
                      possible exclusions or restrictions pertaining to management of the specific   is determined to be hazardous
                      waste.                                                                         waste
                                                                                                                                       N.J.A.C. 7:26G
Characterization of   Must obtain a detailed chemical and physical analysis on a representative      Generation of RCRA                40 CFR § 264.13(a)(1)
hazardous waste       sample of the waste(s), which at a minimum contains all the information        hazardous waste for storage,
(all primary and      that must be known to treat, store, or dispose of the waste in accordance      treatment or disposal
                                                                                                                                       N.J.A.C. 7:26G
secondary wastes)     with pertinent sections of 40 CFR 264 and 268.


Determinations for    Must determine each EPA Hazardous Waste Number (waste code)                    Generation of hazardous           40 CFR § 268.9(a)
management of         applicable to the waste in order to determine the applicable treatment         waste for storage, treatment or
hazardous waste       standards under 40 CFR 268 et seq.                                             disposal
                                                                                                                                       N.J.A.C. 7:26G

                      Note: This determination may be made concurrently with the hazardous
                      waste determination required in Sec. 262.11 of this chapter.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          Action-Specific ARARs
Action/Media                                 Requirement                                            Prerequisite                    Citation
               Must determine the underlying hazardous constituents [as defined in 40      Generation of RCRA                40 CFR § 268.9(a)
               CFR 268.2(i)] in the characteristic waste.                                  characteristic hazardous
                                                                                           waste (and is not D001 non –
                                                                                                                             N.J.A.C. 7:26G
                                                                                           wastewaters treated by
                                                                                           CMBST, RORGS, or
                                                                                           POLYM of Section 268.42
                                                                                           Table 1) for storage,
                                                                                           treatment or disposal

               Must determine if the hazardous waste meets the treatment standards in 40   Generation of hazardous           40 CFR § 268.7(a)
               CFR 268.40, 268.45, or 268.49 by testing in accordance with prescribed      waste for storage, treatment or
               methods or use of generator knowledge of waste.                             disposal
                                                                                                                             N.J.A.C. 7:26G

               Note: This determination can be made concurrently with the hazardous
               waste determination required in 40 CFR 262.11.

               Must comply with the special requirements of 40 CFR 268.9 in addition to    Generation of waste or soil       40 CFR § 268.7(a)
               any applicable requirements in CFR 268.7.                                   that displays a hazardous
                                                                                           characteristic of ignitability,
                                                                                                                             N.J.A.C. 7:26G
                                                                                           corrosivity, reactivity, or
                                                                                           toxicity for storage, treatment
                                                                                           or disposal

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   Action-Specific ARARs
  Action/Media                                       Requirement                                               Prerequisite                     Citation
         Waste Storage – Primary Waste (e.g., excavated soils/sediments, sludge, debris) and Secondary Wastes (e.g., contaminated equipment)
Temporary on–site    A generator may accumulate hazardous waste at the facility provided that:         Accumulation of RCRA             40 CFR § 262.34(a);
storage of              Waste is placed in containers that comply with 40 CFR 265.171 –173;           hazardous waste on site as
hazardous waste in       and                                                                           defined in 40 CFR 260.10
                                                                                                                                        40 CFR §
containers
                        The date upon which accumulation begins is clearly marked and                                                  262.34(a)(1)(i);
                         visible for inspection on each container; and
                        Container is marked with the words “hazardous waste”; or                                                       40 CFR § 262.34(a)(2)
                                                                                                                                        and (3)

                                                                                                                                        N.J.A.C. 7:26G
                        Container may be marked with other words that identify the contents.          Accumulation of 55 gal. or       40 CFR § 262.34(c)(1)
                                                                                                       less of RCRA hazardous
                                                                                                       waste or one quart of acutely
                                                                                                                                        N.J.A.C. 7:26G
                                                                                                       hazardous waste listed in
                                                                                                       261.33(e) at or near any point
                                                                                                       of generation
Use and              If container is not in good condition (e.g. severe rusting, structural defects)   Storage of RCRA hazardous        40 CFR § 265.171
management of        or if it begins to leak, must transfer waste from this container to a container   waste in containers
hazardous waste in   that is in good condition.
                                                                                                                                        N.J.A.C. 7:26G
containers

                     Must use container made or lined with materials compatible with waste to          Storage of RCRA hazardous        40 CFR § 265.172
                     be stored so that the ability of the container to contain is not impaired.        waste in containers
                                                                                                                                        N.J.A.C. 7:26G
                     Containers must be closed during storage, except when necessary to                Storage of RCRA hazardous        40 CFR § 265.173(a)
                     add/remove waste.                                                                 waste in containers              and (b)
                     Container must not be opened, handled, or stored in a manner that may
                     rupture the container or cause it to leak.                                                                         N.J.A.C. 7:26G

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   Action-Specific ARARs
  Action/Media                                       Requirement                                          Prerequisite                     Citation
Storage of           Area must have a containment system designed and operated in accordance      Storage of RCRA hazardous         40 CFR § 264.175(a)
hazardous waste in   with 40 CFR 264.175(b)                                                       waste in containers with free
containment area                                                                                  liquids
                                                                                                                                    N.J.A.C. 7:26G


                     Area must be sloped or otherwise designed and operated to drain liquid       Storage of RCRA–hazardous         40 CFR 264.175(c)(1)
                     resulting from precipitation, or                                             waste in containers that do not   and (2)
                                                                                                  contain free liquids (other
                                                                                                  than F020, F021, F022, F023,      N.J.A.C. 7:26G
                     Containers must be elevated or otherwise protected from contact with
                                                                                                  F026 and F027)
                     accumulated liquid.
Closure              Must close the facility (e.g., container storage unit) in a manner that:     Storage of RCRA hazardous         40 CFR § 264.111
performance                   Minimizes the need for further maintenance;                        waste in containers
standard for RCRA             Controls minimizes or eliminates, to the extent necessary, to                                        N.J.A.C. 7:26G
container storage              protect human health and the environment, post-closure escape of
unit                           hazardous waste, hazardous constituents, leachate, contaminated
                               run-off, or hazardous waste decomposition products to the
                               ground or surface waters or the atmosphere; and
                              Complies with the closure requirements of Subpart, but not
                               limited to, the requirements of 40 CFR § 264.178 for containers.
Closure of RCRA      At closure, all hazardous waste and hazardous waste residues must be         Storage of RCRA hazardous         40 CFR § 264.178
container storage    removed from the containment system. Remaining containers, liners,           waste in containers in a unit
unit                 bases, and soils containing or contaminated with hazardous waste and         with a containment system         N.J.A.C. 7:26G
                     hazardous waste residues must be decontaminated or removed.

                     [Comment: At closure, and throughout the operating period, unless the
                     owner or operator can demonstrate in accordance with 40 CFR 261.3(d) of
                     this chapter that the solid waste removed from the containment system is
                     not a hazardous waste, the owner or operator becomes a generator of
                     hazardous waste and must manage it in accordance with all applicable
                     requirements of Parts 262 through 266 of this chapter].

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                     Action-Specific ARARs
   Action/Media                                         Requirement                                             Prerequisite                    Citation
Temporary on –site       Must be located within the contiguous property under the control of the       Accumulation of solid non–       40 CFR § 264.554(a)(1)
storage of               owner/operator where the wastes are to be managed in the staging pile         flowing hazardous
remediation waste        originated.                                                                   remediation waste (or
in staging pile (e.g.,                                                                                 remediation waste otherwise
                         For purposes of this section, storage includes mixing, sizing, blending or
excavated soils)         other similar physical operations so long as intended to prepare the wastes   subject to land disposal
                         for subsequent management or treatment.                                       restrictions) as defined in 40
                                                                                                       CFR 260.10
Performance              Staging pile must:                                                            Storage of remediation waste     40 CFR §
criteria for staging                                                                                   in a staging pile                264.554(d)(1)(i) and (ii)
                            Facilitate a reliable, effective and protective remedy; be designed to
pile
                             prevent or minimize releases of hazardous wastes and constituents into
                             the environment,
                            And minimize or adequately control cross–media transfer as necessary
                             to protect human health and the environment (e.g. use of liners,
                             covers, run–off/run–on controls).
Operation of a           Must not operate for more than 2 years, except when an operating term         Storage of remediation waste     40 CFR §
staging pile             extension under 40 CFR 264.554(i) is granted.                                 in a staging pile                264.554(d)(1)(iii)
                         Note: Must measure the 2-year limit (or other operating term specified)
                         from first time remediation waste placed in staging pile

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   Action-Specific ARARs
   Action/Media                                      Requirement                                             Prerequisite                   Citation
Design criteria for   In setting standards and design criteria consider the following factors:       Storage of remediation waste    40 CFR §
staging pile
                         Length of time pile will be in operation;
                                                                                                     in a staging pile               264.554(d)(2)(i) –(vi)
                         Volumes of waste intended to store in the pile;
                         Physical and chemical characteristics of the wastes to be stored in the
                          pile;
                         Potential for releases from the pile;
                         Hydrogeological and other relevant environmental conditions at the
                          facility that may influence the migration of any potential releases; and
                         Potential for human and environmental exposure to potential releases
                          from the pile.
Closure of staging    Must be closed within 180 days after the operating term by removing or         Storage of remediation waste    40 CFR § 264.554(j)(1)
pile of remediation   decontaminating all remediation waste, contaminated containment system         in staging pile in previously   and (2)
waste                 components, and structures and equipment contaminated with waste and           contaminated area
                      leachate.
                      Must decontaminate contaminated soils in a manner that EPA determines
                      will protect human and the environment.
                      Must be closed within 180 days after the operating term according to 40        Storage of remediation waste    40 CFR § 264.554(k)
                      CFR 264.258(a) and 264.111 or 265.258(a) and 265.111.                          in staging pile in
                                                                                                     uncontaminated area

                          Waste Treatment and Disposal – Primary Waste (e.g., excavated soils/sediments, sludge, debris) and
                                                    Secondary Wastes (e.g., contaminated equipment)
Disposal of RCRA      May be land disposed if it meets the requirements in the table “Treatment Land disposal, as defined in         40 CFR § 268.40(a)
hazardous waste in    Standards for Hazardous Waste” at 40 CFR 268.40 before land disposal.     40 CFR 268.2, of restricted
a land-based unit                                                                               RCRA waste
                                                                                                                                     N.J.A.C. 7:26G

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                  Action-Specific ARARs
  Action/Media                                       Requirement                                              Prerequisite                       Citation
                       All underlying hazardous constituents [as defined in 40 CFR 268.2(i)]         Land disposal of restricted          40 CFR § 268.40(e)
                       must meet the UTS, found in 40 CFR 268.48 Table UTS prior to land             RCRA characteristic wastes
                       disposal.                                                                     (D001 –D043) that are not
                                                                                                                                          N.J.A.C. 7:26G
                                                                                                     managed in a wastewater
                                                                                                     treatment system that is
                                                                                                     regulated under the CWA,
                                                                                                     that is CWA equivalent, or
                                                                                                     that is injected into a Class I
                                                                                                     nonhazardous injection well
Disposal of RCRA       Must be treated according to the alternative treatment standards of 40 CFR    Land disposal, as defined in         40 CFR § 268.49(b)
–hazardous waste       268.49(c) or according to the UTSs specified in 40 CFR 268.48 applicable      40 CFR 268.2, of restricted
soil in a land–based   to the listed or characteristic waste contaminating the soil prior to land    hazardous soils
                                                                                                                                          N.J.A.C. 7:26G
unit                   disposal.
Disposal of RCRA       To determine whether a hazardous waste identified in this section exceeds     Land disposal of RCRA                40 CFR § 268.34(f)
hazardous waste in     the applicable treatment standards of 40 CFR 268.40, the initial generator    toxicity characteristic wastes
a land-based unit      must test a sample of the waste extract or the entire waste, depending on     (D004 –D011) that are newly
                                                                                                                                          N.J.A.C. 7:26G
                       whether the treatment standards are expressed as concentration in the waste   identified (i.e., wastes, soil, or
                       extract or waste, or the generator may use knowledge of the waste.            debris identified by the TCLP
                                                                                                     but not the Extraction
                                                                                                     Procedure)
                       If the waste contains constituents (including UHCs in the characteristic
                       wastes) in excess of the applicable UTS levels in 40 CFR 268.48, the waste
                       is prohibited from land disposal, and all requirements of Part 268 are
                       applicable, except as otherwise specified.
Disposal of RCRA       Must be treated prior to land disposal as provided in 40 CFR                  Land disposal, as defined in         40 CFR § 268.45(a)
hazardous waste        268.45(a)(1)–(5) unless EPA determines under 40 CFR 261.3(f)(2) that the      40 CFR 268.2, of restricted
debris in a land–      debris no longer contaminated with hazardous waste or the debris is treated   RCRA–hazardous debris                N.J.A.C. 7:26G
based unit (i.e.,      to the waste –specific treatment standard provided in 40 CFR 268.40 for
landfill)              the waste contaminating the debris.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                  Action-Specific ARARs
  Action/Media                                      Requirement                                            Prerequisite                      Citation
                                                  Waste Transportation – Primary and Secondary Wastes
 Transportation of    The generator manifesting requirements of 40 CFR 262.20262.32(b) do       Transportation of hazardous         40 CFR § 262.20(f)
 hazardous waste      not apply. Generator or transporter must comply with the requirements set  wastes on a public or private
     on–site          forth in 40 CFR 263.30 and 263.31 in the event of a discharge of hazardous right–of–way within or along
                      waste on a private or public right–of–way.                                 the border of contiguous            N.J.A.C. 7:26G
                                                                                                 property under the control of
                                                                                                 the same person, even if such
                                                                                                 contiguous property is divided
                                                                                                 by a public or private right–
                                                                                                 of–way
Transportation of     Must comply with the generator standards of Part 262 including 40 CFR       Preparation and initiation of      40 CFR § 262.10(h);
hazardous waste       262.2023 for manifesting, Sect. 262.30 for packaging, Sect. 262.31 for     shipment of hazardous waste
off–site              labeling, Sect. 262.32 for marking, and Sect. 262.33 for placarding.        off–site
                                                                                                                                     N.J.A.C. 7:26G


Transportation of     Shall be subject to and must comply with all applicable provisions of the   Any person who, under              49 CFR § 171.1(c)
hazardous             HMTA and HMR at 49 CFR 171180 related to marking, labeling,                contract with a department or
materials             placarding, packaging, emergency response, etc.                             agency of the federal
                                                                                                  government, transports “in
                                                                                                  commerce,” or causes to be
                                                                                                  transported or shipped, a
                                                                                                  hazardous material
Transportation of     Are not subject to any requirements of 40 CFR Parts 261 through 268 or      Samples of solid waste or a        40 CFR §
samples (i.e.         270 when:                                                                   sample of water, soil for          261.4(d)(1)(i)–(iii)
contaminated soils)      The sample is being transported to a laboratory for the purpose of      purpose of conducting testing
                             testing; or                                                          to determine its characteristics
                                                                                                  or composition
                         The sample is being transported back to the sample collector after
                             testing
                         The sample is being stored by sample collector before transport to a
                           lab for testing

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                              Location-Specific ARARs
     Action/Media                                              Requirement                                                    Prerequisite                             Citation
Historic landmarks,                                                                                               National Historic Preservation
property, or projects         Preserve historic property; minimize harm to National Historic                      Act. Establishes a program for
                                                                                                                  the preservation of historic
                                                                                                                                                           36 CFR § 800
owned or controlled           Landmarks.
by federal agencies                                                                                               properties in the United States.
                                                                              To Be Considered (TBC)
    Action/Media                                              Requirement                                                     Prerequisite                             Citation
Administrative               Administrative Requirements for the Remediation of Contaminated
                                                                                                                                                           N.J.A.C. 7:26C
Requirements                 Sites
                                                                                                                                                           NJDOT Standard
                             NJ Department of Transportation (NJDOT) standards are typically used
Sediment and soil                                                                                                                                          Specifications – Soil
                             to develop the appropriate plans for sediment and soil erosion control
erosion control                                                                                                                                            Erosion and Sediment
                             required under the NJ Soil Conservation Act
                                                                                                                                                           Control Measures (1996)
  Notes:
  ARAR Applicable or relevant and appropriate requirement
  CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
  mg/kg Milligrams per kilogram
  N.J.A.C. New Jersey Administrative Code, Chapters as specified
  CMBST High temperature organic destruction technologies, such as combustion in incinerators, boilers, or industrial furnaces
  CWA      Clean Water Act
  EPA      U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
  HMTA Hazardous Materials Transportation Act
  HMR      Hazardous Materials Regulations
  N.J.A.C. New Jersey Administrative Code, Chapters as specified
  N.J.S.A. New Jersey Statutes
  POLYM Formation of complex high-molecular weight solids through polymerization of monomers
  RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
  RORGS Recovery of organics utilizing distillation, thin film evaporation, steam stripping, carbon adsorption, critical fluid extraction, liquid-liquid extraction,
           precipitation/crystallization, or chemical phase separation techniques
  TCLP     Toxicity characteristic leaching procedure
  UHCs     Underlying hazardous constituents
  UTS      Universal Treatment Standards

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Also note: While not an ARAR, all relevant sections of the Occupational Safety and Health Standards and Safety and Health Regulations for Construction (29 CFR 1910 and 1926)
will be complied with.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      APPENDIX III

Administrative Record Index

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                         FINAL
                                                                                      08/25/2016                                                      REGION ID: 02
         Site Name: FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY
         CERCLIS ID: NJN000200874
              OUID: 01
               SSID: A24N
             Action:


                                                                           Image
DocID:   Doc Date:   Title:                                                Count:       Doc Type:               Addressee Name/Organization:                 Author Name/Organization:
395942   8/25/2016   ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX FOR OU1 FOR THE                1   ARI / Administrative                                              R02: (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                     FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY SITE                                      Record Index                                                   AGENCY)



351628   6/30/2016   FOCUSED FEASIBILITY STUDY FOR OU1 FOR THE FORMER          96      RPT / Report        R02: Staiger, Kimberly (US ENVIRONMENTAL   R02: Gawarzewski, Joseph, F (TETRA TECH
                     KIL-TONE COMPANY SITE                                                                 PROTECTION AGENCY)                         INCORPORATED)


395930   6/30/2016   REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION REPORT FOR OU1 FOR THE           1778      RPT / Report        R02: Staiger, Kimberly (US ENVIRONMENTAL   R02: Gawarzewski, Joseph, F (TETRA TECH
                     FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY SITE                                                          PROTECTION AGENCY)                         INCORPORATED)



395940   7/11/2016   PROPOSED PLAN FOR OU1 FOR THE FORMER KIL-TONE             13     WP / Work Plan                                                  R02: (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                     COMPANY SITE                                                                                                                     AGENCY)


395941   7/11/2016   PROPOSED PLAN FOR OU1 (SPANISH VERSION) FOR THE           14     WP / Work Plan                                                  R02: (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                     FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY SITE                                                                                                     AGENCY)


436189   7/11/2016   REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION REPORT ADDENDUM - PHASE III      2760      RPT / Report        R02: (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION          R02: Gawarzewski, Joseph, F (TETRA TECH
                     RESIDENTIAL SOIL SAMPLING EVENT FOR THE FORMER KIL-                                   AGENCY)                                    INCORPORATED)
                     TONE COMPANY SITE




                                                                                                                       *377092*
                                                                                                                            377092



                                                                                     Page 1 of 1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX IV

 State Letter

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    APPENDIX V

Responsiveness Summary

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY
                                           FOR THE
                                  RECORD OF DECISION
                          FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY SITE
                         CUMBERLAND COUNTY, NEW JERSEY




INTRODUCTION
This Responsiveness Summary provides a summary of comments and concerns provided during
the public comment period related to the Proposed Plan for Operable Unit 1 (OU1) of the Former
Kil-Tone Company Superfund site (Attachment A) and provides the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) responses to those comments. All comments summarized in this
document have been considered in EPA’s final decision in the selection of a remedy to address
the contamination at the site.

SUMMARY OF COMMUNITY RELATIONS ACTIVITIES

All documentation which the EPA used to develop the Proposed Plan and select the remedy in
this Record of Decision (ROD), including the EPA’s Focused Feasibility Study dated June 2016,
are in the Administrative Record for OU1 which was made available to the public beginning July
13, 2016 in the information repositories maintained in the EPA Docket Room at the EPA Region
2 offices at 290 Broadway, New York, New York, at the Vineland Public Library, 1058 East
Landis Avenue, Vineland, New Jersey and on EPA’s website for the site,
www.epa.gov/superfund/former-kil-tone.

On July 13, 2016, EPA published a notice in the Press of Atlantic City newspaper informing the
public of the commencement of the public comment period for the Proposed Plan, the upcoming
public meeting on August 2, 2016, the preferred remedy for OU1, contact information for EPA
personnel, and the availability of site-related documents in the Administrative Record. Notice
was also published in Nuestra Comunidad, a Spanish language newspaper, on July 15, 2016.
Copies of these notices can be found in Attachment B of this appendix. Both English and
Spanish versions of the Proposed Plan were made available at each of the repositories listed
above, including online. The public comment period ran from July 13, 2016 to August 12, 2016.
EPA held a public meeting on August 2, 2016 at 7:00 P.M. at the Gloria M Sabater Elementary
School at 301 Southeast Boulevard, Vineland, New Jersey, to present the findings of the
Proposed Plan, and to answer questions from the public about the Proposed Plan, the remedial
alternatives evaluated, and EPA’s preferred alternative. Local residents and government officials
attended the meeting.


                                                1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SUMMARY OF COMMENTS AND RESPONSES

A summary of the comments provided at the public meeting and all written comments submitted
during the public comment period, as well as the EPA’s responses to them, is provided below.
The transcript from the public meeting and the comments submitted during the public comment
period can be found in Attachments C and D, respectively, of this appendix.

Comment 1: The City of Vineland Health Department endorses EPA’s preferred alternative.
EPA Response to Comment 1: EPA acknowledges the comment in support of its preferred
alternative.

Comment 2: Who is the current owner and operator at the site and do they have any
responsibility to pay for the clean-up?
EPA Response to Comment 2: The property is currently owned by Urban Manufacturing, LLC,
which purchased the property in 2008. Urban Sign & Crane, Inc., is the current tenant, and its
operation includes the fabrication and installation of commercial signage. The current owner and
operator activities are unrelated to the contaminants of concern associated with the Superfund
site. EPA has not identified a potentially responsible party for the site clean-up, though we
continue to search for potentially responsible parties for the site.

Comment 3: What measures have been imposed by EPA to advise residents of the Fish
Consumption Advisory which has been imposed on Union Lake and Maurice River?
EPA Response to Comment 3: Fish advisories in New Jersey are issued and communicated by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Fish and Wildlife not EPA.
If community members have concerns about the fish consumption advisory, information can be
found at: http://www.state.nj.us/dep/dsr/njmainfish.htm.

Comment 4: Will the contamination have any adverse effect on livestock that consumes water
from the stream?
EPA Response to Comment 4: Since OU1 focuses on residential properties, no ecological risk
assessment was conducted. However, ecological risk assessments will be performed for future
operable units and will evaluate whether the site poses an unacceptable risk to ecological
receptors consuming water from the Tarkiln Creek. Based on this comment, livestock will be
included in this evaluation

Comment 5: How is this cleanup going to affect property values?
EPA Response to Comment 5: The effect of the site on property values is unknown. There may
be short-term impacts, however, in the long-term, all known site-related contamination will be
removed from the affected properties and they will be fully restored. EPA will work with
property owners on a case-by-case basis if a concern arises at any point during the site cleanup
process.




                                               2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Comment 6: How long will construction take place on each property?
EPA Response to Comment 6: Construction times will vary by property due to different yard
sizes and variation in the extent of contamination. Some properties may be grouped together so
that a large excavation could take place addressing several properties at once.

Comment 7: Is there additional sampling that needs to take place?
EPA Response to Comment 7: Additional sampling may take place to refine the extent of
contamination on each property. EPA will continue to sample as long as concentrations of COCs
are elevated, so this sampling may extend onto additional properties, which would then be added
to the cleanup plan.

Comment 8: Is drinking water affected?
EPA Response to Comment 8: The soil contamination at the OU1 properties is not expected to
affect drinking water. It is EPA’s understanding that all of the residents are hooked up to
municipal drinking water. All municipal wells are monitored and no elevated concentrations of
site related contaminants have been identified.

Comment 9: Are there any vegetable gardens located at the residential properties and have they
been tested for contaminants?
EPA Response to Comment 9: Several vegetable gardens are located at the residential
properties; they have not been analyzed for contamination. In general, studies have found that
risk from consuming vegetables grown in heavy-metal contaminated soil is less than the risk
from incidental ingestion of the contaminated soil itself.

ATTACHED TO THIS RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY ARE THE FOLLOWING:

Attachment A - Proposed Plan (English and Spanish versions)
Attachment B - Public Notices - Press of Atlantic City and Nuestra Comunidad
Attachment C - August 2, 2016 Public Meeting Transcript
Attachment D - Comments Submitted During Public Comment Period




                                               3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Attachment A

Proposed Plan

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    Former Kil-Tone Company Superfund Site
                                                Residential Soil
                                                     Vineland, New Jersey



Superfund Proposed Plan                                                                             July 2016


EPA ANNOUNCES PROPOSED PLAN                                   EPA is issuing this Proposed Plan as part of its
                                                              community relations program under Section 117(a) of
This Proposed Plan identifies the Preferred Alternative       the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
to remediate residential contaminated soil associated         Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA) 42 U.S.C.
with the former Kil-Tone Company pesticide                    9617(a), and Section 300.435(c) (2) (ii) of the National
manufacturing plant located in Vineland, New Jersey.          Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency
The Preferred Alternative calls for the excavation and        Plan (NCP). This Proposed Plan summarizes
off-site disposal of contaminated soil on residential         information that can be found in greater detail in the
properties nearby the former Kil-Tone Company                 Residential Remedial Investigation (RI) and Residential
property, and would be the final remedy for those             Focused Feasibility Study (FFS) reports and other
properties.                                                   related documents, which can be found in the
                                                              Administrative Record for this action. The location of
EPA has performed soil sampling at more than 60               the Administrative Record is provided below. EPA and
properties located nearby the former Kil-Tone
Company property. Limited additional remedial                   MARK YOUR CALENDARS
investigation (RI) sampling of other areas, including
                                                                Public Comment Period:
soil at the former Kil-Tone Company property itself             July 13 – August 12, 2016
and at other commercial properties as well as                   EPA will accept written comments on the Proposed
groundwater, surface water and sediment sampling.               Plan during the public comment period. Written
The results of the residential soil sampling program            comments should be addressed to:
identified residential properties where a remedial action
is required. Additional sampling may be needed to                     Hunter Young, Remedial Project Manager
further refine the extent of contamination at the                      U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
                                                                             290 Broadway, 18th Floor
residential properties.
                                                                               New York, NY 10007
                                                                           Email: young.hunter@epa.gov
This Proposed Plan includes summaries of cleanup
alternatives evaluated for use at the affected residential      Written comments must be postmarked no later than
properties. This Proposed Plan was developed by EPA,            August 12, 2016.
the lead agency for the Former Kil-Tone Company
Superfund site, in consultation with the New Jersey            Public Meeting
Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP), the            August 2, 2016 at 7:00 P.M.
                                                               EPA will hold a public meeting to explain the Proposed
support agency. EPA, in consultation with NJDEP, will          Plan and all of the alternatives presented in the
select a final remedy for contaminated soil at affected        Feasibility Study. Oral and written comments will also
residential properties after reviewing and considering         be accepted at the meeting. The meeting will be held
all information submitted during the 30-day public             at:
comment period. EPA, in consultation with NJDEP,                         Gloria M Sabater Elementary School.
may modify the Preferred Alternative or select another                 301 Southeast Blvd, Vineland, NJ 08360
response action presented in this Plan based on new
information or public comments. Therefore, the public           In addition, select documents from the administrative
is encouraged to review and comment on the                      record are available on-line at:
alternatives presented in this Proposed Plan.                   www.epa.gov/superfund/former-kil-tone




                                                                                                 *377092*
                                                                                                       377092

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

NJDEP encourage the public to review these documents           property itself and groundwater, surface water and
to gain a more comprehensive understanding of                  sediment contamination associated with the site.
activities for the site.
                                                               The number of affected properties referenced in this
COMMUNITY ROLE IN SELECTION PROCESS                            Proposed Plan with elevated concentrations of soil
                                                               contaminants is an estimate used to calculate the
This Proposed Plan is being issued to inform the public        approximate costs of the cleanup alternatives. EPA
of EPA’s proposed alternative for residential properties       believes that the estimate is not likely to change
and to solicit public comments pertaining to all of the        significantly. The precise number of residential
remedial alternatives evaluated, including the preferred       properties to be remediated will be determined upon
alternative. Changes to the proposed alternative, or a         completion of additional soil sampling during the
change to another alternative, may be made if public           remedial design and possibly refined during
comments or additional data indicate that such a change        implementation of the remedial action.
would result in a more appropriate remedial action. The
final decision regarding the selected remedy will be           SITE BACKGROUND
made after EPA has taken into consideration all public
comments. EPA is soliciting public comments on all of          Site Description
the alternatives considered in the Proposed Plan,
because EPA may select a remedy other than the                 The former Kil-Tone Company property is located at
proposed alternative. This Proposed Plan has been              527 East Chestnut Avenue in the City of Vineland,
made available to the public for a public comment              Cumberland County, New Jersey. The site is located in
period that concludes on August 12, 2016.                      a mixed use area that has been identified as a
                                                               community with environmental justice concerns. The
A public meeting will be held during the public                property was used by the Kil-Tone Company to
comment period to present the conclusions of the               manufacture pesticides. EPA believes that pesticides
RI/FFS, to elaborate further on the reasons for                were manufactured at the location of the former Kil-
proposing the preferred alternative, and to receive            Tone Company property from 1917 to on or about
public comments. The public meeting will include a             1933. Contaminated soil has been identified at various
presentation by EPA of the preferred alternative and           residential and commercial properties surrounding the
other cleanup options.                                         former Kil-Tone Company property. The property is
                                                               bordered to the north by East Chestnut Avenue; to the
Information concerning the public meeting and on               east by South Sixth Street; to the south by Paul Street;
submitting written comments can be found in the                and to the west by South East Boulevard. Residential
“Mark Your Calendars” text box on Page 1. Comments             and commercial properties are located throughout the
received at the public meeting, as well as written             area. The focus of this Proposed Plan is the residential
comments received during the public comment period,            properties closest to the former Kil-Tone Company
will be documented in the Responsiveness Summary               property.
section of the Record of Decision (ROD). The ROD is
the document that explains which alternative has been          Residential properties in the vicinity of the site range in
selected and the basis for the selection of the remedy.        lot size and date of construction. The smallest lots are
                                                               less than 0.05 acre in size, while the largest lots are up
SCOPE AND ROLE OF THE ACTION                                   to 0.5 acre in size. The oldest homes were built in
                                                               1890. The newest homes were constructed as recently
Due to the large area, the different media affected by         as 1999. The majority of the properties contain single-
contamination, and varying land uses, EPA is                   family homes. In addition, there are approximately 10
addressing the cleanup of the Former Kil-Tone                  homes that are duplex construction, in which two
Company site in several phases, or operable units              housing units share a common central wall. Most of the
(OUs). This Proposed Plan is the first operable unit           yards associated with the properties have a lawn,
associated with the site and addresses contaminated soil       landscaping, and impervious surfaces that include
at residential properties in the vicinity of the former        driveways, sidewalks, and patios. There are several
Kil-Tone Company property. Future OUs will address             commercial properties within and among the residential
contamination at the former Kil-Tone Company                   properties including a fuel distribution facility, a
                                                           2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

transmission service company, a salon, a restaurant, and       In addition to the residential properties that are the
a market. In addition, there are a few vacant lots and         subject of this Proposed Plan and the former Kil-Tone
uninhabited properties within and among the residential        Company property itself, elevated concentrations of
properties.                                                    arsenic and lead have been found at nearby commercial
                                                               properties. Contaminants associated with operations at
A storm sewer catch basin located in the northwestern          the former Kil-Tone Company property have also been
corner of the former Kil-Tone Company property                 found in sediments along the entire stretch of the
receives storm water from the entire property and              Tarkiln Branch to the confluence of the Parvin Branch
discharges into the head of the Tarkiln Branch located         and eventually to the Maurice River. Contaminants
across South East Boulevard. The Tarkiln Branch is a           have also been identified in groundwater at or near the
tributary to the Parvin Branch which flows into the            site. Investigations of all these additional areas are
Maurice River located approximately 3.5 miles from             ongoing and will be the subject of future decision
the Site.                                                      documents.

Site History                                                   Site Geology and Hydrogeology

The former Kil-Tone Company began operations at the            The topography of the site area is generally flat. The
property on or about 1917. The company manufactured            United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
arsenic-based pesticides. Specific compounds                   Conservation Service, Soil Survey of Cumberland
manufactured by the company included lead arsenate,            County, New Jersey states that the site is located on
London purple, and Paris green.                                Downer and Auro loamy sands. The Downer loamy
                                                               sands are formed from fluviomarine deposits, located
In the mid-1920s, the Kil-Tone Company was acquired            on river basins or hills. The Auro loamy sands occur
by John Lucas & Company. A subsidiary of John Lucas            with low hills and ancient stream terraces. The
& Company, Lucas Kil-Tone continued to operate at              permeability is moderately slow to moderate for these
the facility until about 1933. In 1930 John Lucas &            soil associations. Parent material is described as loamy
Company was acquired by the Sherwin Williams                   and gravelly alluvium. Much of the area is covered by
Company. The property is currently owned by Urban              houses, streets, driveways, buildings, parking lots, and
Manufacturing, LLC, which purchased the property in            urban construction.
2008. Urban Sign & Crane, Inc., is the current tenant,
and its operation includes the fabrication and                 During sampling activities, the soil types observed at
installation of commercial signage.                            the background and the residential areas included
                                                               coarse sands, coarse sandy loams, coarse loamy sands,
There have been several investigations at the site,            coarse sandy clays, coarse loamy sand and sand. In
including a site investigation by NJDEP which was              addition, background and residential soil samples
initiated in August 2014. Site assessments have been           collected during the Phase I residential soil sampling
conducted by EPA’s removal program. The NJDEP                  event were analyzed for grain size. The grain size
investigation found arsenic on the former Kil-Tone             analysis indicated that the background and residential
Company property at concentrations as high as 740              soil samples are primarily sand. The percentage of
milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg) in the top 6 inches of         sand in the background soil samples ranged from 61.4
soil and at concentrations as high as 5,800 mg/kg at           percent to 63.9. The percentage of sand in the
depth (3.5 to 4 feet below ground surface).                    residential soil samples ranged from 54.4 percent to 85
Groundwater samples collected from temporary well              percent. The grain size analysis indicated that the
points on the former Kil-Tone Company property                 background and residential soil samples also contained
showed arsenic concentrations from 8.1 micrograms per          silt, clay, and colloids. During sampling activities, fill
liter (µg/L) to 14,000 µg/L. This discovery prompted           material was routinely encountered in some of the soil
NJDEP to refer the site to EPA on November 14, 2014.           borings; the fill material included concrete, red brick,
                                                               coarse sand, coarse black sand, coarse orange and
The site was proposed to the National Priorities List          orange black sand with asphalt, brick and rock shards,
(NPL) on September 30, 2015 and was added to the               plastic, terra cotta, dark brown soil fill, various types of
NPL on April 5, 2016.                                          variegated dark brown soil and fill, coal fragments, coal
                                                               ash, silt, small shards of coal, porcelain, slag and trash.
                                                           3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION AND EARLY                                 subset of the soil samples were analyzed for TCL
RESPONSE ACTIONS                                                 VOCs, SVOCs, pesticides and PCBs

In January and February 2015, EPA completed soil                 Early Response Actions
sampling on 27 residential properties located near the
former Kil-Tone Company property, as well as in three            In April 2016, EPA’s removal branch began immediate
background locations. Soil borings were installed at             actions to prevent exposure to lead and arsenic
each residential property to a maximum depth of 2 feet           contamination identified in surface soil at residential
below the ground surface, from the following depth               properties located near the former Kil-Tone Company
intervals: 0-2 inches, 2-6 inches, 6-12 inches and 12-24         property. The removal program’s action level for
inches. Analytical results show elevated concentrations          arsenic is 67 mg/kg rather than NJDEP’s standard of 19
of lead and arsenic exceeding the NJDEP Residential              mg/kg. The NJDEP standard is consistent with
Direct Contact Soil Remediation Standards (RDCSRS)               statewide background concentrations. Out of the 57
of 400 mg/kg for lead and 19 mg/kg for arsenic.                  properties that are currently known to exceed NJDEP’s
                                                                 standards for arsenic and/or lead, 26 properties
EPA then expanded the residential soil sampling                  exceeded the removal action level for arsenic and/or
program to include additional residential properties to          lead. Pesticides and PAHs were not detected above
determine the extent of contamination. From June 8 to            removal action levels. EPA’s removal action consisted
July 1, 2015, soil sampling was completed at an                  of the placement of 6 inches of topsoil on top of these
additional 35 homes. Approximately 815 soil samples              26 properties, with instructions to property owners
were collected, and concentrations of lead and arsenic           and/or residents to not disturb this layer until a
exceeding the NJDEP RDCSRS standards were found                  permanent remedy could be implemented. Completion
at an additional 30 residential properties.                      of these preventative measures was completed in June
                                                                 2016 on residential properties in the vicinity of the
During this event, a population of soil samples was              former Kil-Tone Company property, and is on-going at
collected from 8 residential properties and analyzed for         additional residential properties located in the flood
Target Compound List (TCL) volatile organic                      plain of the Tarkiln Branch. In addition, a soil cover is
compounds (VOC), semi-volatile organic compounds                 being placed over the former Kil-Tone Company
(SVOC), pesticides, and polycholorinated biphenyls               property itself to prevent further migration of
(PCB) to fully characterize the nature and extent of             contamination from the property until a permanent
contamination and ensure that all possible contaminants          remedy can be implemented.
of potential concern were identified. Analytical results
show elevated concentrations of pesticides (dieldrin,            Remedial Investigation
heptachlor epoxide) and polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) (benzo(a)pyrene,                             Comprehensive RI sampling at the site began in
benzo(a)anthracene, and benzo(b)fluoranthene)                    January 2015. To date, thousands of environmental
exceeding the RDCSRS.                                            samples have been collected from soil, sediment,
                                                                 groundwater and surface water. Sampling has occurred
In February 2016, EPA conducted additional residential           on publicly owned property and commercial and
soil sampling to refine the horizontal and vertical extent       residential properties.
of soil contamination at the site. EPA sampled 27
residential properties located north, south, and east of         Soil samples from residential properties, which are the
the former Kil-Tone Company property. All but two of             focus of this action, were analyzed for metals, VOCs,
these properties were sampled during previous                    SVOCs including PAHs, pesticides, and PCBs.
sampling events. These two additional properties are             Analyses of soil samples indicated the site was a source
located near the site and access in order to conduct             of soil contamination found on residential properties. A
sampling was delayed. Soil samples were collected to             human health risk assessment was conducted on the soil
help determine vertical extent of soil contamination and         analytical results from residential properties to
targeted depth intervals at the following six depth              determine if levels of soil contaminants exceeded
intervals at each boring location: 0-2, 2-24, 24-36, 36-         EPA’s acceptable risk range. The analytical results of
48, 48-60, and 60-72 inches below ground surface. All            residential soil samples were also compared to NJDEP
samples were analyzed for TAL metals. In addition, a             RDCSRSs.
                                                             4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Based on the residential sampling efforts and                     mitigate these exposures under current and future site
comparison of the data to the contaminants detected at            uses.
the properties; lead, arsenic, pesticides and PAHs were
identified as contaminants of potential concern                   The cancer risk and noncancer health hazard estimates
(COPCs) for this Proposed Plan. Lead and arsenic are              in the HHRA are based on current and potential future
found most frequently and at the greatest concentrations          reasonable maximum exposure scenarios and were
above the RDCSRS at residential properties. Soil                  developed by taking into account various health
samples had concentrations of arsenic and lead up to              protective estimates about the concentrations,
1,000 mg/kg for arsenic and 5,700 mg/kg for lead. The             frequency and duration of an individual's exposure to
pesticides found at concentrations above the RDCSRS               chemicals selected as COPCs, as well as the toxicity of
at the residential properties were dieldrin and                   these contaminants.
heptachlor epoxide. Maximum concentrations were
found to be 0.49 mg/kg for dieldrin and 0.38 mg/kg for            Since this operable unit focuses on residential
heptachlor epoxide. The PAHs found at concentrations              properties, an ecological risk assessment was not
above the RDCSRS at the residential properties were               conducted. However, an ecological risk assessment
benzo(a)pyrene, benzo(a)anthracene, and                           will be performed as part of a future OU for the site.
benzo(b)fluoranthene and were found up to 0.81 mg/kg,
2.1 mg/kg, and 2.2 mg/kg, respectively. These
pesticides and PAHs were found less frequently than                         WHAT IS A "PRINCIPAL THREAT"?
arsenic and lead at the residential properties at
                                                                  The NCP establishes an expectation that EPA will use treatment
concentrations above RDCSRS.
                                                                  to address the principal threats posed by a site wherever
                                                                  practicable (NCP Section 300.430(a)(1)(iii)(A)). The "principal
Contamination is primarily found in shallow soil on               threat" concept is applied to the characterization of "source
residential properties, though some areas of deeper               materials" at a Superfund site. A source material is material that
contamination were identified. Shallow soil is                    includes or contains hazardous substances, pollutants or
                                                                  contaminants that act as a reservoir for migration of
generally defined as the 0 to 2 foot depth interval.              contamination to ground water, surface water or air, or acts as a
Contaminated soil on the residential properties is likely         source for direct exposure. Contaminated groundwater generally
the result of surface water runoff and air dispersion             is not considered to be a source material; however, Non-Aqueous
from the former Kil-Tone Company property. The                    Phase Liquids (NAPLs) in ground water may be viewed as
                                                                  source material. Principal threat wastes are those source
investigations of other areas and media are ongoing.
                                                                  materials considered to be highly toxic or highly mobile that
                                                                  generally cannot be reliably contained, or would present a
The RI report for this portion of the site was finalized in       significant risk to human health or the environment should
July 2016, and the FFS was also completed in July                 exposure occur. The decision to treat these wastes is made on a
2016. Together, the RI/FFS form the basis for this                site-specific basis through a detailed analysis of the alternatives
                                                                  using the nine remedy selection criteria This analysis provides a
Proposed Plan.                                                    basis for making a statutory finding that the remedy employs
                                                                  treatment as a principal element.
PRINCIPAL THREATS

Although lead and arsenic in soil at the OU1 properties
may act as sources to surface water, sediment and                 Human Health Risk Assessment
groundwater contamination, these sources are not
highly mobile and are not considered principal threat             A four-step human health risk assessment process was
wastes for this OU of the site.                                   used for assessing site-related cancer risks and
                                                                  noncancer health hazards. The four-step process is
SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS                                             comprised of: Hazard Identification, Exposure
                                                                  Assessment, Toxicity Assessment, and Risk
As part of the RI/FS, a human health risk assessment              Characterization (see adjoining box “What is Risk and
(HHRA) was conducted to estimate current and                      How is it Calculated” for more details on the risk
potential future effects of contaminants on human                 assessment process).
health. A HHRA is an analysis of the potential adverse
human health effects caused by hazardous-substance                Based on current and anticipated future land use, the
exposure in the absence of any actions to control or
                                                              5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

receptors evaluated in the HHRA included a child and
adult resident. Potential soil exposure routes included                WHAT IS RISK AND HOW IS IT CALCULATED?
ingestion of and dermal contact with shallow soil (0 to
2 foot depth interval).                                          A Superfund baseline human health risk assessment is an analysis of the
                                                                 potential adverse health effects caused by hazardous substance releases
                                                                 from a site in the absence of any actions to control or mitigate these
For COPCs other than lead, two types of toxic health             under current- and future-land uses. A four-step process is utilized for
effects were evaluated in the risk assessment: cancer            assessing site-related human health risks for reasonable maximum
risk and noncancer hazard. Calculated cancer risk                exposure scenarios.
estimates for each receptor were compared to EPA’s
                                                                 Hazard Identification: In this step, the contaminants of concern
target risk of 1x10-6 (one-in-one million) to 1 x 10-4
                                                                 (COPCs) at the site in various media (i.e., soil, groundwater, surface
(one-in-ten thousand). The calculated noncancer hazard           water, and air) are identified based on such factors as toxicity, frequency
index (HI) estimates were compared to EPA’s target               of occurrence, and fate and transport of the contaminants in the
threshold value of 1.                                            environment, concentrations of the contaminants in specific media,
                                                                 mobility, persistence, and bioaccumulation.
Three properties were selected to represent all of the           Exposure Assessment: In this step, the different exposure pathways
residences that are in proximity to the former Kil-Tone          through which people might be exposed to the contaminants identified
Company property for evaluation in the HHRA. The                 in the previous step are evaluated. Examples of exposure pathways
result of the risk assessment indicated that, out of the         include incidental ingestion of and dermal contact with contaminated
                                                                 soil and ingestion of and dermal contact with contaminated groundwater.
three properties evaluated, one property had a cancer
                                                                 Factors relating to the exposure assessment include, but are not limited
risk of 8x10-4 exceeding EPA’s target cancer risk range          to, the concentrations in specific media that people might be exposed to
while the other two properties were at the upper bound           and the frequency and duration of that exposure. Using these factors, a
of the cancer risk range at 1x10-4. The cancer risks were        “reasonable maximum exposure” scenario, which portrays the highest
primarily driven by adult and child residential exposure         level of human exposure that could reasonably be expected to occur, is
                                                                 calculated.
to arsenic in the surface soil.
                                                                 Toxicity Assessment: In this step, the types of adverse health effects
The total noncancer HI for children at all three                 associated with chemical exposures, and the relationship between
properties exceeded EPA’s target threshold with values           magnitude of exposure and severity of adverse effects are determined.
                                                                 Potential health effects are chemical-specific and may include the risk
ranging from 3 to 20. The total noncancer HI for adults
                                                                 of developing cancer over a lifetime or other non-cancer health hazards,
was exceeded at one property with an HI of 2. The HI             such as changes in the normal functions of organs within the body (e.g.,
exceedances at these properties were driven by                   changes in the effectiveness of the immune system). Some chemicals are
exposure to arsenic in soil.                                     capable of causing both cancer and non-cancer health hazards.

                                                                 Risk Characterization: This step summarizes and combines outputs of
It is not possible to evaluate risks from lead exposure          the exposure and toxicity assessments to provide a quantitative
using the same methodology as for the other COPCs                assessment of site risks for all COPCs. Exposures are evaluated based
because there are no published quantitative toxicity             on the potential risk of developing cancer and the potential for non-
values for lead. The lead concentrations in surface soil         cancer health hazards. The likelihood of an individual developing cancer
                                                                 is expressed as a probability. For example, a 10-4 cancer risk means a
at the targeted properties in proximity to the former Kil-
                                                                 “one in ten thousand excess cancer risk;” or one additional cancer may
Tone Company property were qualitatively assessed by             be seen in a population of 10,000 people as a result of exposure to site
comparing the average lead concentrations found on               contaminants under the conditions identified in the Exposure
each property to EPA’s residential soil screening level,         Assessment. Current Superfund regulations for exposures identify the
400 mg/kg. Mean, or average, lead concentrations on              range for determining whether remedial action is necessary as an
                                                                 individual excess lifetime cancer risk of 10-4 to 10-6, corresponding to a
two of the three properties exceeded EPA’s residential           one in ten thousand to a one in a million excess cancer risk.
soil screening level. The mean concentrations found on
these properties ranged from 192 to 1,743 mg/kg.                 For non-cancer health effects, a “hazard index” (HI) is calculated. The
                                                                 key concept for a non-cancer HI is that a “threshold” (measured as an
                                                                 HI of less than or equal to 1) exists below which non-cancer health
Contamination levels found at the three properties are
                                                                 hazards are not expected to occur. The goal of protection is 10-6 for
generally similar to those found at other residential            cancer risk and an HI of 1 for a non-cancer health hazard. Chemicals that
properties in the vicinity of the former Kil-Tone                exceed a 10-4 cancer risk or an HI of 1 are typically those that will require
Company property and are above background                        remedial action at the site.
concentrations. The evaluated properties do not
necessarily represent the worst-case scenario; other
nearby properties have both higher and lower
                                                             6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

concentrations of site-related contaminants than those          SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES
evaluated. The results of the risk assessment are
considered to be representative of all affected                 CERCLA requires that each selected remedy be
residential properties in the vicinity of the former Kil-       protective of human health and the environment, be
Tone Company property, and thus can be used to                  cost effective, comply with other statutory laws, and
evaluate OU1 as a whole.                                        utilize permanent solutions and alternative treatment
                                                                technologies and resource recovery alternatives to the
Summary                                                         maximum extent practical. In addition, the statute
                                                                includes a preference for the use of treatment as a
It is EPA’s judgment that the Preferred Alternative             principal element for the reduction of toxicity, mobility,
summarized in this Proposed Plan is necessary to                or volume of the hazardous substances.
protect public health or welfare or the environment
from actual or threatened releases of hazardous                 Potential technologies applicable to soil remediation
substances into the environment.                                were identified and screened by effectiveness,
                                                                implementability, and cost criteria, with emphasis on
REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES                                      effectiveness. Those technologies that passed the initial
                                                                screening were then assembled into remedial
Soil contamination on residential properties is present         alternatives.
in surface and/or subsurface soil. The following
remedial action objectives (RAOs) for contaminated              Of the 62 residential properties identified during the
soil attain a degree of cleanup that ensures the                course of the RI, it is estimated that 57 residential
protection of human health and the environment:                 properties will warrant remediation. The remedial
                                                                alternatives will warrant additional sampling at
    •   Prevent potential current and future                    residential properties during remedial design to
        unacceptable risks to human receptors resulting         determine the extent of remedial activities and
        from direct contact with contaminated soil.             additional properties may be identified.
    •   Prevent migration of site contaminants from the
        OU1 properties to other areas via overland flow         The time frames below for construction do not include
        and air dispersion.                                     the time for designing a remedy, reaching agreement
                                                                with responsible parties if they are identified, or the time
To achieve RAOs, EPA has selected soil cleanup goals            to procure necessary contracts.
for residential properties. Impact to groundwater was
not evaluated as part of the OU1 RI, but given that the         Alternative 1 - No Action
contamination is primarily located in the top two feet of
soil, we do not anticipate this is an issue for this OU.        The NCP requires that a “No Action” alternative be
Groundwater, and impact to groundwater, will be                 evaluated to establish a baseline for comparison with
evaluated as part of a future OU. The soil cleanup goals        other remedial alternatives. Under this alternative, no
for COPCs are based on the New Jersey RDCSRS.                   action would be taken to remediate the contaminated
The cleanup goals for COPCs on residential properties           soil at residential properties. Because this alternative
are as follows:                                                 would result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or
                                                                contaminants remaining at the properties above levels
    •   Lead: 400 mg/kg                                         that would allow for unlimited use and unrestricted
                                                                exposure, EPA would review conditions at residential
    •   Arsenic: 19 mg/kg
                                                                properties every five years.
    •   Dieldrin: 0.04 mg/kg
    •   Heptachlor epoxide: 0.07 mg/kg                          Total Capital Cost:               $0
    •   Benzo(a)pyrene: 0.2 mg/kg                               Annual O&M:                       $0
    •   Benzo(a)anthracene: 0.6 mg/kg                           Total Present Net Worth:          $0
                                                                Timeframe:                         0 years
    •   Benzo(b)fluoranthene: 0.6 mg/kg



                                                            7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 2 –Limited Soil Excavation, Soil Cover               Alternative 3 – Excavation with Off-site Disposal
and Institutional Controls
                                                                 Under this alternative, contaminated soil exceeding the
Under this alternative, soil would be excavated to six           cleanup goals would be excavated. Excavated soil
inches, clean soil would be placed over contaminated             would be transported and disposed off-site.
soil to minimize direct contact. In addition,                    Implementation of this alternative would entail the
institutional controls (deed notices) would be                   following major steps:
implemented to prevent human exposure by regulating
future use of contaminated areas within the properties.               •   Site preparation
The deed notices would require maintenance of the                     •   Tree and vegetation removal, as necessary, to
cover material and restrictions on excavation of the                      excavate contaminated soil
property. Contaminated soil at residential properties                 •   Demolition and replacement of sheds and
would be excavated to 6 inches below ground surface                       garages, as necessary, to excavate
and disposed of at a permitted off-site disposal facility.                contaminated soil
Following removal of the top 6 inches of surface soil, a              •   Removal and replacement of asphalt and
geotextile fabric layer would be placed to act as a visual                concrete paved driveways, as necessary, to
marker and covered with 6 inches of clean fill and                        excavate contaminated soil
sodded. No pavement or structures would be removed                    •   Excavation
for this alternative.
                                                                      •   Particulate monitoring and dust suppression
                                                                      •   Waste characterization sampling
After construction, the soil cover would be graded and
vegetated with grass; plants with deep root systems                   •   Transportation
would not be planted on the covered area. A deed                      •   Off-site disposal
notice would notify residents that contaminated soil                  •   Confirmatory sampling
remains on the property, and provide notification of                  •   Site restoration
future use restrictions and maintenance requirements.                 •   Maintenance
The covered area would require inspection on a
periodic basis.                                                  Excavated soil would be sampled to determine if the
                                                                 soil would be disposed of as either hazardous waste or
     •   Site preparation                                        non-hazardous waste. Treatment of soil, if needed,
     •   Tree and vegetation removal, as necessary, to           would be conducted at and by the approved disposal
         excavate contaminated soil                              facility.
     •   Limited excavation
     •   Particulate monitoring and dust suppression             If the excavation encounters the water table,
                                                                 management of the water and soil in contact with the
     •   Waste characterization sampling
                                                                 water table would need to be addressed.
     •   Transportation
     •   Off-site disposal                                       Total Capital Cost:              $8,773,059
     •   Site restoration                                        Annual O&M:                      $927
     •   Maintenance                                             Present Worth Cost:              $8,774,000
                                                                 Construction Time Frame:         1 year
Since this alternative results in contaminants remaining
on site above acceptable levels, a review of the action at       EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES
least every five years would be required.
                                                                 EPA uses nine criteria to evaluate the remedial
Total Capital Cost:              $1,920,776                      alternatives individually and against each other to select
Annual O&M:                      $3,544                          a remedy. This section of the Proposed Plan profiles
Total Present Worth:             $1,924,000                      the relative performance of each alternative against the
Construction Time Frame:         1 year                          nine criteria, noting how it compares to the other
                                                                 options under consideration. The nine evaluation
                                                                 criteria are discussed below. A detailed analysis of
                                                                 each of the alternatives is in the FFS.
                                                             8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Overall Protection of Human Health and the                     would ensure the remedy remains effective in
Environment                                                    preventing exposure to contaminants.

Since Alternative 1 would not address the risks posed          The continued effectiveness of the Alternative 2
by soil contaminants, it would not be protective of            containment system would depend on how well the soil
human health and the environment.                              cover is maintained. Soil cover maintenance would
                                                               include periodic maintenance (primarily mowing) of
Alternatives 2 and 3 would provide adequate protection         the vegetative cover (where used), periodic inspection
of human health and the environment by eliminating,            of the soil cover, repair of any defect or deficiency in
reducing, or controlling risk through containment, soil        the soil cover, and repair (e.g., reseeding and/or
cover, or removal. Engineering controls (i.e., soil            replanting) of the vegetative layer (where applicable).
cover) and a deed notice would prevent exposure to
risk-based levels of contaminants through Alternative 2.

Alternative 3 would provide protection by removing the              THE NINE SUPERFUND EVALUATION CRITERIA
contaminants, thereby preventing exposure.
                                                               1. Overall Protectiveness of Human Health and the Environment
                                                               evaluates whether and how an alternative eliminates, reduces, or
Because the “no action” alternative, Alternative 1, is         controls threats to public health and the environment through
not protective of human health and the environment, it         institutional controls, engineering controls, or treatment.
was eliminated from further consideration under the
remaining eight criteria.                                      2. Compliance with Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate
                                                               Requirements (ARARs) evaluates whether the alternative meets
                                                               federal and state environmental statutes, regulations, and other
Compliance with ARARs                                          requirements that pertain to the site, or whether a waiver is justified.

Alternative 2 provides compliance with chemical-               3. Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence considers the ability of
                                                               an alternative to maintain protection of human health and the
specific ARARs, because the soil cover and
                                                               environment over time.
institutional controls would be effective in preventing
exposure to the contaminants. Location-specific                4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume (TMV) of
ARARs and Action-specific ARARs would both be met              Contaminants through Treatment evaluates an alternative's use of
by proper design and implementation of the respective          treatment to reduce the harmful effects of principal contaminants, their
                                                               ability to move in the environment, and the amount of contamination
components such as general construction standards and          present.
waste handling requirements. The Location-specific
ARARs and Action-specific ARARs for the disposal               5. Short-term Effectiveness considers the length of time needed to
phase would be met with proper selection of the                implement an alternative and the risks the alternative poses to workers,
                                                               the community, and the environment during implementation.
disposal facility.
                                                               6. Implementability considers the technical and administrative
Alternative 3 provides compliance with chemical-               feasibility of implementing the alternative, including factors such as
specific ARARs by removing contaminated soil above             the relative availability of goods and services.
New Jersey RDCSRS. Location and Action-specific
                                                               7. Cost includes estimated capital and annual operations and
ARARs would be met during the construction phase by            maintenance costs, as well as present worth cost. Present worth cost is
proper design and implementation of the action such as         the total cost of an alternative over time in terms of today's dollar
general construction standards and waste handling              value. Cost estimates are expected to be accurate within a range of
requirements. The Location-specific ARARs and                  +50 to -30 percent.
Action-specific ARARs for the disposal phase would be
                                                               8. State/Support Agency Acceptance considers whether the State
met with proper selection of the disposal facility.            agrees with the EPA's analyses and recommendations, as described in
                                                               the RI/FS and Proposed Plan.
Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence
                                                               9. Community Acceptance considers whether the local community
                                                               agrees with EPA's analyses and preferred alternative. Comments
Alternative 2 provides long-term effectiveness and             received on the Proposed Plan are an important indicator of community
permanence through maintenance of the soil covers and          acceptance.
the institutional controls. Periodic inspection and
maintenance, as required by the institutional controls,
                                                           9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

These maintenance activities would be complicated by             development of protective engineering and institutional
the lack of direct control of soil covered areas on the          controls that would be both enforceable and acceptable
residential properties. An access agreement with the             to the residential property owners is highly uncertain.
owners and appropriate coordination for property                 Implementation of Alternatives 2 and 3 is complicated
access would be needed when maintenance is required.             to some extent by the need to perform either soil cover
                                                                 construction (Alternative 2) or excavation and
Alternative 3 would provide long-term effectiveness              backfilling (Alternative 3) on residential properties.
and permanence by removing contaminants from
residential properties and providing secure disposal of          Both alternatives would result in some short-term
excavated soil at appropriate permitted facilities. Long-        impacts to the community, in the form of vehicular
term monitoring and maintenance of the residential               (truck) traffic and noise and dust from
properties and CERCLA five-year reviews would not                construction/excavation activities, although Alternative
be required since the properties would be remediated to          2 (bringing soil in to construct a soil cover) would
unrestricted use.                                                generate less truck traffic than Alternative 3 (removing
                                                                 contaminated soil from properties and bringing soil in
Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume through               to fill excavated areas). Traffic, noise, and dust impacts
Treatment                                                        could be mitigated to some extent by limiting the
                                                                 construction schedule to daytime hours on weekdays or
Alternative 2 does not provide reduction of toxicity,            other timing as specified by local ordinance. Perimeter
mobility, or volume of contamination through                     air monitoring and dust control measures would be
treatment.                                                       required to address concerns over exposure to dust
                                                                 during activities.
Alternative 3 would not provide reduction of toxicity,
mobility, or volume of contamination at the properties           Administrative implementation of Alternative 2 may be
through treatment.                                               significantly impacted by the need to impose deed
                                                                 notices on residential properties to prevent human
Short-Term Effectiveness                                         exposure by regulating future use of contaminated areas
                                                                 within the properties. These notices would restrict the
Alternative 2 would be effective in the short term since         owner’s use of the property and would not likely be
contaminated soil would not be significantly disturbed           favorable to the owner. Since Alternative 3 results in
during construction activities. Construction of the              the removal of contaminated soil, a deed notice placing
required containment system and establishment of the             restrictions on use of the property would be
deed notices, could be accomplished in approximately 1           unnecessary.
year.
                                                                 Cost
Alternative 3 involves excavation of contaminated soil
and would present a potential for short-term exposure.           The total estimated cost for Alternative 2 is $1,924,000.
Under this alternative, any potential environmental              Capital costs include the cost for construction of the
impacts associated with the excavation of soil would be          containment system and administrative cost for
minimized with the proper installation and                       establishment of the deed notices. Annual O&M costs
implementation of dust and erosion control measures,             include maintenance of the containment systems.
by performing excavation with appropriate health and
safety measures, and by using a lined temporary staging          The total estimated cost for Alternative 3 is $8,774,000.
area. Appropriate transportation safety measures would           Capital costs include the cost for the excavation and
be required during the shipping of the contaminated soil         disposal of soil and site restoration. There is no annual
to approved off-site disposal facilities. Completion of          maintenance required and therefore no annual O&M
the required construction for most properties can be             costs are associated with this alternative.
accomplished in approximately 1 year.
                                                                 State Acceptance
Implementability
                                                                 The State of New Jersey concurs with the preferred
Alternative 2 can be implemented; however, the
                                                            10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

alternative as presented in this Proposed Plan.                 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION

Community Acceptance                                            The administrative record file, which contains copies
                                                                of the Proposed Plan and supporting documentation is
                                                                available at the following locations:
Community acceptance of the preferred alternative will
be evaluated after the public comment period ends and           EPA Region 2 Superfund Records Center
will be described in the ROD. Based on public                   290 Broadway, 18th Floor
comment, the preferred alternative could be modified            New York, New York 10007-1866
from the version presented in this proposed plan. The           (212) 637-4308
Record of Decision is the document that formalizes the          Hours: Monday-Friday – 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
selection of the remedy for a site.
                                                                Vineland City Library
PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE                                           1058 East Landis Ave.
                                                                Vineland, New Jersey 08360
The Preferred Alternative for achieving remedial action         For Library Hours:
objectives for the residential properties with soil             http://www.vinelandlibrary.org/
impacted by site-related contamination is Alternative 3,
                                                                In addition, select documents from the administrative
excavation and off-site disposal of contaminated soil.          record are available on-line at:

Based on the information available at this time, EPA            www.epa.gov/superfund/former-kil-tone
and NJDEP believe the preferred alternative meets the
threshold criteria and provides the best balance of
tradeoffs among the other alternatives with respect to
the balancing criteria.

The preferred alternative satisfies the two threshold
criteria and achieves the best combination of the five
balancing criteria of the comparative analysis. This
alternative is preferred because it will achieve the
RAOs and cleanup goals in the shortest amount of time,
and is a permanent remedy that will not require the
implementation of ICs. The EPA and NJDEP expect the
preferred alternative to satisfy the following statutory
requirements of CERCLA Section 121(b): 1) be
protective of human health and the environment; 2)
comply with ARARs; 3) be cost effective; 4) utilize
permanent solutions and alternative treatment
technologies or resource recovery technologies to the
maximum extent practicable; and 5) satisfy the
preference for treatment as a principal element. EPA
will assess the modifying criteria of community
acceptance in the ROD following the close of the public
comment period.




                                                           11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                              Former Kil-Tone
                                                                                                                                                Vineland, NJ
                                                                                                                                         39.478410o N,75.025509o W
File Path: S:\CADD\I\9026\0001S051501400\mxd\FIG_1_Vineland_Site_Location_011915.mxd




                                                                                                                            CT   RI
                                                                                                                NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Former Kil-Tone Site Removal Assessment




                                                                                              MD
                                                                                                PA


                                                                                                               NJ



                                                                                                               Cumberland
                                                                                                               County
                                                                                                                                                          Sources:
                                                                                                                                      USGS 7.5 Minute Topographic Quadrangle Maps:
                                                                                                                                                                                     1,000
                                                                                                                                                                                             ±0     1,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Site Location

                                                                                                        DE                               Millville, NJ 1997 & Five Points, NJ 1994           Feet
                                                                                       VA                                                    EPA Contract No.: EP-S5-13-01
                                                                                                                                              TDD No.: S05-0010-1501-400                                    Prepared For: joesph.gawarzewski   Prepared By: joel.peters

                                                                                       Date Saved: 1/19/2015                                                                                                      Coordinate System: NAD 1983 UTM Zone 18NTransverse Mercator

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ±




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      50               0            50

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Feet

                                                                                                  Landis Park Background Sampling Locations                               Vineland Cemetery Background Sampling Locations                                                  South Vineland Park Background Sampling Locations
File Path: X:\R2_Projects\Former_Kil_Tone\Projects\mxd\Remediated\Figure1.mxd




                                                                                                                                                       150    0     150                                                                                 100    0     100                                                                                                            300            0             300

                                                                                                                                                             Feet                                                                                             Feet                                                                                                                                Feet




                                                                                                              Landis         Legend                                                                                                                                                                         Former Kil-Tone Site Removal Assessment
                                                                                 Vineland
                                                                                Cemetery
                                                                                                              Park
                                                                                                                                       Parcel                                                                                                                                                                         Vineland, New Jersey
                                                                                                             Main                      Sampled Parcel                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Phase I and II Residential Properties
                                                                                                             Map
                                                                                                                                       Sampled Parcel to be Remediated
                                                                                                                                       Subject Property                                                                                                                                                                      for Remediation Map
                                                                                         South
                                                                                      Vineland
                                                                                          Park                                                                                 Source: Cumberland County Department of Planning and Development
                                                                                                                                                                                 NJ Office of Information Technology (NJOIT), Office of Geographic
                                                                                                                                                                           Information Systems (OGIS), 2011, and Bing Maps Aerial Imagery, 2010-2011.                                                    Prepared For: Carter Owens                                Prepared By: Clayton.Hayes
                                                                          Date Saved: 6/29/2016                        EPA Contract No.: EP-S5-13-01                                                        TDD No.: S05-0010-1501-400                                      Coordinate System: NAD 1983 StatePlane New Jersey FIPS 2900 Feet   Projection: Transverse Mercator   Datum:North American 1983   Units: Foot US

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Attachment B

Public Notice

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    l-       I
                         ..
    •I
    ~                r


                               4 I locales
    ~t


    i
    -;
        'i


                                                                                                                                          1erasalt
    ~
        'i
    :
    ''
    ..
    ..,




    1.
                                                                                                                                          del sueii1
                                                                                                                                   El emprendedor lucha por
    l                                                                                                                              seguir el deseo que tenia con

l                                                                                                                                  sus fallecidos hermanos de
                                                                                                                                   abrir un gimnasio de boxeo y
l.                        David Anthony, dueiio de Vila Boxing, entrena con una puchimbal dentro del gimnasio ubicado en 754 North COnVOCa r ala COffi Un idad.
                          Delsea Drive de Vineland.                                                  Sean M. Fltzgmld/Nuestra Comunidad
                                                                                                                                          POR MATT SILVA I Reportero
1
                                                                                                                                             VINELAND -Abrir un gimnasio de bo
~
    ;\                                                                                                                                    ya no es el sueiio de David Anthony, es i
                                                                                                                                          realidad. Vila Boxing fue inaugurado •
                                                                                                                                          de julio en un local ubicado en 754 Ne
                 •                                                                                                                        Delsea Drive en Vineland y Anthony es
    j                                                                                                                                     ra compartir su gran sueiio con la cor
                                                                                                                                          nidad.
                                                                                                                                             "Mis hermanos y yo
..                            La Agencia de Protecci6n Ambiental de Estados Unidos emiti6 un Plan de propuesta para la
                                                                                                                                          siempre hemos esta-              ~brine
                                                                                                                                          do en el boxeo~ cont6
~                             limpieza de la tierra contaminada de aproximadamente 57 viviendas en Vineland, Nueva
                              Jersey. El perfodo para que el publico haga comentarios es de 30 dfas, y comienza el 13 de
                                                                                                                                          Anthony, de 45 aiios         unlugar
.,                            julio y finaliza el 12 de agosto de 2016 e identifica el plan de limpieza preferido por la EPA y
                                                                                                                                          de edad. "Nosotros
                                                                                                                                          crecimos en gimna-           el rato, et
~
                              otras opciones de limpieza consideradas por la EPA.                             ·                           sios y campamentos
                              El plan de limpieza preferido por la EPA consta de: 1) la eliminaci6n de la tierra contanli.nada            de boxeo de New York andarpo
.                             en viviendas afectadas por las instajaciones de la antigua Kil-Tone Company; 2) el desecho de               City y siempre habla-        brindara
                              la tierra en instalaciones con licencia para manipular Ios desechos; 3) el·relleno de las areas             mos de abrir un gim-
                              ex.cavadas con tierra Iimpia; 4) la replantaci6n de vegetaci6n, si corresponde, y Ia restauraci6n           nasio ... Es un deseo        unlugar
                              de las propiedades; y 5) la supervisi6n durante la limpieza de la tierra para garantizar la                 que siempre ha estado
                              eficacia de la limpieza y la prot~ci6n de las viviendas.                                                    en mi coraz6n y lo voy       delestr~
                             Durante el periodo de comentarios del publico, la EPA celebracl una reuni6n publica en                       a cumplir en nombre
                             Vineland, NJ, para recibir Ios comentarios acerca del plan de limpieza preferido y otras                     de mis hermanos".
                          ., opciones consideradas. La reuni6n se celebracl el 2 de agosto de 2016 a las 7:00 p. m. en la                    Los hermanos Anthony -Placid·
                             escuela Gloria M Sabater Elementary School, 301 SE Boulevard, Vineland, Nueva Jersey.                        Raymond- fueron una gran influenci<
                                                                                                                                          su vida. Placido se convirti6 en activ
                              Para obtener el plan propuesto, consulte- el sitio www.epa.gov/superfund/fonner-kil-tone' o
                              llame a Wanda Ayala, coordinadora de Participaci6n de la Comunidad de Ia EPA. al (212)
                                                                                                                                          comunitario y director de campamer
                              637-3676 y solicite una copia por correo.
                                                                                                                                          juveniles de verano en el Spanish Harl
                                                                                                                                          mientras que "Ray" lleg6 a ser boxea
                              Puede enviar por correo pos~ los comentarios escritos sobre el plan propuesto antes del 12                  profesional y luego en el entrenador
                              de agosto de 2016; escribiendo a Hunter Young, EPA Project Manager, U.S. EPA, 290                           llev6 a Antonio Fuertes a conseguir el t
                              Broadway, 18th floor, New York, NY 10007-1866 o enviar un mensaje de correo electr6nico a                   lo del Concejo Mundial de Boxeo en 2C
'                             young.hunter@epagov antes del 12 de agosto de 2016.                                                            Desafortunadamente, ellos ya no ei
j                             El archivo de Registro administrativo que contiene los documentos que se utilizan o se                      con David.
                              emplean como base para el desarrollo de las alternativas y el plan de limpieza preferido esta                  Placido muri6 a lo.s 33 aiios de ec
                              disponible para revisi6n publica en Ios siguientes centros de infonnaci6n:                                  mientras que a Raymond le diagnostica
                                                                                                                                          cancer de pancreas en 2004 y, un aiio (
                              Biblioteca de Vineland City ubicada en 1058 East Landis Ave., Vineland, Nueva Jersey
                                                                                                                                          pues, falleci6 a los 38 aiios.
                              Centro de registros de Superfund de la regi6n 2 de la EPA, ubicado en 290 Broadway, Piso 18,                   "Le hablo a mis hermanos a diario", •
                              Nueva York. Nueva York.                                                            ..,.,_,,..               Anthonv.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

THE PRESS OF ATLANTIC CITY                                                            LOCAL                                                            WEDNESDAY, JULY 13, 2016 • A5




Former Miss Ala. likens Dallas killer to ‘martyr’
JOHN DEROSIER                   “I think, more than         first black woman to           word, but that’s just              Both the Miss Ala-                   current Miss Alabama or
Staff Writer                 anything, I’m dealing          hold the title in the          what came to mind.”              bama Organization and                  the Miss Alabama
                             with a bit of guilt be-        state’s history. She is a        James said she re-             the television station                 Organization. We have
   A former Miss Alabama     cause I don’t feel sad for     graduate of the                ceived mixed reactions           she works for, WPBT2 in                nothing but the utmost
stirred controversy on-      the officers that lost their   University of Alabama          about the video and that         Miami, quickly distanced               respect and appreciation
line after posting a video   lives and I know that          and is now a television        a wife of one of the Dallas      themselves from the for-               for the men and women
to Facebook on Sunday        that’s really not my heart,”   host in Miami.                 victims reached out to           mer pageant winner.                    of law enforcement, and
calling the Dallas police    she said while tearing            In an interview Mon-        her and said she forgave           “Kalyn Chapman James                 would never condone
shooter a martyr.            up. “I value human life        day with NBC Local 15          her. She said she has            was Miss Alabama 23                    violence of any kind.”
   In a short video, Kalyn   and I want to be sad for       in Mobile, Alabama, James      received several threats.        years ago in 1993,” the                   The television station
Chapman James said           them, but I can’t help         said her words were              “People telling me to          Miss Alabama Organi-                   released a statement on
she does not feel bad for    but feeling like the           taken out of context.          watch my back, people            zation said in a written               its Twitter account say-
the five police officers     shooter was a martyr.”            “What Micah did was         telling me to be careful,        statement. “The opinions               ing James had been sus-
who were shot and killed        James won the Miss          wrong. Period,” she said       people telling me the            she expressed are her                  pended.
by Micah Johnson on          Alabama Pageant in             in the interview. “Maybe       police should never pro-         own, and do not repre-                 Contact: 609-272-7260
Thursday during protests.    1993 and became the            martyr wasn’t the right        tect me," she said.              sent the viewpoint of the              JDeRosier@pressofac.com


CRIME                       after the meeting.
Continued from A3
                              The department also
                            will acquire 60 more
                            body cameras to add to
                                                                                                                               Federal grant targets
siege” and called for 24- its 130 devices in use by
hour police patrols in
Back Maryland.
                            officers, Mazur said. He
                            said officers on foot pa-
                                                                                                                               oral health services
   Officers will begin foot trols will wear the cam-                                                                          NICOLE LEONARD                        used to buy more den-
patrols immediately in      eras, which will contrib-                                                                         Staff Writer                          tist chairs with equip-
the Marina District, which ute to increased account-                                                                                                                ment and hire two new
includes Back Maryland, ability for officers.                                                                                    BRIDGETON — Oral                   dentists for its Glass-
Chief Henry White Jr.,        Meanwhile, bids are                                                                             health sometimes takes                boro location, which is
said during the meeting being accepted for con-                                                                               a back seat to general                scheduled to transform
at the Atlantic Villas      struction of a surveil-                                                                           health, but local and fed-            from a medical and
Community Center.           lance center inside the                                                                           eral organizations and                dental facility into a
   Mazur said the patrols Public Safety Building,                                            DONNA WEAVER / STAFF WRITER
                                                                                                                              health centers are mak-               dental-only center.
will include four officers Capt. James Sarkos said.         Mayor Don Guardian speaks Tuesday with Kathleen Burnside,         ing strides to fix that.                 Of the nearly 20,000
at a time, every day,         Sarkos said the center        of the city’s Back Maryland section, about her concerns with         CompleteCare Health                dental patients the net-
from daylight to night-     will monitor cameras            crime and violence in the community.                              Network, based in                     work serves annually,
time. Police will be able from around the city,                                                                               Bridgeton, is one of six              Edwards said 90 per-
to establish community including the new                    lighting in the area.          bleeding and it was                health centers in the                 cent use Medicaid or
contacts and introduce      devices to be installed in         News of these initia-       pouring out. He picked             state awarded grant                   qualify for a sliding
themselves to residents, areas of the Marina                tives has been some-           up his phone and called            money from the U.S.                   scale reduced-fee pro-
Mazur said.                 District by Interstate          thing residents such as        his wife and told her he           Department of Health                  gram.
   “These officers will be Realty Management.               Pauline Norwood have           wasn’t going to make it,”          and Human Services to                    “We’re the safety net
able to be a visible pres- The surveillance center          wanted to hear for a           Norwood said.                      increase access to oral               for uninsured, under-
ence and deterrent          will be manned by at            long time.                       That man died on her             health care in the region.            served and migrant
here,” Mazur said.          least two officers, 24             Norwood has lived in        front steps, she said.                “Dental is not popu-               worker populations,”
   White said he will also hours each day.                  Back Maryland for                Norwood said she was             lar with a lot of health              he said. “In all of our
participate and accom-        Guardian said the city        decades and has                appreciative of the                centers,” said Curtis                 counties, poverty is the
pany officers on the        will install LED lighting       watched it change from         police and officials               Edwards,                              biggest thing. These
patrols.                    in the Marina District, as      good to bad. She said          meeting with residents.            CompleteCare CEO                      people have to weigh
   “This is a way for the   residents have com-             she’s seen it all and she’s      “They’ve been work-              and president. “They                  dental against other
people to get to know       plained about the dark          seen enough.                   ing with us, and they              sometimes run in the                  things like buying gro-
the police officers. This   conditions.                        “About three years          need to get credit for             red (debt) with dental.               ceries, paying rent, get-
is not necessarily for        Guardian said the city        ago, a young man came          that,” she said.                   We know how big the                   ting general health care.”
crime suppression. We       has $2 million grant and        to my front door holding       Contact: 609-513-6686              demand is here. It                       Jim Schulz, director
are coming to break down $4 million loan to go              his chest and said he          DWeaver@pressofac.com              seems to be increasing                of governmental and
the barriers,” White said toward funding LED                was stabbed. He was            Twitter @ACPressWeaver             in our area, and we                   public affairs at New
                                                                                                                              need to make sure                     Jersey Dental Associa-
                                                                                                                              everyone in our coun-                 tion, said people might
PARADE                        participate anymore,” he      create plywood cutouts         America.” “I’ve worked             ties gets care.”                      not put dental health
Continued from A3             said.                         suited to their theme —        really hard to up the                 The network got                    on the same level as
                                Colette Gabriel has         this year it’s “All Aboard,”   musical acts.”                     $525,000 from the award,              general health because
                              also noticed the decline      a 1940s nautical theme.          Hartman said he is               one of the highest                    there is a lack of educa-
been participating for        in the size of the parade.       Many guests hop from        trying to learn from               amounts in the state.                 tion about relationship
last 33 years.                  “I don’t know, a lot of     party to party to keep up      Soifer, who has been               Five other dental health              between oral health
   Caserta, 66, said he       people have a lot of          with the parade. An ice        putting together unique            centers in Newark,                    and overall health.
began riding in the boat opinions,” Gabriel said,           truck from Sea Isle Ice        and wacky events for the           Trenton, Lakewood,                       “Oral health prob-
parade as a young man         adding that it’s possible     Co. makes its rounds to        city for the last 45 years.        Ocean County, and Do-                 lems are more like ero-
aboard a friend’s vessel. some boats are dissuad-           the house parties deliv-         “He worked hard to de-           ver, Morris County, were              sion over time,” he
   “For the last 18 years,    ed due to the depth of        ering ice as needed.           velop a brand for Ocean            awarded $350,000 or                   said. “You might not be
we’ve been using my           the back bay.                    “We party hop as well,      City,” Hartman said.               more.                                 in a lot of pain at first,
1969 wooden Lyman,”             Fifteen years ago, Ga-      that’s what the whole            Soifer said he believes             CompleteCare Heath                 but if you let it contin-
Caserta said.                 briel and her husband,        thing is all about,”           the number of boats will           Network operates 20                   ue, it will manifest.
   This year, the classic     Sam, used to enter a          Gabriel said.                  also grow with the new             health centers in Cum-                People don’t under-
boat had some issues,         boat in the parade each          Michael Hartman, city       organizers.                        berland, Gloucester                   stand or value the
he said, so they will         year, but after purchas-      special events coordina-         “We never gave up. We            and Cape May coun-                    importance of oral
instead be entering his       ing a second home on          tor, is taking over for        kept it going, and now I           ties. Its dentist centers             health. If you’re not
20-foot 1989 Barefoot         the bay, they decided to      Soifer, who is set to re-      can see with these new             are located in Bridge-                being proactive, there’s
Nautique.                     host a house party instead.   tire at the year’s end. He     people I think it’s going          ton, Millville, Vineland,             the opportunity of den-
   Joe Caserta, a 94-year- She said that part of the        is best known around           to be bigger than last             Wildwood and Glass-                   tal disease that
old World War II veteran reason was because they            town for his Ocean City        year and it will continue          boro and serve Medi-                  becomes part of body.”
and French Legion of          had young children.           Theatre Company.               to be something to see,”           caid, underinsured and Contact: 609-272-7022
Honor recipient, is the         Now, the Gabriels host         On Friday, Hartman          he said.                           uninsured patients.        NLeonard@pressofac.com
one who got his son           over 100 guests each          enthusiastically went          Contact: 609-272-7251                 Edwards said the        Twitter @ACPressNLeonard
started in the parade.        Night in Venice at their      over the details of this       CLowe@pressofac.com                grant money will be
   “It’s a family tradition,” Lagoon Road home.             year’s parade.
Mike Caserta said. The          “It’s the most exciting        “I’m really encourag-
Casertas currently have       night in Ocean City,” she     ing people to celebrate
four generations riding       said.                         landmarks across our
on their boat, from pa-         The Gabriels set up a       country,” he said, speak-
triarch Joe all the way       large buffet for their        ing of the optional
down to Mike’s grand-         guests. Each year they        theme “Destination
daughter, Rielle.
   “It’s a big family
affair,” he said.
   Night in Venice now
includes a bayfront
home-decorating con-                                                                                    DISCOVER NEW WAYS TO
test, and each year more
homes take part. Soifer
                                                                                                        GREATER INDEPENDENCE.
                                                                                                     We’re showcasing over 60 vendors, featuring some of the most exciting products
estimated that between                                                                                                             TM
                                                                                                      and services – from ReWalk , Bioness® and more – designed to help seniors
200 and 300 homes will
                                                                                                           and the physically challenged lead more mobile and fulfilling lives.
enter this year. In addi-
tion, organizers added a
fireworks show.
   However, the number
                                                                                                                                   • Meet Rio 2016 Paralympian hopeful, Michael Braxton
of participating boats
dropped last year. At its                                                                                                          • Hear Gerald Turning, autism blogger
height, 100 boats took                                                                                                             • See the ReWalk exoskeleton
part in the parade.                                                                                                                • Meet Lucy, the world’s smallest working therapy dog
   “It hit its heyday really
when the casinos came
(into Atlantic City). They                                                                               Michael Braxton

put (in) some huge
boats. One was a giant
Ferris wheel on a boat,”
                                                                                                        WEDNESDAY, JULY 20 | 11AM - 4PM
                                                                                                            Michael Braxton
Soifer recalled.                                                                                          Stockton        University Campus Center Event Room
                                                                                                                           Accessible parking. Easy ramp access.
   No one can say exactly
what led to decrease in
boats, but Joe Caserta                                                                                            LEARN MORE AND REGISTER AT
think it’s due to the
amount of time and                                                                                           ABILITYFAIR.COM OR (609) 748-5250
                                                                                                                               FREE and open to the public.
effort needed to enter.
   “You’ve got to get peo-
ple interested to spend                                                                            presented by

the time and money. It
takes a lot of work and
planning ahead of time.                                                                                  @
They want to participate
and watch, but you can’t
get enough boaters to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      Attachment C

Public Meeting Transcripts

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                 1


         1              UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

         2                       AGENCY, REGION II

         3

         4                          * * * * * * * *

         5                 IN RE:   FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY

         6                          SUPERFUND SITE

         7                          * * * * * * * *

         8

         9   BEFORE:      Wanda Ayala, Community Involvement

        10                Coordinator

        11                Hunter Young, EPA Project Manager

        12   HEARING:     Tuesday, August 2, 2016

        13                7:00 p.m.

        14   LOCATION:    Gloria M. Sabater Elementary School

        15                301 Southeast Boulevard

        16                Vineland, NJ    08360

        17

        18                  Reporter:    Stacey Jacovinich

        19

        20

        21

        22               Any reproduction of this transcript

        23               is prohibited without authorization

        24                   by the certifying agency.


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          2


         1                           I N D E X

         2

         3   DISCUSSION AMONG PARTIES            4 - 42

         4   CERTIFICATE                            43

         5

         6

         7

         8

         9

        10

        11

        12

        13

        14

        15

        16

        17

        18

        19

        20

        21

        22

        23

        24


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                3


         1                          E X H I B I T S

         2

         3                                             Page

         4   Number   Description                     Offered

         5

         6                           NONE OFFERED

         7

         8

         9

        10

        11

        12

        13

        14

        15

        16

        17

        18

        19

        20

        21

        22

        23

        24


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        4


         1                     P R O C E E D I N G S

         2   -----------------------------------------------------

         3                MS. AYALA:

         4                My name is Wanda Ayala, and I'm the

         5   Community Involvement Coordinator for the Kil-Tone

         6   Superfund site.   I know many of you because I've been

         7   around for almost two years as part of the removal

         8   program.   And now for the remainder of the program, I'm

         9   staying on as the Community Involvement Coordinator.

        10   I just want to talk about why we're here tonight.

        11   We're here to discuss the proposed plan and other

        12   payment options for the former Kil-Tone Company Super

        13   Fund site.   The public comment period started July 13

        14   and goes through August 12th.   All public comments will

        15   be considered and included formally in the record.

        16   We have a stenographer here tonight, Stacey.   We're

        17   required by law to have a transcript of this meeting,

        18   so Stacey will be recording it.   And I ask that out of

        19   consideration for her, at the end, when we open up the

        20   floor for comment, that you state your name clearly for

        21   her.   We have interpreters that are here to offer

        22   translation for anybody that needs it, so please see

        23   them to get the equipment.

        24                With me tonight we have Hunter Young, who


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         5


         1   is the EPA Project Manager; Stephanie Vaughn, who is

         2   the Acting Section Chief of the Mega Project Section;

         3   Michael Sivak, who is the Special Projects Branch

         4   Chief; and Abbey States, who is our Risk Assessor.     We

         5   also have Terry Kish.   Many of you know him because

         6   he's the off-scene coordinator that's handling the

         7   removal portion of Kil-Tone.   And we have Emma Lopez

         8   and Bill Jones from the Vineland Health Department.

         9   And I want to thank them so much for helping us out for

        10   the setup here for the meeting.

        11                I want to acknowledge any elected

        12   officials, if there are any present tonight.   Okay.

        13   I'll ask if you can put your phones on vibrate.   And

        14   the facilities are here to the left if anybody needs to

        15   go.   And without further ado, I'll hand it then over to

        16   Hunter.

        17                MR. SIVAK::

        18                She actually handed it over to Michael ---

        19                MS. AYALA:

        20                Michael.

        21                MR. SIVAK::

        22                --- just to keep everyone not confused.

        23   So I'm going to start out of this evening, first of

        24   all, by thanking everyone for coming out night.   And


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        6

         1   before we actually get into the investigation and then

         2   what we found from the investigation of the Kil-Tone

         3   property, I want to take you through the Superfund

         4   process a little bit.

         5                As you should all know or as many of you

         6   may know, the former Kil-Tone Company site is a federal

         7   --- NPL Federal Superfund site.   Now, what does that

         8   mean?   Well, what that means is that the site was

         9   referred to the EPA because someone found some

        10   contamination somewhere and they wanted it looked into.

        11                So it was referred to the EPA, and we've

        12   had some of our removal folks, represented by Terry.

        13   EPA has two main programs.   There's the removal

        14   program, which deals with early investigations of sites

        15   and emergency responses at sites.   And then there's the

        16   remedial program.   And the remedial program, which is

        17   what Hunter and Stephanie and I represent, we ---.    I

        18   will keep using this and hopefully you guys can fill in

        19   the blanks when it goes out, but the remedial process,

        20   which is what we all deal with, investigates the

        21   long-term clean-ups of sites that are very complicated.

        22                Now, this process starts with a referral to

        23   EPA for a site that people want to have investigated a

        24   little bit more in depth.    That happens up here.   The


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                       7

         1   site, once we have enough information on it, it gets

         2   nominated to the National Priorities List, which is a

         3   federal rulemaking effort that identifies the most

         4   complex hazardous waste sites in the country.   Once a

         5   site is on the National Priorities List, that site is

         6   then eligible for federal monies for investigation and

         7   clean-up.   So it doesn't necessarily go back to the

         8   State for money expenditures.   It comes to the Federal

         9   Government.   We look for responsible parties that may

        10   be able to help pay for that clean-up.   If those

        11   responsible parties are not identified or if they are

        12   no longer in existence, they've gone out of business,

        13   they've gone bankrupt, then the Federal Government

        14   funds that investigation and clean-up.   And that's

        15   actually what's happening right now.

        16                 So the former Kil-Tone Company site was

        17   nominated to the National Priorities List last fall.

        18   It went final, so it is, in fact, a Federal Superfund

        19   site as of this spring.   We initiated a remedial

        20   investigation at the site, which means we looked for

        21   the nature and the extent of contamination.   We wanted

        22   to find out what type of contaminants are out there and

        23   where are those contaminants.   Hunter is going to talk

        24   about what we found at the site and walk you through


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                       8

         1   exactly what the results were and what we found.

         2   We also conducted a human health risk assessment at the

         3   site.   The human health risk assessment identifies, if

         4   people are exposed to the contamination that we have

         5   found, what are the health effects that we would find

         6   from exposure to that kind of contamination now and

         7   what would be the health effects in the future if we

         8   don't do anything, if we don't clean up the site, if we

         9   just walk away from it.

        10                The results of those investigations help us

        11   to determine whether or not we need to clean up the

        12   site.   If we think that we need to clean up the site,

        13   we then look at the surface feasibility study, which

        14   looks at different technologies that exist that allow

        15   us to address that contamination and clean it up and

        16   remediate that contamination.   So all of these steps

        17   have been accomplished already for what we're talking

        18   about tonight.

        19                We are here at the proposed plant stage.

        20   The proposed plan, which many of you have received in

        21   the mail and we have copies in the back in both Spanish

        22   and English, looks at all of the different technologies

        23   that we believe are appropriate to consider for

        24   cleaning up the site and then identifies what EPA


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         9

         1   believes is the best clean-up option for this site.

         2   And again, Hunter is going to walk you through what

         3   we've done and what we've decided what our

         4   recommendation is.

         5                We want to hear from you tonight.    We want

         6   to hear from you during this public comment period.

         7   And that will help inform our record of decision, which

         8   finalizes EPA's clean-up for this component of the

         9   site.   Once that record of decision is signed, we then

        10   move into designing that remedy.   We're going to need

        11   some more data.   We're going to need to figure out

        12   exactly how we're going to implement this remedy, and

        13   we're going to take that action.   We're going to

        14   implement that action.   We're going to figure out how

        15   we need to install --- or how we need to implement that

        16   remedy so that we can get rid of this contamination,

        17   things from like traffic control to fazing in, where

        18   we're going to start, where we're going to end.     All

        19   those kinds of things go into these two steps.

        20                Once that's done and we are completed with

        21   the construction, and if there is a component of a

        22   remedy that requires long-term maintenance, then we ---

        23   that phase would kick in at that time.   All throughout

        24   this process we have community involvement.   And that's


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                          10

         1   where you guys can --- we're going to meet here,

         2   communicating to you throughout this process what we're

         3   doing, what we found.    And we want to hear from you how

         4   are we doing.    Have you found anything that you need us

         5   to know about?   So it's a two-way street on the

         6   community involvement.    That's important throughout

         7   this whole process, and we welcome you here tonight for

         8   that.   So with this overview of the process, I'm now

         9   going to turn it over to Hunter to actually talk you

        10   through what we found ---.

        11                MR. YOUNG:

        12                Hello.   So that brings us here, finally,

        13   and more specifically here to the Kil-Tone facility.

        14   This is Chestnut right here.   I'm sure most of you are

        15   familiar with the location.    I'm just going to talk

        16   loud.

        17                Kil-Tone, an agricultural pesticide

        18   factory.   This is an old newspaper clipping from way

        19   back.   So this factory used to be in that location.

        20   They began operation in 1917 and operated until about

        21   1933.   Specifically, they were manufacturing lead.     So

        22   they were making different pesticides.   Lead arsenate,

        23   London purple, Paris green are some of the examples.

        24   Currently, right now, a manufacturing company is on the


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        11


         1   site and it's currently operating.

         2                And so a while back, in about 2014, across

         3   the street from Kil-Tone there's an old fuel

         4   distribution facility that's being cleaned up.    And

         5   while they were cleaning that up they found some

         6   chemicals that weren't really attributed to that field

         7   distribution site, so they called NJ DEP and said, hey,

         8   we're finding some interesting chemicals.    Maybe you

         9   guys should look into it.    So NJ DEP, which is New

        10   Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, they

        11   came and did an investigation and found some chemicals

        12   and decided it was pointing towards Kil-Tone.    So that

        13   was in August of 2014.   Then they decided this was a

        14   big issue, so they referred the site to the EPA in

        15   November of 2014.

        16                In January of 2015 we went out and did our

        17   Phase One soil sampling.     So we went out and we took

        18   soil samples from a selection of residential properties

        19   around the site.    Then, looking at the results from

        20   that, we decided we wanted to step out and do some more

        21   sampling.   So we looked at Tarkiln Branch, which is the

        22   stream that all the water drains into from that

        23   property.   And we went and did sampling of the Tarkiln

        24   Branch and the floodplain there.


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        12


         1                Then we expanded our residential sampling

         2   and we expanded our ring of properties out and we

         3   sampled more residential property.   Then in February of

         4   2016 we decided we wanted to know more about that

         5   sampling, so we went back to some of the properties we

         6   had already sampled and sampled deeper to make sure we

         7   knew wherever --- how deep these chemicals went.    And

         8   we also went back and sampled for more chemicals.     So

         9   we wanted to make sure we captured all the different

        10   chemicals that we could find.

        11                And then in March our removal program came

        12   in and started doing --- installing soil covers on

        13   certain residential properties that had the highest

        14   levels of contaminants.   And in April the site was

        15   officially added to the National Priorities List, which

        16   meant he could begin the Superfund process.   And July,

        17   that brings us to basically now, where we put the

        18   proposed plan out and the public comment period began.

        19   So here we have Vineland.    Up here is what we're going

        20   to talk about today.   Operable Unit One is what we're

        21   going to call it.   This dark red square is the former

        22   Kil-Tone Company property site itself.   The surrounding

        23   area is what we're going to talk about today, these

        24   residential properties that we're going to take action


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         13


         1   an action on.   But also just to mention, here's the

         2   Tarkiln Branch down here in the floodplain that we

         3   found contamination in.   Maurice River right down here

         4   we found contamination in and Union Lake.    Now, we're

         5   going to get to all of these parts later on in the

         6   future, but right now we want to clean up the source

         7   right now.   We want to take care of this because if we

         8   take care of, you know, some issues down here, they

         9   could become re-contaminated.   So right now we're

        10   focusing on this.

        11                  Operable Unit One.   What's an operable

        12   unit?   In the Superfund program we break things down

        13   into making things more manageable.    We break down

        14   sites by media.   So we can do groundwater, surface

        15   water, soil.    Sometimes we do it by sections, like, you

        16   know, an operable unit, like a north and south and east

        17   and west.    We sectioned off this area we're focusing on

        18   today, which is Operable Unit One, which is the

        19   residential properties in the vicinity of the former

        20   Kil-Tone facility.

        21                  So earlier I mentioned our Phase One

        22   sampling.    Here we have the site itself.   We went out

        23   and sampled this kind of first ring of properties here.

        24   And you'll notice residential properties, not


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        14

         1   commercial and industrial properties.   That will come

         2   later.   So we went and did sampling there.   We

         3   collected 237 samples across 27 properties.    We tested

         4   all of them for metals, lead and arsenic.     And we

         5   sampled down to four feet.

         6                So then I talked about Phase Two sampling,

         7   which is where we expanded the ring outward.    We're

         8   making sure we're capturing all of the contamination.

         9   So we sampled 35 more properties, 815 samples down to

        10   four feet and we tested again for metals.     So we

        11   decided we wanted to know more, so we went back and did

        12   Phase Three sampling.   We went back to those original

        13   properties that were nearest to the facility and we

        14   sampled deeper.   We sampled down to six feet this time.

        15   And we also --- we sampled for a whole list of

        16   contaminants to make sure there wasn't anything that we

        17   missed or that we didn't think of.   So we sampled for

        18   volatile organic compounds, pesticides, PAHs, the whole

        19   gamut.

        20                We took all this information and we

        21   compiled them into --- a lot of it into two documents.

        22   First we did the remedial investigation.    I'll call it

        23   the RI sometimes.   The RI, as Michael touched on

        24   earlier, it characterizes the conditions and determines


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         15


         1   the nature and extent.   So basically we are figuring

         2   out what's going on.   We're figuring out how widespread

         3   is the contamination, what is the contamination, and

         4   what type of risk does that pose to human health.

         5   Then we look at the focus feasibility study.   We move

         6   on to that, which is where we take the RI and we find

         7   out what we can do to address the contamination.     We

         8   look at all these different remedial actions that

         9   addresses the contamination.   We screen those different

        10   actions against each other to figure out which action

        11   or alternative is the best option.

        12                We conduct risk assessments.   Like I

        13   mentioned earlier, we do a human health risk

        14   assessment, where we try and figure out what kind of

        15   risks are posed to humans on the site.   And normally we

        16   do an ecological risk assessment.    This site, we're

        17   focusing on these residential yards.   We're just --- we

        18   just did the human health risk assessment and we're

        19   going to come back and do an ecological risk assessment

        20   where we're going to look at the whole Tarkiln Branch

        21   and everything put together.

        22                So when we're working through the Superfund

        23   process we develop remedial action objectives.   These

        24   are specific clean-up goals for us.    And they are meant


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         16


         1   to sort of serve the mission of EPA, which is

         2   protecting human health and the environment.

         3                 We determined our first objective to be

         4   preventing risk to human health.   And we determined our

         5   second objective would be preventing migration of a

         6   site examination.   We don't want any of this

         7   contamination to leave.

         8                 Then we developed these clean-up goals, how

         9   clean do we want these properties to be.   The different

        10   contaminants we found, the main ones were lead and

        11   arsenic.   These are the ones that are driving this

        12   action.    These are the pesticides that were

        13   manufactured at the plant.   We also found some PAHs, or

        14   polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, and we also found

        15   some pesticides.    Both of these things are pretty

        16   common in residential yards.   Pesticides --- you know

        17   --- an insecticide, a lot of these PAHs are from

        18   combustion and ---.

        19                 So in the end, our investigation found

        20   arsenic and lead.   Those are our contaminants of

        21   concern.   Those are what we're focusing on.    That's

        22   what we're finding in the yards at very high levels.

        23   We found 57 properties with contamination that we plan

        24   on addressing.   We have found that most of the


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         17


         1   contamination is within zero to three feet in most

         2   yards.   We found a few properties where it's deeper

         3   than that, down to six feet, but that's just on about

         4   two properties.   And more properties could be

         5   identified as we continue doing the action.   We want to

         6   keep in mind that, you know, this could --- we could

         7   add more property.   We want to get all of the

         8   contamination out.

         9                 So we made a proposed plan where we looked

        10   at three different alternatives for cleaning up this

        11   contamination we found.   The first alternative was

        12   doing nothing.    We have to include that because we have

        13   to do it at the baseline so we can compare it to all of

        14   the actions that we propose.

        15                 The second alternative was a limited soil

        16   excavation.   We just take off the top of the soil and

        17   we install a soil cover and we add additional controls.

        18   The third alternative would be total excavation and

        19   dispose of everything offsite.

        20                 So alternative one I'm not going to talk

        21   about.   No further action, we're not going to do that.

        22   Alternative two, the idea was we dig six feet down ---

        23   excuse me, six inches, and we add a soil --- like a

        24   solid cap, and we'd have institutional control, which


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                          18


         1   is like deed notices, restrictions on the property.

         2   The next alternative that we looked at is alternative

         3   three, total excavation to whatever depth the

         4   contamination goes, removing some temporary structures,

         5   if we find contamination on a driveway, we can get rid

         6   of the driveways, and restoration of --- full

         7   restoration.   We take those alternatives and we screen

         8   them against nine different criteria.   The two most

         9   important ones are overall protection of human health

        10   and the environment.

        11                  The next one is compliance with applicable

        12   or relevant and appropriate requirements, which

        13   basically is rules and regulations, federal and state

        14   laws.

        15                  Then we move onto the balancing criteria.

        16   These are three through seven.    Long-term effectiveness

        17   of permits.    You know, what are the effects down the

        18   road?   You look at reduction in toxicity through

        19   treatment.    If we treat this contamination, does that

        20   reduce overall harmful effects?   We look at short-term

        21   effectiveness.   Are there any issues with these

        22   alternatives in the short term?   We look at implement

        23   ability, how hard are there alternatives to do.     And we

        24   also look at costs.


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                           19


         1                 The last two, we look at state acceptance,

         2   does the state agree with our remedy?    And we look at

         3   community acceptance.   Do you want to have involvement

         4   with the community and make sure the community is happy

         5   with our alternative, our remedy?

         6                 So when we did that screening, we have

         7   proposed alternative three as our clean-up, which we

         8   determined because it satisfies the two threshold

         9   criteria in the beginning, the two most important

        10   criteria.    It achieves the best --- a combination of

        11   the five balancing criteria that I mentioned.    And it

        12   also completes our remedial action objective and the

        13   clean-up goals that we set up for this site.    And it's

        14   also a permanent remedy.     There's no institutional

        15   control, so no restrictions on your property.    We would

        16   come in, clean up, and you don't have to worry about it

        17   anymore.

        18                 So just to talk about again what we would

        19   do, we'd come in and we are going to dig it out as deep

        20   as we need to go, remove all the contamination.    We're

        21   going to transport the soil, dispose of it offsite.      It

        22   will get tested to see where it needs to go, what type

        23   of landfill it needs to go, see if it requires any

        24   treatment.   We will get rid of any temporary


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                          20


         1   structures, sheds, driveways, as necessary, if we find

         2   contamination underneath it.   We will knock it down and

         3   we will get you a new shed, whatever it needs.     I will

         4   bring in clean soil and restore the backyards.

         5                 So what does that mean now?   Where are we

         6   now?    So we have proposed this plan.   We've opened the

         7   public comment period.    We want to hear from the

         8   community.   We're going to hear from the state.     We're

         9   going to get comments.    And if all goes well, if

        10   everyone's --- if we get support for this remedy, then

        11   we'll forward and sign the Record of Decision, which is

        12   basically, you know, our document that officially

        13   states that this is the remedy we're choosing.

        14                 We will develop a remedial action to

        15   basically come up with a plan how we're going to do all

        16   this.   And we'll submit the remedy and then we'll start

        17   moving on.   We're going to have to look at

        18   contamination in the creek.    We're going to have to

        19   look at residential properties on the creek.    We're

        20   going to look at the site itself.    We're going to have

        21   to go to the Kil-Tone property and do an excavation or

        22   some other alternative.   We're going to look at

        23   commercial and industrial properties soon and we're

        24   going to look at groundwater soon.


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         21


         1                So the public comment period is open right

         2   now through the 12th.   Here is my contact information.

         3   It's also on the proposed plan.   The proposed plan and

         4   my information is also on the website here.     We'll

         5   accept comments in this public meeting.   The

         6   stenographer records the comments, so they will get put

         7   into the official record for the site.    Yeah, so that's

         8   all I have now.   And I'm also just going to plug that

         9   next week we are also having another public meeting

        10   just like this for the Vineland chemical site, which is

        11   another pesticide manufacturing plant that is a

        12   Superfund site north of Kil-Tone, north of here.    That

        13   going to be held at City Hall.    And that's on the 8th

        14   at City Hall, 6:30.   So yeah?

        15                MS. AYALA:

        16                We're going to open it up for comment and

        17   questions now.

        18                MR. YOUNG:

        19                Any questions?    Any of you guys want to

        20   come up personally after the meeting to us, come on up.

        21                MS. STRACHEJKO:

        22                My name is Kathryn Strachejko.     I don't

        23   live here specifically, but I live on the river.    And

        24   my first question is this facility, how big is it and


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         22


         1   in whose hands is it now?    Is it still with the owner?

         2   Is it operating?   Because that's what we're going to

         3   clean first.   Do they have any input in this or, for

         4   that matter, you designated $50 million I think it was

         5   for the whole clean-up for the EPA or the Federal

         6   Government.    Are these people that contaminated such a

         7   vast piece of land in Vineland, which is going further

         8   into the lake, have any responsibility?

         9                  MR. YOUNG:

        10                  So currently right now on the site it is a

        11   company?

        12                  MR. SIVAK:

        13                  Can you repeat what she said?

        14                  MR. YOUNG:

        15                  Yeah.   Just so everyone can hear, she's

        16   asking who is at the site right now, how big is the

        17   site right now, the Kil-Tone site, and how --- and if

        18   we're pursuing for any type of clean-up payment.

        19   Right?

        20                  So right now it's from them right.    So

        21   right now it's a sign manufacturing company.    It has

        22   nothing to do with pesticides anymore.    So that ---

        23   then they are operating currently.    They have no

        24   relationship to site contamination.


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        23


         1   We are going in and we're tapping the property itself

         2   right now.   It's probably going to happen within the

         3   next year.   We're going to put down a tap so that no

         4   surface water or anything can get into the site.    And

         5   that's going to be a temporary action.    We're going to

         6   go in and clean up the site completely.

         7                So as far as who are we holding responsible

         8   for this, we have --- we do have a responsible party

         9   search.   And as of right now, we have not identified,

        10   actually, a responsible party.   So right now we are

        11   operating it as a fund clean site, which is where the

        12   Federal Government pays for the clean-up.

        13                MS. STRACHEJKO:

        14                May I add another question to it, which is

        15   probably not related, but it is important for our

        16   health.   And if there is anybody here who is like a

        17   journalist for any paper, we would appreciate it very,

        18   very much that Union Lake, Maurice River, you're not

        19   allowed --- you're allowed to go fishing, but you're

        20   not allowed to eat that fish.    Well, what's the big

        21   deal to go fishing if you can't eat it?   But it never,

        22   never has been in print that I've seen within my 60

        23   years of being a citizen or living in Cumberland

        24   County.   I would very much appreciate it if people


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        24

         1   would be aware of it.

         2                MR. YOUNG:

         3                Yeah.   Just so everybody hears her

         4   question, in the Maurice River and Union Lake, there is

         5   a fish ban --- or consuming fish, a fish-consumption

         6   ban that has to be public.   So that's going to be ---.

         7                MR. SIVAK:

         8                There is currently a fish advisory.    Fish

         9   advisories are issued by the State of New Jersey.

        10   They're not issued by the Federal Government.   The

        11   State of New Jersey does have a fishing band.   There's

        12   a statewide fishing advisory.   Excuse me.   It's not a

        13   ban.   So it limits the amount of certain types of fish

        14   to certain populations.   I believe there's a statewide

        15   advisory for mercury, again, not necessarily associated

        16   with this particular site tonight.   Mercury is a global

        17   problem.

        18                There's also, I believe, an advisory for

        19   bacterial arsenic examination we need to make, amounts

        20   associated with primarily geese runoff.   You know,

        21   there's a lot of Canada geese around Union Lake.

        22   There's a lot of Canada geese --- there's a lot of ---

        23   there's sort of runoff into Union Lake from wildlife

        24   that tends to do what wildlife does.   This is all going


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        25


         1   in the public record, isn't it?   So I'm trying to be

         2   very sensitive to how I say this because this will be

         3   memorialized.   So the runoff from those actions from

         4   those wildlife have impacted the quality of the lake

         5   and have resulted in that advisory as well.

         6   Union Lake is being investigated as part of the

         7   Superfund site we're talking about next week.

         8                MS. AYALA:

         9                Vineland chemical site.

        10                MR. SIVAK:

        11                The Vineland chemical site.   I don't want

        12   to get too much into that, but we did select a remedy

        13   for that.   We did select a tentative remedy for that

        14   lake several years ago.   But again, we need to address

        15   the contamination at the source before we clean up

        16   where it ultimately ends up.   And we're not quite there

        17   yet for Union Lake.

        18                Hunter had that figure earlier when he

        19   showed we will be investigating the Tarkiln and the

        20   Parvin Branch that meet up with the Maurice River right

        21   above you, the confluence with Union Lake or right

        22   above where it dumps into Union Lake.   We will be

        23   investigating that as parrot of the Kil-Tone property

        24   and we will track the contamination from the site as


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 108 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         26


         1   far as we need to.   If that contamination from Kil-Tone

         2   --- so we will be investigating this.   We have some

         3   sampling from along here.    We will continue to chase

         4   the contamination as far as we need to.   If we have to

         5   go down the Tarkiln to the Parvin, if we have to go

         6   from the Parvin into the Maurice River, if we have to

         7   go from the Maurice River into Union Lake to trap the

         8   contamination from Kil-Tone we will do that.   That,

         9   however, is not our immediate priority.   Our immediate

        10   priority is the homes around the Kil-Tone facility and

        11   then the homes along the floodplain, along here.   We

        12   want to clean up the homes because we think that that's

        13   the first priority for our agency.

        14                MS. STRACHEJKO:

        15                So in your presentations are you going to

        16   have somebody making --- apart from the State of New

        17   Jersey that can answer those questions that I have just

        18   asked or the inhabitants of this place ---?

        19                MR. SIVAK:

        20                We cannot require the State of New Jersey

        21   to attend that meeting next week.    We can let them know

        22   that there were questions raised tonight about that.

        23   We can try to get some information on what the

        24   consumption advisories for Union Lake are and have that


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 109 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                       27


         1   available --- so we can get that information available

         2   to you.   I mean, it's all on their website, but we can

         3   see what we can do to try to make that information more

         4   available to you.

         5                MS. STRACHEJKO:

         6                And can you ---

         7                MR. SIVAK:

         8                Yes.

         9                MS. STRACHEJKO:

        10                Thank you.

        11                MS. AYALA:

        12                Any other questions or comments?

        13                MS. LOPEZ:

        14                We're in the Road area.

        15                MR. YOUNG:

        16                Yeah.

        17                MS. LOPEZ:

        18                Is that where --- well, we give fresh

        19   water, but there is other water going through that.

        20                MR. YOUNG:

        21                So you're down here?

        22                MS. LOPEZ:

        23                We're down here.

        24                MR. YOUNG:


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 110 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         28


         1                So we think ---.

         2                MS. LOPEZ:

         3                They already done the soil check and

         4   everything ---.

         5                MR. YOUNG:

         6                Yeah.

         7                MS. LOPEZ:

         8                And I did talk to ---.

         9                MR. YOUNG:

        10                Kim?

        11                MS. LOPEZ:

        12                Kim, that's her name, and she was saying I

        13   think the water's up here.

        14                MR. YOUNG:

        15                Yeah.   So I mean, we're up here right next

        16   to the site, you know, I think.   So up here is where

        17   we're going to have the highest levels of

        18   contamination.    We're going to move down here, and so

        19   we think that there is some --- can be some

        20   contamination in some yards, flooding of the Tarkiln

        21   Branch.   You know, over years, you know, the creek's

        22   going to flood and leave some of that sediment.      Some

        23   of that soil from the bottom of the creek is going to

        24   get flushed up into the yards.    So we think ---.


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 111 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                       29


         1                MS. LOPEZ:

         2                And then stays there.

         3                MS. AYALA:

         4                I'm sorry, ma'am, can you state your name

         5   for the record?

         6                MS. LOPEZ:

         7                Mildred Lopez.

         8                MR. YOUNG:

         9                So we're going to come and we're going to

        10   do a whole big sampling event and we're going to ---

        11   and we've already got some sampling information.

        12                MS. LOPEZ:

        13                If they do drink it, is that going to ---?

        14                MR. YOUNG:

        15                If they drink the --- from the Tarkiln

        16   Branch?

        17                MR. SIVAK:

        18                What's the question?

        19                MS. AYALA:

        20                If the animals drink the water.

        21                MR. SIVAK:

        22                We will look at that when we do our

        23   ecological risk assessment.   Typically --- we will get

        24   some information to you when we look at that data when


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 112 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        30


         1   we get to that part of the evaluation, yeah.

         2                MS. AYALA:

         3                Are you talking about a farm?

         4                MS. LOPEZ:

         5                The farm.

         6                MR. YOUNG:

         7                Yeah.

         8                MS. LOPEZ:

         9                I mean, we usually come up and ---

        10                MR. YOUNG:

        11                Right.

        12                MS. LOPEZ:

        13                --- going down that way.

        14                MR. YOUNG:

        15                Yeah, it's going to be hard to keep them.

        16                MR. SIVAK:

        17                Sheep and goats we have found don't really

        18   pay attention to advisories to not drink the water,

        19   yeah, so we ---.

        20                MR. YOUNG:

        21                Yeah.    I mean, and there is contamination

        22   in Tarkiln Branch, so --- we don't know the exact

        23   effects as of right now.

        24                MR. SIVAK:


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 113 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        31


         1                But it's also important to know that this

         2   was the source.    This former pesticide manufacturing

         3   facility was the source.     It's no longer operational.

         4   It's been out of business for quite some time.    And

         5   we're currently in the process of capping all of this

         6   so that any contamination that remains in the surface

         7   soils is no longer available to be flushed into the

         8   system.

         9              So the contamination that we see along here,

        10   a lot of this is historical because we don't have these

        11   active releases of arsenical and lead-based pesticides

        12   into the environment anymore because that facility went

        13   out of business.   So we anticipate --- you know, as

        14   Hunter said, the highest levels are going to be up

        15   here, but we also anticipate that these levels may not

        16   necessarily be as high as

        17              They might have been, you know, 20 years

        18   ago, when this was continuing to dump waste --- you

        19   know, dump their product into the --- onto the ground,

        20   and it ultimately ended up in that stream channel.

        21   Does that make sense?   You know, you cut off the source

        22   and the concentration drops.

        23                MR. YOUNG:

        24                So we'll get more information on the


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 114 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                       32

         1   surface water, what they're actually drinking and how

         2   much contamination is there.   That's ongoing.

         3                MS. AYALA:

         4                Any other questions or comments?    Please

         5   state your name.

         6                MR. CORTES:

         7                Migael Cortes.

         8                MS. AYALA:

         9                Okay.

        10                MR. CORTES:

        11                I'd just like to know, like my mom was

        12   asking, who takes the cost of like the piece of land

        13   especially if you're on the source.   I mean, how does

        14   that --- the value of the home is going to go down. You

        15   know, how's that going to affect home value?

        16                MS. VAUGHN:

        17                Sure.   There are a couple of things I can

        18   say in response.   You know, we can't --- we can't

        19   guarantee it won't affect the home value in the short

        20   term, and in the long term properties will be ---

        21   contamination will be addressed and that property

        22   values should go back up and perhaps even improve

        23   because if a property were --- does need to be cleaned

        24   up, it will be restored and it will look good when it's


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 115 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        33


         1   done.

         2                In addition, we've had people and other

         3   scenarios like this where residential clean-ups are

         4   required that have wanted to perhaps sell their homes

         5   while the work is still ongoing or refinance their

         6   loan.   And EPA can write a letter to the bank and let

         7   them know the status, and we --- generally, people have

         8   not had trouble, you know, selling their homes or

         9   buying homes while this work is going on.   Because once

        10   the recommended decision is signed, there is assurance

        11   that we will be doing the work and the contamination

        12   will be removed.   It might take a while, but it will be

        13   addressed.   So you know, if it comes up, let's say we

        14   deal with that issue on a day-to-day basis, and work to

        15   help the homeowner have the best possible outcome.

        16                MR. YOUNG:

        17                And I don't think I asked you this

        18   earlier, but if this remedy is --- you know, if we sign

        19   this as our Record of Decision, if we move forward with

        20   this, if everyone accepts this remedy, we hope to be

        21   out there, you know, implementing this remedy quickly.

        22   You know, we hope to be --- have this excavation done

        23   in the next couple of years.   You know, we want to get

        24   out there and start working the next construction


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 116 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         34


         1   season.   We want to be out there in March.   We're going

         2   to spend the winter, we're going to, you know, kind of

         3   plan everything out and we hope to get out there in the

         4   spring and start ---.   So if you have contamination, we

         5   want to get out there and clean it up as soon as

         6   possible.

         7                 MS. LOPEZ:

         8                 When you get to the property site, how

         9   long are they going to have to be ---?

        10                 MS. VAUGHN:

        11                 It'll vary by property site, but also if

        12   there are a number of properties that are located near

        13   each other.   We would try to do those all at once.

        14                 MS. LOPEZ:

        15                 So you won't be taking out fencings ---?

        16                 MS. VAUGHN:

        17                 If necessary, yes.

        18                 MR. YOUNG:

        19                 If we remove a fence, we'll replace a

        20   fence.

        21                 MR. JONES:

        22                 Is there anywhere the testing taking

        23   place?

        24                 MR. YOUNG:


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 117 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         35


         1                Yeah.    So we're going to do more testing

         2   in the --- to repeat the question, he's asking if any

         3   more testing will take place.    So we're going to --- as

         4   we do the clean-up, we're going to be doing testing

         5   during it.   We're going to do more testing this fall

         6   and we're going to make sure that we have the

         7   contamination fully delineated.   You know, we're going

         8   to make sure we've captured it all before we finish

         9   anything.

        10                MS. LOPEZ:

        11                So not everything is going to have the

        12   same at the point ---?

        13                MR. YOUNG:

        14                Right.   And that's so that we make sure

        15   --- you know, one property might have it much deeper

        16   than the other.   We want to make sure that we can

        17   capture all the contamination.

        18                MR. SIVAK:

        19                And one property may need the entire

        20   property, the entire yard, cleaned.   Other properties

        21   may only have certain areas or very localized areas

        22   where they have a problem.   So every property ---.

        23                MS. LOPEZ:

        24                You're going to test to see ---?


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 118 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        36


         1                MS. VAUGHN:

         2                Yes.

         3                MR. SIVAK:

         4                We already established a lot of

         5   information about the three phases of sampling that we

         6   already conducted, but we do need to kind of refine

         7   that a little bit.   You know, we want to collect some

         8   more samples.   We want to make sure, you know, how far

         9   down the testing goes and we just want to rip off a

        10   little bit more.

        11                MS. LOPEZ:

        12                Would that testing be outside that area,

        13   too, also, because ---?

        14                MR. YOUNG:

        15                Yeah.   You know, you're going to see a lot

        16   of the areas this right now are commercial and

        17   industrial properties, and so we're going to go and do

        18   the commercial and industrial property.   And if we find

        19   contamination for those parts of the property, we would

        20   sample the residential properties on the other side.

        21   So you know, we're not going to have ---.

        22                MS. LOPEZ:

        23                If the properties all are contaminated.

        24                MR. YOUNG:


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 119 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        37


         1                  For example ---.

         2                  MR. SIVAK:

         3                  Yeah, we're going to look at what

         4   information we have.   If there is a reason for us to

         5   keep going, like looking below parking surfaces, like

         6   parking lots or sidewalks, we will do that.   We have to

         7   look and see that they tell us.   Like he said, we're

         8   going to be --- keep where it is until we figure out

         9   where it is. But we'll --- we're going to locate it

        10   systematically.   We're not just going to go out and

        11   close it up.   We're going to be very compliant when we

        12   do it.

        13                  MS. LOPEZ:

        14                  In walking with Wanda we were across

        15   another street from their home.   What about us?

        16                  MR. SIVAK:

        17                  So we're going to --- again, we're going

        18   to look at the information given to us, hoping maybe

        19   somebody's part, put a tree in their yard, put a tree

        20   in or a garden.   We want to give people the opportunity

        21   to do that and not have to worry about having to put

        22   additional controls on them, saying if you're going to

        23   build on here, you need to.   So roadways are a little

        24   different.   We'll deal with that a little further down


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 120 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         38


         1   the line.

         2                  MR. YOUNG:

         3                  And a lot of that is because these are

         4   residential properties.      We want to act as fast as we

         5   can.   There's no harm, but we want to act as quickly as

         6   we can and correct the problem.

         7                  MS. LOPEZ:

         8                  Does everybody's --- so what happens to

         9   the properties adjacent to that home if that home

        10   doesn't ---?

        11                  MS. VAUGHN:

        12                  So we will try to a get a typical response

        13   to that and ---

        14                  MS. LOPEZ:

        15                  And I don't mean ---

        16                  MS. AYALA:

        17                  No.

        18                  MS. VAUGHN:

        19                  So essentially --- so we don't want to

        20   talk about that.

        21                  MS. LOPEZ:

        22                  I know.   I'm just thinking if these

        23   properties get cleaned ---.

        24                  MS. VAUGHN:


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 121 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         39


         1                 If we find that that property is

         2   contaminated, they know it.

         3                 MS. AYALA:

         4                 It wasn't a question of access because he

         5   had access.   She just decided like she didn't want us

         6   to take an action on the property.

         7                 MR. SIVAK:

         8                 So if we come across properties, and there

         9   may be one or two properties that we don't have access

        10   to. Our office --- our New York office that deals with

        11   New York and New Jersey, we have a lot of experience

        12   with cleaning up neighborhoods, so we know how to do

        13   it.   We know what to look for.   We know how to talk to

        14   folks about, you know, what to expect if we're coming

        15   onto your property, you yard.     So we, you know,

        16   unfortunately, have a lot of experience cleaning up

        17   neighborhoods.   But fortunately, we have a lot of

        18   experience in cleaning up neighborhoods.    So we'll talk

        19   with folks.   Hopefully, nothing that we do will be

        20   unexpected.   So please be aware that if you are one of

        21   the properties that we have targeted for a clean-up,

        22   you know, we will let you know exactly what's going to

        23   happen.

        24                 MR. KISCH:


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 122 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        40


         1                 Just to follow that up a little bit, for

         2   each step in the process we usually ask for separate???

         3   We usually write a different document describing the

         4   action that we plan to take next.    So a lot of

         5   properties we receive access to sample and then we go

         6   back and get a consent.     Next year, each of those

         7   consent documents were described specifically.     So we

         8   may come back to each of the homes several times, as I

         9   spoke.

        10                 MS. LOPEZ:

        11                 Does this affect the city water?

        12                 MR. YOUNG:

        13                 No.

        14                 MS. VAUGHN:

        15                 The drinking water is supplied by

        16   municipal and the drinking water ---.

        17                 MS. AYALA:

        18                 Question?

        19                 MS. STRACHEJKO:

        20                 This is strictly for the --- Did you find

        21   any gardens that had vegetables in it in the vicinity

        22   to test whether it has any arsenic or lead that was

        23   planted on.

        24                 MR. YOUNG:


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 123 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                       41


         1                So the question was were there gardens in

         2   yards with contamination.    Yeah.

         3                MS. STRACHEJKO:

         4                Did you have them tested, the fruit or

         5   vegetables from those gardens?

         6                MR. YOUNG:

         7                No, we didn't test the vegetables.     I

         8   don't want to speak above my pay grade here, but from

         9   what I understand the way that arsenic and other metals

        10   --- it doesn't easily go from soil into the fruit and

        11   into your body.   That is usually not the risk that

        12   we're looking at.    It's more of a risk that you get

        13   like from any type of ingestion of the soil.

        14                MS. AYALA:

        15                And part of our removal action, the

        16   interim action that we took was we made up a barrier of

        17   soil so people wouldn't come in direct contact with the

        18   contaminated soil.   And we provided people with raised

        19   garden beds for their plants or their vegetable

        20   gardens.   So this happened during the spring, so

        21   whatever ---.

        22                MS. STRACHEJKO:

        23                And another question is you're talking

        24   about the city water.   Was there anybody in the city


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 124 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         42


         1   that has well water?

         2                  MR. YOUNG:

         3                  No.

         4                  MS. VAUGHN:

         5                  And that's something that we always keep

         6   an eye out.    I don't believe that but, yes, we're going

         7   to be sampling groundwater.

         8                  MR. YOUNG:

         9                  Any other questions?    Thanks for coming,

        10   everyone.

        11                  MS. STRACHEJKO:

        12                  I want to thank you for being here.

        13                  MS. AYALA:

        14                  And the public commentary is open still,

        15   so if you didn't have the opportunity to comment here

        16   you can send it to Hunter via e-mail, via fax and air

        17   mail.   And I'll be seeing everybody around.    I'm still

        18   your point of contact, so please feel free to call me

        19   at any time.

        20                          * * * * * * *

        21               PUBLIC MEETING CONCLUDED AT 8:03 P.M.

        22                          * * * * * * *

        23

        24


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 125 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                      43


         1                         CERTIFICATE

         2

         3     I hereby certify, as the stenographic reporter, that

         4   the foregoing proceedings were taken stenographically

         5   by me, and thereafter reduced to typewriting by me or

         6   under my direction; and that this transcript is a true

         7   and accurate record to the best of my ability.

         8

         9

        12

        13

        14

        15

        16

        17

        18

        19

        20

        21

        22

        23

        24


SARGENT'S COURT REPORTING SERVICE, INC.
(814) 536-8908

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 126 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  Attachment D

Written Comments

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 127 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Young, Hunter

From:                              Jones Dale <djones@vinelandcity.org>
Sent:                              Tuesday, August 09, 2016 10:38 AM
To:                                Young, Hunter
Cc:                                Mayors Office; Fanucci Anthony R; Tonetta Richard; Dickinson(Health) Robert; Dickenson
                                   Bob; Lopez Emma
Subject:                           Former Kil-Tone Company Super Fund Site


Hunter,
  Please accept this email as comment to the EPA’s Proposed Plan to remediate the residential soil associated with the
former Kil-Tone Company pesticide manufacturing plant located here in Vineland, New Jersey. I was in attendance at
your August 2, 2016 public meeting which was held at the Gloria M Sabater Elementary School regarding this matter.
During this meeting you discussed the remedial action objectives and three remedial alternatives in addressing the
contaminated soil in the residential neighborhood adjacent to the Site. I support the EPA’s decision to use Alternate #3
which states that all contaminated soil exceeding the cleanup goals will be excavated from the residential properties
and then the soil will be transported and disposed of off-site. At that point all the properties would be restored to their
present condition. This alternative will achieve the remedial action objectives and cleanup goals in the shortest amount
of time and is a permanent remedy. It will also assure that the citizens of the City of Vineland long term health will be
protected as well as the environment as a whole. I also realize this in only one step (OU’s) in cleaning up the site and
there will be more to come. Our Department looks forward to working with the EPA in achieving those goals.

Respectfully submitted.

Dale Jones
Health Director
Vineland Health Department
640 E. Wood Street, Vineland NJ 08360
P]856-794-4000 *4115
F]856-405-4608
E]djones@vinelandcity.org

Visit our website at www.vldhealth.org




                                                             1
