LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT FOR OU3 FOR THE VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SITE
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/393184
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 5eadb4201af4d4e650bf18aac438d6c9fe43e5934b2ddfd60b4a342ea5ffb4f9
Source PDF pages: 90
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

               RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT

               Vineland Chemical Company Superfund Site
                    Cumberland County, New Jersey

Operable Unit 3: Exposed Sediment/Soil of the Blackwater Branch Floodplain




              United States Environmental Protection Agency
                                 Region 2
                           New York, New York
                             September 2016

                                                                      *393184*
                                                                             393184

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             DECLARATION STATEMENT
                          RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT


SITE NAME AND LOCATION

Vineland Chemical Company Superfund Site
Cumberland County, New Jersey.

Superfund Site Identification Number: NJD002385664
Operable Unit 3 – Exposed Sediment/Soil of the Blackwater Branch Floodplain

STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

This Record of Decision (ROD) Amendment documents the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency’s (EPA) selection of a change in the remedy for the River Areas Sediment Operable Unit
3 (OU3) portion of the remedy which was originally selected for the Vineland Chemical
Company Superfund Site (site) in a 1989 ROD. This ROD Amendment applies specifically to
the exposed sediment/soil of the Blackwater Branch floodplain. The amended remedy is an
interim action that will be revisited at a later date as additional knowledge is gained about
conditions in the floodplain and the long-term effectiveness of the interim remedial actions
selected in this ROD Amendment. The original remedy was, and this ROD Amendment remedy
is, chosen in accordance with the requirements of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, as amended (CERCLA), 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601-9675, and
the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 C.F.R. Part
300. This decision document explains the factual and legal basis for selecting a remedy to
address contamination at the site. The attached index (see Appendix III) identifies the items that
comprise the Administrative Record upon which the amended remedy is based.

The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) was consulted on the
proposed amended remedy in accordance with Section 121(f) of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. § 9621(f),
and NJDEP concurs with the amended remedy (see Appendix IV).

RATIONALE FOR AMENDMENT

The 1989 ROD selected the excavation and treatment of the exposed arsenic-contaminated
sediment in the Blackwater Branch floodplain. This ROD Amendment changes this portion of
the response action to implementation of in-situ (in-place) treatment technologies to prevent
recontamination of the exposed sediment/soil, excavation of localized areas of sediment/soil in
the Blackwater Branch floodplain that have significantly elevated concentrations of
contaminants, and performance monitoring to assure the remedy is effective and to assess the
need for additional in-situ treatment and/or excavation. This amended remedy is necessary as
sediment sampling conducted between 2010 and 2015 demonstrated that groundwater
discharging to the Blackwater Branch floodplain is recontaminating the sediment/soil in certain
areas. A subsequent Remedial System Evaluation of the groundwater extraction and treatment
system determined that in-situ treatment can immobilize arsenic in soil before it reaches the

                                                i

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Blackwater Branch floodplain. Based on this, EPA began implementation of a bench scale study
and pilot testing program to evaluate the effectiveness of in-situ remediation technologies to
prevent recontamination of the floodplain, and this ROD Amendment is based on the findings of
the pilot study and EPA’s general knowledge of the site.

ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE

Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from the site, if not addressed by
implementing the response action selected in this ROD Amendment, may present an imminent
and substantial endangerment to public health, welfare or the environment.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY AS AMENDED

The selected remedy described in this document addresses a discrete portion of OU3 of the site
involving exposed sediment/soil of the Blackwater Branch floodplain near the former Vineland
Chemical Company property on East Mill Road in the City of Vineland, Cumberland County,
New Jersey. This is one of four remedial phases, or operable units, for the site. OU1 addressed
the control of source material at the former Vineland Chemical Company plant site. OU2
addresses the management of the migration of contamination in groundwater; long-term
operation and maintenance of the groundwater extraction and treatment system for this portion of
the remedy is ongoing. OU3 addresses contamination associated with the sediment/soil in the
river areas, including the Maurice River, the Blackwater Branch of the Maurice River and their
associated floodplains. OU4 relates to Union Lake, an 870-acre impoundment on the Maurice
River.

Pursuant to the 1989 ROD, EPA excavated the exposed sediment/soil of the Blackwater Branch
floodplain, treated the sediment/soil through water wash extraction, and placed the treated
material back in the excavated portions of the floodplain. The sludge from the treatment process
was transported off-site for proper disposal, and the work was initiated after the groundwater
(OU2) portion of the remedy was operating. The groundwater remedy began operation in the
summer of 2001 and the floodplain excavation and treatment work was completed in December
2012. However, monitoring since that time has shown that certain areas of exposed sediment/soil
of the Blackwater Branch floodplain have become recontaminated with arsenic above the
cleanup goals identified in the 1989 ROD due to arsenic in groundwater reaching the
sediment/soil during the ongoing implementation of the OU2 remedy.

The major components of this ROD Amendment include the following:

      Installation of in-situ treatment technologies to prevent recontamination of the exposed
       sediment/soil to concentrations above remediation goals.
      Hot-spot excavations to remove exposed sediment/soil in the Blackwater Branch
       floodplain with contaminant concentrations above remediation goals.
      Performance monitoring to assure the remedy is effective and assess the need for
       additional in-situ treatment and/or excavation.




                                               ii

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The in-situ technology used may vary across the affected areas and will depend on the
geochemistry and subsurface conditions in each particular location. Examples of such
technologies include air sparging in iron rich groundwater environments and iron chloride
injection in addition to air sparging or peroxide injection in iron poor groundwater environments.
In-situ technologies may also include pH adjustments and/or the installation reactive barriers.
The in-situ treatment technology appropriate for each area of the site will be determined after
further studies during remedial design.

In addition, the need for excavation of the exposed sediment/soil before and/or after in-situ
treatment for each area of the site will be determined during the remedial design and further
refined during implementation of the remedial action through performance monitoring.

This is considered an interim remedial action as it will be revisited at a future date as additional
knowledge is gained about conditions in the sediment/soil and once the amended remedy’s long-
term effectiveness as a part of the remedy for all operable units of the site can be evaluated.

The environmental benefits of the amended remedy may be enhanced by consideration, during
the remedy design or implementation, of technologies and practices that are sustainable in
accordance with EPA Region 2’s Clean and Green Energy Policy.

The estimated present-worth cost of the selected remedy is $14,897,663.

DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

The selected amended remedy meets the requirements for remedial actions set forth in CERCLA
Section121, 42 U.S.C. § 9621, because it: 1) is protective of human health and the environment;
2) meets a level or standard of control of the hazardous substances, pollutants and contaminants
which at least attains the legally applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements under
federal and state laws; 3) is cost-effective; and 4) utilizes permanent solutions and alternative
treatments (or resource recovery) technologies to the maximum extent practicable. In addition,
Section 121 of CERCLA includes a preference for remedies that employ treatment that
permanently and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity or mobility of hazardous substances as
a principal element (or requires a justification for not satisfying the preference). One of the main
components of the selected remedy involves in-situ treatment that will reduce the mobility of
contamination.

While this amended remedy will ultimately result in reduction in mobility of contaminant levels
in sediment/soil and prevent recontamination, the remedy will take longer than five years to
implement. As a result, the site will be reviewed at least once every five years until such time as
remedial action objectives (RAOs) and remediation goals are attained and human health and the
environment are protected under unrestricted site use.

This interim action is protective of human health and the environment and is intended to provide
adequate protection until EPA evaluates its long-term effectiveness at a future date.




                                                 iii

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ROD AMENDMENT DATA CERTIFICATION CHECKLIST

The following information is included in the Decision Summary section of this ROD
Amendment. Additional information can be found in the Administrative Record for the site.

       •   Chemicals of concern and their respective concentrations may be found in the
           "Remedial Action Objectives" section.

       •   Baseline risk represented by the chemicals of concern may be found in the "Updated
           Risk Assessments" section.

       •   A discussion of remediation goals may be found in the "Remedial Action Objectives"
           section.

       •   Estimated capital, annual operation and maintenance (O&M) and total present w~rth
           costs are discussed in the "Description of Alternatives for ROD Amendment" section.

       •   Key factors that led to selecting the remedy (i.e., how the selected remedy provides
           the best balance of tradeoffs with respect to the balancing and modifying criteria,
           highlighting criteria key to the decision) may be found in the "Comparative Analysis
           of Alternatives for ROD Amendment" and "Statutory Determinations" sections.




Walter E. Mugdan, Director
Emergency & Remedial Response Division
EPA - Region 2




                                               lV

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                        DECISION SUMMARY

Operable Unit 3: Exposed Sediment/Soil of the Blackwater Branch Floodplain
                     Vineland Chemical Company Site
                     Cumberland County, New Jersey




              United States Environmental Protection Agency
                                 Region 2
                           New York, New York
                             September 2016

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                            TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                           PAGE

1.0   INTRODUCTION TO SITE AND STATEMENT OF PURPOSE .................................... 1
      1.1      Site Name, Location and Description ..................................................................... 1
      1.2      Lead and Support Agencies .................................................................................... 2
      1.3      Statement of Purpose .............................................................................................. 2
      1.4      Community Participation/Availability of Documents ............................................ 2
2.0   SITE HISTORY AND CONTAMINATION, AND 1989 ROD SELECTED REMEDY . 3
      2.1      Site History and Contamination .............................................................................. 3
      2.2      Original (1989) ROD Selected Remedy ................................................................. 4
      2.3      Implementation of the 1989 ROD Selected Remedy for OU3 ............................... 6
3.0   BASIS FOR THE ROD AMENDMENT ............................................................................ 7
      3.1      Sediment Sampling ................................................................................................. 8
      3.2      Remedial System Evaluation (2011) ...................................................................... 9
      3.3      Bench Scale Studies ................................................................................................ 9
      3.4      Updated Risk Assessments ..................................................................................... 9
4.0   REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES .............................................................................. 11
5.0   DESCRIPTION OF ALTERNATIVES FOR ROD AMENDMENT ............................... 12
6.0   COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES FOR ROD AMENDMENT........ 14
7.0   SELECTED AMENDED REMEDY ................................................................................. 18
8.0   STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS ............................................................................... 19
      8.1      Protection of Human Health and the Environment ............................................... 20
      8.2      Compliance with ARARs ..................................................................................... 20
      8.3      Cost-Effectiveness ................................................................................................ 20
      8.4      Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment Technologies (or
               Resource Recovery) Technologies to Maximum Extent Practicable ................... 21
      8.5      Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element ................................................. 21
      8.6      Five-Year Review Requirements .......................................................................... 21
9.0   DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES .................................................... 21

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                           APPENDICES

APPENDIX I     FIGURES
APPENDIX II    TABLES
APPENDIX III   ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX
APPENDIX IV    STATE LETTER
APPENDIX V     RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

1.0    INTRODUCTION TO SITE AND STATEMENT OF PURPOSE

1.1    Site Name, Location and Description

The Vineland Chemical Company Site (site), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Superfund Site Identification Number NJD002385664, is located in the City of Vineland,
Cumberland County, New Jersey.

The site is located in the northwestern portion of Vineland, which is in south central New Jersey,
in an area of mixed industrial, low-density residential and agricultural properties (see Appendix
I, Figures 1 and 2). The site is bordered to the north by other industrial properties and the
Blackwater Branch, a perennial stream that flows westward to the Maurice River.

The Blackwater Branch of the Maurice River flows northeast to southwest, in proximity to, and
partially through, the site itself. A floodplain lies immediately adjacent to the Blackwater
Branch along the entire length of the tributary extending to the Maurice River.

The site is located in the Atlantic Coastal Plain physiographic province, which consists of a
seaward-dipping wedge of unconsolidated sediment (sand, silt, clay, and gravel) that range in age
from Cretaceous to Quaternary periods. Locally, the site is situated on a relatively level plain that
slopes slightly from the southeast toward the northwest with topographic elevations that range
from 65 to 75 feet above mean sea level.

Groundwater levels vary seasonally at the site with an average of approximately 10 feet below
ground surface (bgs), and a typical minimum and maximum of between 4 and 19 feet bgs. When
the groundwater treatment plant is not in operation, groundwater south of the Blackwater Branch
moves in an east to west direction with groundwater discharging at several locations along
Blackwater Branch. Under pumping conditions, the direction of flow is somewhat altered to a
more southeast to northwest flow direction south of Blackwater Branch, and a northeast to
southwest flow direction north of Blackwater Branch. Groundwater that is not captured by the
recovery system discharges to Blackwater Branch.

Due to the large area, the different media affected by contamination, and the complexity of
multiple areas and varying land uses at the site, EPA is addressing the cleanup of the site in
several phases, or operable units (OUs). A Record of Decision (ROD) signed on September 28,
1989 divided the site into four OUs (Appendix I, Figure 3), and selected remedies to address
each of the operable units.

Operable Unit 1 (OU1) consisted of the control of source material at the former Vineland
Chemical Company plant site. To address arsenic-contaminated soil, EPA constructed a soil
washing facility that processed up to 70 tons of excavated soil per hour. The facility processed
over 400,000 tons of arsenic-contaminated soil and sediment, and the remaining waste was
disposed of at a permitted off-site disposal facility. The soil remedy was completed in December
2014.

OU2 relates to management of the migration of groundwater contamination. To address
contaminated groundwater, EPA constructed a system to pump and treat about two million
                                                 1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

gallons of contaminated groundwater daily. Operation of the facility began in the spring of 2000
and is ongoing. The pump-and-treat operation is capturing the majority of the flow of arsenic-
contaminated groundwater from the plant site, and removing the arsenic through treatment. The
treated groundwater continues to meet the site’s cleanup goal. Operation of the pump-and-treat
system was transferred to NJDEP in October 2014.

OU3 relates to contamination associated with the sediment/soil in the river areas, including the
Maurice River, the Blackwater Branch of the Maurice River and their associated floodplains. To
address the river areas, the 1989 ROD selected excavation/dredging of the Blackwater Branch
soil and sediment, treatment of this material via water wash extraction, and placement of the
treated material back in the excavated areas. Following this and implementation of the OU2
remedy, a three year monitoring period was to be initiated to see if natural river flushing would
effectively address remaining contamination in the Maurice River. The excavation/dredging of
the Blackwater Branch and its associated floodplain was completed in December 2012 and the
three year monitoring period ended in August 2014.

OU4 of the site relates to Union Lake, an 870-acre impoundment on the Maurice River. The
interim remedy for OU4 will be initiated once the upstream remedial activities have been
completed. The remediation of the sediment in Union Lake involves excavation of the arsenic-
contaminated sediment at the periphery of the lake, once they have been exposed by lowering the
lake’s water level. Sediment at the upper end of the lake above the submerged dam will be
evaluated prior to dredging and an environmental assessment of the impact of dredging will be
performed. Beach monitoring in Union Lake began in the early 2000s and will continue until it is
concluded that there are no further unacceptable impacts to the lake. To date, no unacceptable
risks to beach users have been identified.

1.2    Lead and Support Agencies

EPA is the lead agency and the NJDEP is the support agency.

1.3    Statement of Purpose

An amendment to the 1989 ROD is necessary because a fundamental change is being made to
the portion of the OU3 remedy related to the exposed sediment/soil of the Blackwater Branch
floodplain. This ROD Amendment documents the basis for this fundamental change. This ROD
Amendment is issued in accordance with Section 117 of CERCLA and 40 CFR 300.435(c)(2)(ii)
of the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Contingency Plan (NCP).

1.4    Community Participation/Availability of Documents

In compliance with Section 117 of CERCLA and NCP Section 300.435(c)(2)(ii), on July 22,
2016 EPA released the Proposed Plan for the amendment of the cleanup of the exposed
sediment/soil of the Blackwater Branch floodplain and supporting documentation to the public
for comments. EPA made these documents available to the public in the administrative record
file maintained at the Vineland City Library, 1058 East Landis Avenue in Vineland, New Jersey
and at the EPA Region 2 Superfund Records Center located at 290 Broadway, New York, New

                                                2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

York (see Appendix III). The administrative record file is also available online at
www.epa.gov/superfund/vineland-chemical. EPA published a notice of availability of these
documents in the Press of Atlantic City newspaper on July 22, 2016. The public comment
period lasted 30 days and closed on August 22, 2016.

A public meeting was held on August 8, 2016, at the Vineland City Hall, 640 E Wood Street in
Vineland, New Jersey to inform local officials and interested citizens about the Superfund
process, to review the completed and planned remedial activities at the site, and to respond to
questions from area residents and other attendees. Comments that were received by EPA at the
public meeting and in writing during the public comment period are included in the
Responsiveness Summary (see Appendix V).

The ROD Amendment and supporting documentation will become part of the Administrative
Record for the site, in accordance with NCP 40 C.F.R. § 300.825 (a)(2). The Administrative
Record Index is presented in Appendix III to this ROD Amendment.

2.0    SITE HISTORY AND CONTAMINATION, AND 1989 ROD SELECTED
       REMEDY

2.1    Site History and Contamination

The Vineland Chemical Company operated from 1949 to 1994 and produced arsenical herbicides
and fungicides. There were seventeen buildings on the plant site, some of which were used by
the Vineland Chemical Company for various manufacturing purposes.

As early as 1966, the New Jersey Department of Health observed untreated wastewater being
discharged into unlined lagoons at the site. This wastewater was contaminated with arsenic at
concentrations up to 67,000 parts per billion (ppb). Waste salts containing 1-2 percent arsenic
were stored outside in uncovered piles. Precipitation dissolved some of these salts and carried
them into the groundwater and eventually into nearby surface water bodies. Contaminated
sediment was mapped 1.5 miles downstream in Blackwater Branch to its confluence with the
Maurice River and then 7.5 miles downstream to Union Lake.

Between 1975 and 1976, Vineland Chemical was "fixating" the waste salts for disposal at the
Kin-Buc Landfill. The process involved mixing the dried salts with ferric chloride and soda ash,
reportedly reducing the solubility. The process was stopped in 1976 when the Kin-Buc Landfill
voluntarily stopped accepting all chemical wastes, including the fixated salts. The company then
resumed stockpiling the untreated waste salts on the soil surface at the plant site.

A court order issued on January 26, 1977 required Vineland Chemical to containerize the waste
salts located in chicken coops and piles, and then store the drums in a warehouse off-site. In
June 1979, another court order was issued for the disposal of the stored drums in an approved
landfill. Removal and disposal of these drums were not completed until June 30, 1982.

Aerial photographs provided by EPA's Environmental Photographic Information Center, as well
as conversations with Vineland Chemical Company employees, indicated several possible

                                                3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

locations of historic contamination. A cleared area in the southwest corner of the site was
previously occupied by two chicken coops. Sometime between November 1975 and March
1979, both coops were destroyed. These coops were reportedly used to store process chemicals
and/or waste in the 1970s. The materials stored in the coops may have percolated into the
groundwater. Photographs showed many locations containing mounded material and/or drums.
These were observed in the lagoon area and along the plant road. The floors of the
manufacturing buildings may also have been leaking arsenic compounds into the underlying
sands for years. The original floors of the buildings were brick and were reportedly in need of
repair. When the bricks were removed, the underlying soil was said to have contained crystalline
waste from previous spills. It is not known whether the soil was removed when the floors were
replaced.

In early 1992, EPA assessed the plant site conditions after being informed by the plant manager
that the Vineland Chemical Company site would be abandoned. EPA found thousands of gallons
of arsenic solutions stored in tanks and containers on the site. In June 1992, EPA secured the
buildings and installed fences around soil areas containing high levels of arsenic. In addition, a
fence was installed around the plant site to restrict trespassers. Removal of the hazardous
materials stored in tanks and containers began in the fall of 1992. The company ceased
operations, and the plant site buildings were abandoned in early 1994.

The site was added to the EPA’s National Priorities List (NPL) in September 1984. A Remedial
Investigation and Feasibility Study (RI/FS) was completed in 1989 to identify the types,
quantities, and locations of contaminants, and to develop ways to correct the problems posed by
the contaminants.

Potentially responsible parties (PRPs) identified for the site include the Vineland Chemical
Company and its owners. In 1994, the PRPs entered into a judicial consent decree with EPA,
fully resolving their liability. The Vineland Chemical Company no longer exists and the owners
of the site are deceased.

2.2       Original (1989) ROD Selected Remedy

In September 1989, EPA issued a ROD for the entire site, with NJDEP concurrence. The major
components of the 1989 ROD, as excerpted exactly from the Declaration Statement, are as
follows:

Operable Unit One (Plant Site Source Control)

         In situ treatment, by flushing, of the arsenic-contaminated soil to reduce arsenic levels.
          Portions of the contaminated soil will be excavated and consolidated prior to the flushing
          action.

         Plant site remediation also includes closure of the two lined surface impoundments in
          compliance with the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and
          decontamination of the former chicken coop storage buildings.


                                                  4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Operable Unit Two (Plant Site Management of Migration)

      Removal of arsenic-contaminated groundwater through pumping, followed by on-site
       treatment and reinjection of the treated groundwater to the aquifer at the maximum rate
       practicable. The remainder of the treated groundwater will be discharged to the Maurice
       River. A portion of the treated groundwater will also be used for the soil flushing action
       in Operable Unit One. The arsenic-contaminated sludge from the groundwater treatment
       process will be transported off-site for hazardous waste treatment and disposal. This
       action will effectively eliminate the source of arsenic into the Maurice River system.

Operable Unit Three (River Areas Sediment)

      Excavation and treatment of the exposed arsenic-contaminated sediment in the
       Blackwater Branch floodplain. Treatment will consist of a water wash extraction. The
       cleaned sediment will be redeposited in the excavated portion of the floodplain. The
       sludge from the extraction process will be transported off-site for hazardous waste
       treatment and disposal. Remediation will begin after the contaminated groundwater flow
       into the Blackwater Branch has been stopped.

      Dredging/removal and treatment, by water wash extraction, of the submerged arsenic-
       contaminated sediment in the Blackwater Branch adjacent to and downstream of the
       Vineland Chemical Company plant site. Prior to removing any sediment, an
       environmental assessment of the impact of dredging will be performed and a
       confirmation made that this sediment is a source of contamination to the river system.
       The treated sediment will be redeposited on undeveloped areas of the Vineland Chemical
       Company plant site. The sludge from the extraction process will be transported off-site
       for hazardous waste treatment and disposal.

      After stopping the flow of arsenic-contaminated groundwater from the Vineland
       Chemical Company plant site, a three year period for natural river flushing will be
       implemented. This will allow the submerged, arsenic-contaminated sediment in the
       Maurice River to be flushed clean through natural processes. If, after this period, the
       submerged sediment is no longer contaminated with arsenic above the action level, no
       remediation will be performed in the river. Similarly, if sediment contamination above
       the action level persists, but the observed or expected natural decontamination rate is
       consistent with an acceptable public health risk, no remediation will be performed.
       However, if contamination above the action level persists in some locations and is
       expected to remain at levels posing unacceptable health risks, those locations would be
       remediated.

      Remediation of the submerged Maurice River sediment will be performed, as necessary,
       by dredging and treatment with a water wash extraction. However, prior to removing any
       sediment, an environmental assessment of the impacts of dredging will be made. The
       treated sediment will be deposited on undeveloped areas of the Vineland Chemical
       Company plant site. The sludge from the extraction process will be transported off-site
       for hazardous waste treatment and disposal.

                                                5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Operable Unit Four (Union Lake Sediment)

         Removal and treatment of arsenic-contaminated sediment on the periphery of Union Lake
          will be performed after the three year flushing period (if no remediation is performed in
          the Maurice River) or after remediation of the Maurice River (if this is necessary
          following the flushing period). Verification sampling will be conducted prior to
          remediation to confirm the locations of sediment contaminated above the action level for
          arsenic along the periphery of Union Lake.

         The arsenic-contaminated sediment on the periphery of Union Lake will be excavated
          after they are exposed by lowering the lake's water level. However, for the upper end of
          the lake above the submerged dam, prior to removing any sediment, an environmental
          assessment of the impact of dredging will be performed. The sediment will be treated by
          water wash extraction and the cleaned sediment returned to its approximate former
          locations in Union Lake. The sludge from the extraction process will be transported off-
          site for hazardous waste treatment and disposal.

         This is an interim remedy, since arsenic-contaminated sediment above health-based
          levels will remain in Union Lake. Therefore, periodic reviews will be conducted to
          determine whether contaminated sediment is redistributed, through natural processes, to
          the cleaned areas.

EPA also issued two Explanations of Significant Differences (ESDs) for the site, one in 1997 and
one it 2001. The basic rationale and effect of these ESDs are as follows:

         1997 ESD: During the pre-design investigation phase, borings were advanced through the
          floors of all the plant site buildings and paved areas. Samples were also collected from
          inside the buildings including the walls, floors, ceilings and equipment. Significant
          quantities of arsenic at elevated concentrations were discovered in some of the buildings
          and in the soil at depths down to the water table. On June 26, 1997, EPA approved an
          ESD which included the demolition and disposal of the plant site buildings and debris.
          The ESD also included an increase in volume of the contaminated plant site soil and
          changes in the groundwater treatment plant size and treatment process.

         2001 ESD: In August 2001, EPA changed the in-situ soil flushing remedy to ex-situ soil
          washing, based on the results of treatability studies that concluded soil flushing was more
          effective at reducing arsenic concentrations to the clean-up goal of 20 mg/kg.

2.3       Implementation of the 1989 ROD Selected Remedy for OU3

The excavation and treatment of arsenic impacted sediment from the Blackwater Branch and its
floodplain were carried out in four phases from 2006 through 2012. Phase 1 encompassed the
area east of North Mill Road and adjacent to the chemical plant site. Phase 2 encompassed the
area west of North Mill Road and east of Route 55. Phase 3 encompassed the area west of Route
55 and east of the Maurice River Parkway. Phase 4 encompassed the stream and floodplain west
of the Maurice River Parkway to the Maurice River.

                                                   6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

In each phase, the Blackwater Branch was diverted to a clean location before excavation of the
contaminated material was performed. Once material with arsenic concentrations exceeding 20
milligrams/kilogram (mg/kg), the value identified in the 1989 ROD, was removed and either
treated via soil washing or disposed of off-site, the excavated area was backfilled with clean
material and stream flow was restored to the re-constructed stream channel.

Soon after arsenic excavation in the floodplain of Phases 1 and 2 was completed in 2009, iron
staining along the banks and within the Blackwater Branch was observed in certain locations.
Sediment and seep water samples collected between 2010 and 2015 demonstrated that
groundwater that is discharging to the Blackwater Branch in certain areas is recontaminating the
sediment due to localized geochemical conditions that result in the dissolved arsenic
precipitating out as the groundwater discharges into the branch sediment.

3.0       BASIS FOR THE ROD AMENDMENT

An Amendment to the 1989 ROD is necessary because a fundamental change to the OU3 remedy
is needed. Since implementation of the original OU3 remedy, new information has been
collected to support a change from the technology selected in the 1989 ROD to one that EPA
anticipates will address the recontamination that is occurring in the Blackwater Branch
sediment/soil.

This new information is summarized as follows and discussed in more detail below:

         Sediment samples collected between 2010 and 2015 demonstrated that groundwater that
          is discharging to the Blackwater Branch floodplain in certain areas is recontaminating the
          sediment/soil.

         New information collected as part of a Remedial System Evaluation (RSE) of the pump-
          and-treat system completed in 2011 found that the system provided reasonably good
          containment of the contaminated groundwater plume, but that concentration reduction
          rates had slowed to asymptotic conditions over the past 10 years. It was concluded that
          due to existing geochemical conditions, active in-situ treatment for arsenic
          immobilization could play an important role in cost effectively containing the
          groundwater plume and optimizing the remedial processes at the site.

         Bench scale studies and pilot tests of in-situ treatment technologies have been conducted
          and are ongoing. Thus far, in-situ treatment has been shown to be effective in preventing
          recontamination of the sediment/soil of the Blackwater Branch floodplain, and is
          expected to be effective in other parts of the impacted floodplain.

         An updated human health risk assessment was conducted, which concluded that the
          concentrations of arsenic accumulating in the floodplain continue to be associated with
          unacceptable levels of risk. Likewise, an ecological screening assessment concluded that
          arsenic is accumulating in the floodplain at concentrations that pose a potential risk to
          ecological receptors.


                                                  7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

3.1    Sediment Sampling

Soon after arsenic excavation in the floodplain of Phases 1 and 2 was completed in 2009, iron
staining along the banks and within the Blackwater Branch was observed in certain locations.
Sediment and seep water samples taken at a few of these iron-stained locations were analyzed in
2010 to determine if these iron-stained sediment also contained arsenic. Phase 1 samples were
taken after excavation, backfilling and flow had been restored to the channel. Phase 2 samples
were collected after excavation and backfilling in the floodplain had occurred, but before flow
was restored to the original creek channel.

The sediment samples that were co-located with the seep samples contained arsenic just above
the floodplain sediment cleanup goal of 20 mg/kg as identified in the 1989 ROD. These results
provided evidence that arsenic is seeping into the Blackwater Branch floodplain at some of the
locations sampled even with the pump and treat system in operation, contaminating exposed
sediment/soil by precipitating out once it discharges. The OU3 remedy was selected based on the
assumption that groundwater discharging into the Blackwater Branch floodplain would not
impact the exposed sediment/soil.

Further sampling of surface sediment was performed between 2011 and 2012 along Phases 2, 3
and 4, soon after stream restoration and prior to re-diverting the surface water back to the stream.
Samples were biased toward the iron-stained sediment. Results indicated that arsenic in surface
sediment samples accumulated soon after restoration and concentrations exceeded 20 mg/kg in
exposed sediment/soil. Due to extensive arsenic exceedances along the Phase 4 segment of the
Blackwater Branch, surface water was not re-diverted back to this section of the Blackwater
Branch. The Blackwater Branch was eventually re-diverted back to a stream alignment that was
similar to the original but followed an alternate path around the areas where the arsenic
exceedances were encountered.

Additional sediment sampling was conducted in Phases 1 and 2 between 2013 and 2015.
Samples were biased to locations that were iron-stained and were collected from floodplain areas
as well as locations near the banks of the Blackwater Branch where sediment is likely to be
exposed during periods of low water level conditions. During this time period, operation of the
pump and treat system varied between full pumping, no pumping and partial pumping.
Concentrations of arsenic in sediment samples exceeded 20 mg/kg while the pump and treat
system was fully operational as well as when the pump and treat system was shut down.

The sediment samples collected between 2010 and 2015 demonstrated that groundwater that is
discharging to the Blackwater Branch in certain areas is recontaminating the sediment due to
localized geochemical conditions that result in the dissolved arsenic precipitating out as the
groundwater discharges into the branch sediment. Over time, larger areas of sediment may
become recontaminated. It should be noted that despite the elevated arsenic concentrations in
the floodplain, surface water arsenic concentrations have not been found to be elevated.




                                                 8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

3.2       Remedial System Evaluation (2011)

In 2011, EPA performed an optimization study to evaluate the efficiency of the pump-and-treat
groundwater remediation system. Although this study was focused on OU2 (groundwater), it
impacts OU3. The RSE focused on maximizing the efficiency of the pump-and-treat system,
while maintaining protection of human health from exposure to site contaminants; expediting the
cleanup; and identifying key steps to achieve the RAOs defined in the 1989 ROD. In the RSE it
was recommended that due to existing geochemical conditions, active in-situ treatment for
arsenic immobilization could play an important role in cost effectively containing the
groundwater plume.

3.3       Bench Scale Studies

Once EPA determined that implementation of the original OU3 remedy would not prevent
recontamination of the floodplain sediment/soil and the RSE recommended immobilization as a
potential technology for the site, preliminary bench scale testing was conducted to evaluate the
viability of in-situ treatment as a method of controlling recontamination. In-situ treatments
evaluated at the bench scale focused on creating conditions for which the accumulation of
arsenic in sediment would be unfavorable either by reducing the movement of arsenic to the
sediment/soil of the floodplain or by reducing the availability of areas onto which arsenic can
accumulate through bonding with the sediment.

Results of the bench scale studies indicated that several methods of in-situ treatment can reduce
arsenic accumulation in sediment/soil so that concentrations in the Blackwater Branch floodplain
would remain below cleanup goals. These methods include in-situ treatment with oxygen (such
as by air sparging or the use of peroxide), in-situ treatment with iron, and/or in-situ pH
adjustment.

In 2015, pilot testing of in-situ treatment options was initiated, and the preliminary results of this
testing are favorable. Because the results show that the in-situ treatment is working, the pilot
study will continue and will remain operational until the amended remedy is implemented.

3.4       Updated Risk Assessments

Human Health Risk Assessment

As part of the July 2016 Focused Feasibility Study (FFS) that supports this ROD Amendment, a
four-step human health risk assessment process was used for assessing site-related cancer risks
and noncancer health hazards from exposure to arsenic in the exposed sediment/soil of the
Blackwater Branch floodplain. The four-step process is comprised of:

         Hazard Identification – this step identifies the chemicals of concern (COCs) at a site
          based on several factors such as toxicity, frequency of occurrence, and concentration;

         Exposure Assessment – this step estimates the magnitude of actual and/or potential
          human exposures, the frequency and duration of these exposures, and the pathways by

                                                  9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       which humans are potentially exposed (i.e., ingestion and dermal contact with
       contaminated soil);

      Toxicity Assessment – this step identifies the types of adverse health effects associated
       with chemical exposures, and the relationship between magnitude of exposure (dose) and
       severity of adverse effects (response); and

      Risk Characterization – this step summarizes and combines outputs of the exposure and
       toxicity assessments to provide a quantitative assessment of site-related risks. During this
       step, contaminants with concentrations that exceed federal Superfund guidelines for
       acceptable exposure are identified. These guidelines are 10-4 to 10-6, or one-in-ten-
       thousand to one-in-a-million excess occurrences for cancer, and a Hazard Index (HI) of
       greater than 1 for noncancer health hazards. Contaminants with concentrations that
       exceed these guidelines are then considered COCs for a site and are typically those that
       will require remediation. The uncertainties associated with the risk calculations are also
       evaluated under this step.

Three separate areas with contamination in the floodplain of the Blackwater Branch were
identified with unique geochemical conditions and were designated Areas A, B, and C
(Appendix I, Figure 4). The maximum detected arsenic concentrations in all three of these areas
of the Blackwater Branch floodplain exceed the site cleanup level of 20 mg/kg for arsenic in
exposed sediment/soil by an order of magnitude or more. Additionally, the 2016 supplemental
risk assessment concluded that the maximum detected arsenic concentrations in these areas are
greater than the health-based regional screening level (RSL) for arsenic, which indicates the
potential for unacceptable risk and adverse health effects from recreational exposure to exposed
Blackwater Branch sediment. The RSL uses standardized equations that combine exposure
information and assumptions with available toxicity data.

A semi-quantitative screening evaluation was conducted for Area C of the Blackwater Branch
floodplain. The risk evaluation for Area C is summarized in Appendix II, Tables 1 through 6.
The results indicate that the current remedy is not protective of human health for a future
recreator. The estimated cancer risk for a child and adult recreator utilizing the Blackwater
Branch in Area C would equal 3 x10-4, exceeding EPA’s acceptable risk range of 10-6 to 10-4.
The noncancer hazard estimates for a child and adult recreator in Area C are 5 and 0.5,
respectively, with the child recreator exceeding EPA’s noncancer hazard index of 1. These
conclusions support those in the 1989 HHRA. Any current site user (e.g., treatment plant worker
or trespasser) would have less frequent exposures, and thereby lower risks, than these future
receptors.

Ecological Risk Assessment

A different approach was used in evaluating ecological risk associated with contamination in the
exposed sediment/soil of the Blackwater Branch floodplain in comparison to the evaluation of
human health risks. As is stated above, maximum concentrations of arsenic in all three areas of
the Blackwater Branch floodplain exceed the site 1989 cleanup level of 20 mg/kg for arsenic in
exposed sediment/soil by an order of magnitude or more. As such, an evaluation was conducted

                                                10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

to determine whether cleanup of the floodplain to concentrations below the 1989 ROD goal
would be protective of the environment.

The floodplain soil is considered to be representative of a terrestrial environment, thus
concentrations of arsenic were compared to EPA’s Ecological Soil Screening Level (Eco-SSLs),
which are concentrations of contaminants in soil that are protective of ecological receptors that
commonly come into contact with and/or consume biota that live in or on soil. As such, these
values are presumed to provide adequate protection of terrestrial avian and mammalian
receptors. The EPA Eco SSLs for arsenic are 18 mg/kg for plants, 43 mg/kg for avian receptors
and 46 mg/kg for mammalian receptors.

Comparison of these screening levels to the 1989 ROD goal of 20 mg/kg for arsenic shows that
this value is protective for avian and mammalian receptors. The only ecological value that is
lower than 20 mg/kg is the value that was derived to be protective to plants (18 mg/kg).
However, 18 mg/kg is below what is considered background for arsenic (20 mg/kg in 1989, 19
mg/kg currently) and is not considered achievable under site-specific conditions. Conversely,
since concentrations above 46 mg/kg are present, this review shows that there is a potential risk
to ecological receptors.

Conclusion

Based on the new information summarized above, the current remedy has not effectively
mitigated the risks to recreators and ecological receptors, and further action is warranted to
protect human health and the environment. As a result, new alternatives to address the exposed
sediment/soil of the Blackwater Branch floodplain portion of OU3 of the site were evaluated in
an FFS.

4.0       REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES

Remedial action objectives are specific goals to protect human health and the environment.
These objectives are based on available information and standards such as applicable or relevant
and appropriate requirements (ARARs), to-be-considered (TBC) guidance and site-specific risk-
based levels and background (i.e., reference area) concentrations. The 1989 ROD identified the
following RAO for the sediment in OU3:

         Minimize public exposure, either through containment, removal, or institutional controls,
          for those areas with unacceptably high sediment arsenic concentrations.

This overall RAO for OU3 remains in effect. The specific RAOs for the selected remedy
described in this ROD Amendment are:

         Reduce concentrations of arsenic in the exposed sediment/soil in the Blackwater Branch
          floodplain to below acceptable levels of risk.

         Prevent recontamination of exposed sediment/soil of the Blackwater Branch floodplain
          from site-related groundwater contamination.

                                                 11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

As additional knowledge is gained about conditions in the sediment/soil in this area, and the
long-term effectiveness of the amended remedy is evaluated, EPA’s expectation is that the
remedy described in this ROD Amendment will be revisited at a future date. Therefore, this
action is considered an interim remedial action.

Remediation Goal

EPA has adopted the preliminary remediation goal identified in the Proposed Plan as the final
Remediation Goal (RG) for OU3 of the site. The soil remediation goal for arsenic, the COC at
the Site, is consistent with New Jersey Residential Direct Contact Soil Remediation Standard
(RDCSRS). The remediation goal for OU3 is as follows:

                  Constituent in Soil                    Cleanup Goal (mg/kg)
                       Arsenic                                    19

The 1989 ROD identified a Remediation Goal of 20 mg/kg for arsenic in exposed sediment/soil
of the Blackwater Branch floodplain. Since then, the state of New Jersey has conducted a much
more robust study of statewide levels of arsenic in soil, and from this study a statewide
concentration of 19 mg/kg has been established. EPA has evaluated the protectiveness of 19
mg/kg and the Remediation Goal for arsenic in the exposed sediment/soil has been modified to
meet the current New Jersey RDCSRS.

5.0    DESCRIPTION OF ALTERNATIVES FOR ROD AMENDMENT

The remedial alternatives considered for this ROD Amendment are summarized below. Capital
costs are those expenditures that are required to construct a remedial alternative. Operation and
maintenance (O&M) costs are those post-construction costs necessary to ensure or verify the
continued effectiveness of a remedial alternative and are estimated on an annual basis. Present
worth is the amount of money which, if invested in the current year, would be sufficient to cover
all the costs over time associated with a project, calculated using a discount rate of seven percent.
Since these are considered interim remedies, a 10-year time interval was evaluated. Construction
time is the time required to construct and implement the alternative and does not include the time
required to design the remedy or procure contracts for design and construction. Detailed
information regarding the alternatives can be found in the 2016 FFS.

Alternative 1 – No Further Action

The NCP requires that a “No Action” alternative be evaluated to establish a baseline for
comparison with other remedial alternatives. Under this alternative, no further action would be
implemented, and the current status of the site would remain unchanged. A Classification
Exception Area for the site already exists to restrict use of groundwater. Signs are posted in
accessible areas of Blackwater Branch and the Maurice River advising the public that sediment is
contaminated with arsenic and there are risks associated with prolonged exposure of arsenic.
With the exception of the existing security fences, engineering controls would not be
implemented to prevent site access or exposure to site contaminants.

                                                 12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Total Capital Cost:           $0
Annual O&M:                   $0
Present Worth Cost:           $0
Construction Timeframe:       0 years

Alternative 2 – Ongoing Hot Spot Excavation

This alternative consists of periodic excavation and off-site disposal of the exposed sediment/soil
of the Blackwater Branch floodplain as the arsenic concentrations exceed the remediation goals.
Excavated sediment/soil would be transported and disposed of off-site.

The sediment/soil would be sampled to determine if they need to be disposed of as either
hazardous waste or non-hazardous waste. Treatment of sediment/soil, if needed, would be
conducted at and by the approved disposal facility.

Total Capital Cost:           $1,160,646
Annual O&M:                   $4,642,584
Present Worth Cost:           $33,768,213
Construction Time Frame:      Constant over 10 years

Alternative 3 – In-Situ Treatment, Hot Spot Excavation, and Performance Monitoring

This alternative consists of installation of in-situ treatment technologies to prevent
recontamination of the exposed sediment/soil to concentrations above remediation goals, hot-
spot excavations to remove exposed sediment/soil in the Blackwater Branch floodplain above
remediation goals, and performance monitoring to assure the remedy is effective and assess the
need for additional in-situ treatment and/or excavation. In-situ technologies are those
technologies that are implemented in place, rather than removing the contamination and treating
it.

The in-situ technology used may vary across the site and will depend on the geochemistry and
subsurface conditions in each particular location. Examples of such technologies include air
sparging in iron rich groundwater environments and iron chloride injection, in addition to air
sparging or peroxide injection, in iron poor groundwater environments. In-situ technologies may
also include pH adjustments and/or the installation of material into the ground which will
intercept the groundwater flow and passively capture the contamination, also known as ‘reactive
barriers’. Final selection of the in-situ treatment technology appropriate for each area of the site
will be made after further studies during remedial design.

In addition, the need for excavation of the exposed sediment/soil before and/or after in-situ
treatment for each area of the site will be determined during the remedial design and further
refined during implementation of the remedial action through performance monitoring.




                                                13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Total Capital Cost:           $9,988,488
Annual O&M:                   $745,569
Present Worth Cost:           $14,897,663
Construction Time Frame:      1 year

Change in Expected Outcome

Both the 1989 ROD and the ROD Amendment have the same objective for OU3 sediment/soil of
the Blackwater Branch floodplain: reducing contaminant levels to below federal and state
standards. As a result, there is no change to the expected outcome that will result from this ROD
Amendment. However, the amended remedy will remove the recontaminated exposed
sediment/soil and prevent any more recontamination of the exposed sediment/soil in the
Blackwater Branch and its floodplain so that the contamination levels will remain below federal
and state standards.

The 1989 ROD identified a Remediation Goal of 20 mg/kg for arsenic in exposed sediment/soil
in the Blackwater Branch floodplain. However the Remediation Goal for arsenic in the exposed
sediment/soil has been modified to meet the current New Jersey RDCSRS of 19 mg/kg.

6.0    COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES FOR ROD AMENDMENT

In selecting a remedy for a site, EPA considers the factors set forth in Section 121 of
CERCLA 42 U.S.C. § 9621, and conducts a detailed analysis of the viable remedial alternatives
pursuant to Section 300.430(e)(9) of the NCP, 40 C.F.R § 300.430(e)(9), EPA’s Guidance for
Conducting Remedial Investigations and Feasibility Studies, OSWER Directive 9355.3-01, and
EPA’s A Guide to Preparing Superfund Proposed Plans, Records of Decision, and Other
Remedy Selection Decision Documents, OSWER 9200.1-23.P. The detailed analysis consists of
an assessment of the individual alternatives against each of the nine evaluation criteria at 40
C.F.R. § 300.430(e)(9)(iii) and a comparative analysis focusing upon the relative performance of
each alternative against those criteria.

A comparative analysis of these alternatives based upon the nine evaluation criteria noted herein
follows.

Threshold Criteria – The first two criteria are known as “threshold criteria” because they are
the minimum requirements that each response measure must meet in order to be eligible for
selection as a remedy.

1. Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment
Overall protection of human health and the environment determines whether an alternative
eliminates, reduces, or controls threats to public health and the environment through
institutional controls, engineering controls, or treatment.

Alternative 1 does not protect human health and the environment because no action is taken to
prevent exposure to sediment/soil that exceeds risk based cleanup goals for arsenic.



                                               14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 2 is protective of human health and the environment because sediment/soil is
removed as it reaches arsenic concentrations that exceed the risk based cleanup goals.

Alternative 3 is protective of human health and the environment because in-situ treatment
systems are installed and operated that prevent recontamination of sediment/soil with arsenic,
and sediment/soil currently exceeding risk based arsenic concentrations are removed and
disposed of off-site.

2. Compliance with applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs)
Section 121 (d) of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. § 9621(d), and Section 300.430(f)(1)(ii)(B) of the NCP,
40 CFR §300.430(f)(1)(ii)(B), require that remedial actions at CERCLA sites at least attain
legally applicable or relevant and appropriate Federal and State requirements, standards,
criteria and limitations which are collectively referred to as “ARARs,” unless such ARARs are
waived under Section 121(d)(4) of CERCLA.

Compliance with ARARs addresses whether a remedy will meet all of the applicable or relevant
and appropriate requirements of other Federal and State environmental statutes or provides a
basis for invoking a waiver.

A complete list of ARARs can be found in Appendix II, Table 7.

Alternative 1 would not comply with ARARs in that it would leave exposed sediment/soil in
place that exceed New Jersey RDCSRS and pose unacceptable risk to human health and the
environment.

Alternative 2 provides compliance with chemical-specific ARARs by removal of sediment/soil
that exceeds New Jersey RDCSRS. Location-specific ARARs and Action-specific ARARs
would both be met by proper design and implementation of the respective components such as
general construction standards and waste handling requirements. The Location-specific ARARs
and Action-specific ARARs for the disposal phase would be met with proper waste management
on-site, and selection of the disposal facility.

Alternative 3 provides compliance with chemical-specific ARARs by removing contaminated
soil above New Jersey RDCSRS and in-situ treatment that would prevent groundwater from
recontaminating the sediment/soil. Location-specific ARARs and Action-specific ARARs would
both be met by proper design and implementation of the respective components such as general
construction standards and waste handling requirements. The Location-specific ARARs and
Action-specific ARARs for the disposal phase would be met with proper waste management on-
site, and selection of the disposal facility.

Primary Balancing Criteria – The next five criteria, criteria 3 through 7, are known as
“primary balancing criteria”. These criteria are factors by which tradeoffs between response
measures are assessed so that the best options will be chosen, given site-specific data and
conditions.




                                               15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

3. Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence
Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence considers the ability of an alternative to maintain
protection of human health and the environment over time.

Although the three alternatives are interim remedial actions, they were evaluated for long-term
effectiveness and permanence. This interim remedy is intended to be protective of human health
and the environment until EPA decides on a permanent remedy for this OU.

Alternative 1 does not provide adequate controls of risks to human health over the long-term
because there is no mechanism to prevent future exposure.

Alternative 2 is only effective in the long-term with a high level of constant maintenance. It does
not treat the source of contamination, and although steps would be taken to protect the
surrounding community, there would be nearly continuous operation of construction equipment
and hauling of contaminated soil off-site for an indefinite period of time.

Alternative 3 is effective in the long-term in that it prevents recontamination of the exposed
sediment/soil in the Blackwater Branch floodplain.

4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume through Treatment
Reduction in Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume of Contaminants through Treatment evaluates an
alternative's use of treatment to reduce the harmful effects of principal contaminants, their
ability to move in the environment and the amount of contamination present.

Alternative 1 would not reduce the toxicity, mobility or volume of contaminated soil, since the
soil would remain in place.

Alternative 2 would not provide reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume of contamination
through treatment.

Alternative 3 does not reduce the overall volume of arsenic but does reduce the mobility of
arsenic in the groundwater, which reduces the volume entering the Blackwater Branch
floodplain. This effectively reduces the toxicity of the groundwater entering the Blackwater
Branch floodplain.

5. Short-Term Effectiveness
Short-term Effectiveness considers the length of time needed to implement an alternative and the
risks the alternative poses to workers, residents and the environment during implementation.

Alternative 1 poses no short-term adverse impacts to the community.

Alternative 2 construction and implementation activities would be frequent and would have
almost continuous impact on the local community with truck traffic to haul contaminated
sediment/soil for off-site disposal.




                                                16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 3 would have some impacts on the nearby community due to truck traffic to haul
contaminated sediment/soil off-site and drilling activities to install the in-situ treatment systems.
However, these impacts would be relatively short term and ongoing long term treatment
activities at the site are expected to have minimal impact to the community.

Both alternatives would result in some short-term impacts to the community, in the form of
vehicular (truck) traffic and noise and dust from construction/excavation activities, although
Alternative 2 would generate less truck traffic than Alternative 3. Traffic, noise, and dust
impacts could be mitigated to some extent by limiting the construction schedule to daytime hours
on weekdays or other timing as specified by local ordinance. Perimeter air monitoring and dust
control measures would be required to address concerns over exposure to dust during activities.

6. Implementability
Implementability addresses the technical and administrative feasibility of a remedy from design
through construction and operation. Factors such as availability of services and materials,
administrative feasibility, and coordination with other governmental entities are also considered.

Alternative 1 requires no implementation.

Alternative 2 can be easily implemented. There are no special techniques, materials, or labor
required to implement Alternative 2.

Alternative 3 is administratively and technically feasible; however, implementation of
Alternative 3 would take a greater level of effort than Alternative 2 because it requires the design
of an in-situ treatment component.

7. Cost
Cost includes estimated capital and annual operation and maintenance costs, as well as present
worth cost. Present worth cost is the total cost of an alternative over time in terms of today's
dollar value. Cost estimates are expected to be accurate within a range of +50 to -30 percent
(This is a standard assumption in accordance with EPA guidance).
The estimated capital cost, operation and maintenance (O&M), and present worth costs are
discussed in detail in EPA’s FFS. The cost estimates are based on the best available information.
Alternative 1 has no cost because no activities are implemented.

The estimated capital, O&M present-worth cost over a ten year period, and total present-worth
costs for each of the alternatives are as follows:




                                                 17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                              10-year
            Cost Summary                     Capital         Annual       Performance         Present
                                              Cost           O&M           Monitoring         Worth
 Alternative 1: No Further Action              $0              $0               -               $0
 Alternative 2: - Ongoing Hot Spot
 Excavation 1                               $1,160,646     $4,642,584           -           $33,768,213
 Alternative 3: In-Situ Treatment, Hot
 Spot Excavation, and Performance
 Monitoring 2                               $9,988,488      $745,569        $213,438        $14,897,663
         Alternative 3: Year 2                   -          $557,670        $135,461             -
         Alternative 3: Years 3-10               -          $557,670         $95,663             -

 1
   $1,160,646 is for one time excavation of all areas. $4,642,584 annual cost is excavation every 3
 months.
 2
   Capital Cost includes installation of in-situ remedies in Areas A, B, and C and one time excavation of
 hotspots.

Modifying Criteria – The final two evaluation criteria, criteria 8 and 9, are called “modifying
criteria” because new information or comments from the state or the community on the
Proposed Plan may modify the preferred response measure or cause another response measure
to be considered.

8. State Acceptance
State Agency acceptance considers whether the State and/or Support Agency agrees with EPA’s
analyses and recommendations.

The State of New Jersey concurs with the selected remedy. A letter of concurrence is attached in
Appendix IV.

9. Community Acceptance
Community Acceptance considers whether the local community agrees with EPA's analyses and
preferred alternative. Comments received on the Proposed Plan are an important indicator of
community acceptance.

On August 8, 2016, EPA held a formal public meeting on the proposed plan for this OU.
All written and oral comments are addressed in detail in Appendix V, which is the
Responsiveness Summary for this ROD Amendment. No comments received during the
comment period for the proposed plan expressed disagreement with EPA’s preferred alternative
for this OU at the site.

7.0     SELECTED AMENDED REMEDY

Based upon the requirements of CERCLA, the results of the site investigations, the detailed
analysis of the alternatives, and public comments, EPA has determined that Alternative 3 (In-
Situ Treatment, Hot Spot Excavation, and Performance Monitoring) satisfies the requirements of
Section 121 of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. § 9621, and provides the best balance of tradeoffs among
                                                    18

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

the remedial alternatives with respect to the NCP’s nine evaluation criteria, 40 C.F.R. §
300.430(e)(9).

The major components of this ROD Amendment for OU3 include:

              Installation of in-situ treatment technologies to prevent recontamination of the
               exposed sediment/soil to concentrations above Remediation Goals.
              Excavation of localized areas of sediment/soil in the Blackwater Branch
               floodplain with concentrations of contaminants above Remediation Goals.
              Performance monitoring to assure the remedy is effective and assess the need for
               additional in-situ treatment and/or excavation.

This alternative consists of installation of in-situ treatment technologies to prevent
recontamination of the exposed sediment/soil to concentrations above remediation goals,
excavation of localized areas of sediment/soil in the Blackwater Branch floodplain with
concentrations of contaminants above remediation goals, and performance monitoring to assure
the remedy is effective and assess the need for additional in-situ treatment and/or excavation.

The in-situ technology that will be used depends on the geochemistry and subsurface conditions
in each particular location. The actual technology will be selected during the Remedial Design.
For the purposes of cost estimation the following were used as representative technologies: air
sparging in iron rich groundwater environments; iron chloride injection in addition to air
sparging in iron poor groundwater environments; sodium bicarbonate or sodium hydroxide
injections for pH adjustments. As noted above, the final selection of the in-situ treatment
technology appropriate for each area of the site will be made after further studies during remedial
design.

This is considered an interim remedial action that will be revisited at a future date once the long-
term effectiveness as a part of the remedy for all operable units of the site is evaluated.
Additional ROD Amendments, for this OU or others, may be warranted in the future. This
selected interim remedy will ensure that recontaminated sediment/soil will be remediated to
levels that are protective of human and ecological health.

8.0    STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

CERCLA Section 121(b)(1), 42 U.S.C. § 9621(b)(1), mandates that remedial actions be
protective of human health and the environment, be cost-effective, and use permanent solutions,
alternative treatment technologies, and resource recovery alternatives to the maximum extent
practicable. Section 121(b)(1) also establishes a preference for remedial actions which employ,
as a principal element, treatment to reduce the volume, toxicity, or mobility of the hazardous
substances, pollutants, and contaminants at a site permanently and significantly. CERCLA
Section 121(d), 42 U.S.C. § 9621(d), further specifies that a remedial action must attain a level
or standard of control of the hazardous substances, pollutants and contaminants, which at least
attains ARARs under federal and state laws, unless a waiver can be justified.




                                                 19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

EPA has determined that the selected remedy complies with the CERCLA and NCP provisions
for remedy selection, meets the threshold criteria, and provides the best balance of tradeoffs
among the alternatives with respect to the balancing and modifying criteria. These provisions
require the selection of remedies that are protective of human health and the environment,
comply with ARARs (or justify a waiver from such requirements), are cost-effective, and utilize
permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery technologies to
the maximum extent practicable. In addition, CERCLA includes a preference for remedies that
employ treatment that permanently and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity, or mobility of
hazardous substances as a principal element (or justify not satisfying the preference). The
following sections discuss how the selected remedy meets these statutory requirements. The
State of New Jersey concurs with the selected remedy.

8.1    Protection of Human Health and the Environment

The selected remedy, Alternative 3, will adequately protect human health and the environment
through a combination of excavation, in-situ treatment, and performance monitoring. The
selected remedy will eliminate all significant direct-contact risks to human health and the
environment associated with contaminated exposed sediment/soil of the Blackwater Branch and
its floodplain. This action will result in the reduction of exposure levels to acceptable risk levels
within EPA’s generally acceptable risk range of 10-4 to 10-6 for carcinogens and below a HI of
1.0 for noncarcinogens. Implementation of the selected remedy will not pose unacceptable
short-term risks.

8.2    Compliance with ARARs

The selected remedy complies with Chemical-specific, Location-specific and Action-specific
ARARs. The ARARs for the selected interim OU3 remedy include the chemical-specific New
Jersey Residential Direct Contact Soil Remediation Standards (NJAC 7:26D), the location-
specific New Jersey Flood Hazard Control Act (NJAC 7:13) and the action-specific Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (42 USC 6901 et seq.; 40 CFR 107, 171-177). A complete list of
the ARARs, TBCs and other guidance that concern the selected remedy is presented in Appendix
II, Table 7.

8.3    Cost-Effectiveness

EPA has determined that the selected remedy is cost-effective and represents reasonable value
for the money to be spent. A cost-effective remedy is one whose costs are proportional to its
overall effectiveness (NCP § 300.4309f)(1)(ii)(D)). EPA evaluated the “overall effectiveness” of
those alternatives that satisfied the threshold criteria (i.e. were both protective of human health
and ARAR-compliant). Overall effectiveness is based on the evaluations of long-term
effectiveness and permanence; reduction in toxicity, mobility, and volume through treatment;
and short-term effectiveness. Overall effectiveness was then compared to costs to determine
cost-effectiveness.

Each of the alternatives were subjected to a detailed cost analysis. In that analysis, capital, annual
O&M, and performance monitoring costs were estimated and used to develop present-worth

                                                 20

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

costs. The estimated present worth cost of the selected soil remedy for OU3 is $14,897,663,
which is less expensive than Alternative 2. The selected remedy is cost-effective as it has been
determined to provide the greatest overall protectiveness for its present-worth cost.

8.4   Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment Technologies (or
Resource Recovery) Technologies to Maximum Extent Practicable

EPA has determined that the amended remedy represents the maximum extent to which
permanent solutions and treatment technologies can be utilized in a practicable manner for this
OU. Of those alternatives that are protective of human health and the environment and comply
with ARARs (or provide a basis for invoking an ARAR waiver), EPA has determined that the
selected remedy provides the best balance of trade-offs in terms of the five balancing criteria,
while also considering the statutory preference for treatment as a principal element, the bias
against off-site disposal without treatment, and State/support agency and community acceptance.

8.5    Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element

By utilizing in-situ methods to prevent recontamination of the sediment/soil, the amended
remedy addresses contamination posed by the site through the use of treatment technologies. By
utilizing treatment as a significant portion of the remedy the statutory preference for remedies
that employ treatment as a principal element is satisfied.

8.6    Five-Year Review Requirements

While this amended remedy will ultimately result in reduction of contaminant levels in
sediment/soil to levels that would allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, it will take
longer than five years to achieve these levels. As a result, the site will be reviewed at least once
every five years until such time as RAOs and remediation goals are attained and human health
and the environment are protected with unrestricted use.

9.0    DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES

The Proposed Plan for OU3 of the Vineland Chemical Company site was released for a public
comment period on July 22, 2016. The public comment period ran until August 22, 2016. The
Proposed Plan identified Alternative 3 (In-Situ Treatment, Hot Spot Excavation, and
Performance Monitoring) as the preferred alternative for OU3 of the site. EPA reviewed all
written (including electronic formats such as e-mail) and verbal comments submitted during the
public comment period and has determined that no significant changes to the remedy, as it was
originally identified in the Proposed Plan, are necessary or appropriate.




                                                 21

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX I

  Figures

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Vineland Chemical Company
       Superfund Site




  Figure 1: Site Location

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Vineland Chemical Company
       Superfund Site




  Figure 2: Site Overview

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Vineland Chemical Company
       Superfund Site



  Figure 3: Operable Units

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      Vineland Chemical Company
             Superfund Site



Figure 4: Delineation of Areas A, B, and C

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX II

  Tables

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              TABLE 1
                                                Summary of Chemicals of Concern and
                                             Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
Scenario Timeframe: Future
Medium:             Sediment
Exposure Medium:    Exposed Sediment

                                                        Concentration
                                                                                                                    Exposure Point
                                                          Detected            Concentration        Frequency                              EPC
   Exposure Point         Chemical of Concern                                                                       Concentration                    Statistical Measure
                                                                                 Units            of Detection                            Units
                                                                                                                       (EPC)
                                                        Min         Max

Blackwater Branch         Arsenic                                                  mg/kg
                                                          1        1,470                             100%                1,470           mg/kg            Maximum
Area C



                                     Summary of Chemicals of Concern and Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
  This table presents the chemicals of concern (COCs) and exposure point concentrations (EPCs) for the COCs in exposed sediment. The table includes the range of
concentrations detected for each COC, as well as the frequency of detection (i.e., the number of times the chemical was detected in the samples collected at the site), the
                                                                     EPC and how it was derived.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                               TABLE 2
                                                                    Selection of Exposure Scenarios
     Scenario                                                                                  Receptor
                            Medium           Exposure Medium         Exposure Point                                Receptor Age         Exposure Route        Type of Analysis
    Timeframe                                                                                 Population

                                                                    Blackwater Branch                             Adult and Child
        Future              Sediment          Exposed Sediment                                 Recreator                                   Ing/Der/Inh           Quantitative
                                                                         Area C                                  (birth to <6 years)


Ing – Ingestion
Der – Dermal
Inh - Inhalation
                                                                Summary of Selection of Exposure Pathways
     This table describes the exposure pathways that were evaluated for the risk assessment. Exposure media, exposure points, and characteristics of receptor populations are
                                                                                     included.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             TABLE 3
                                                  Non-Cancer Toxicity Data Summary
Pathway: Oral/Dermal
                                                                                                                  Combined                           Dates of
                                     Oral                     Absorp.      Adjusted       Adj.       Primary
    Chemical of        Chronic/                 Oral RfD                                                          Uncertainty    Sources of RfD:      RfD:
                                      RfD                    Efficiency       RfD        Dermal       Target
     Concern          Subchronic                 Units                                                            /Modifying      Target Organ
                                     Value                   (Dermal)      ( Dermal)    RfD Units     Organ
                                                                                                                   Factors

Arsenic                 Chronic     3.0E-04    mg/kg-day        95%         3.0E-04     mg/kg-day      Skin            3               IRIS          9/1/1991

Key

IRIS: Integrated Risk Information System

                                                           Summary of Toxicity Assessment
This table provides non-carcinogenic risk information which is relevant to the contaminants of concern. When available, the chronic toxicity data have been
used to develop oral reference doses (RfDs).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       TABLE 4
                                              Cancer Toxicity Data Summary
Pathway: Oral/Dermal

  Chemical of Concern             Oral            Units           Adjusted         Slope Factor         Weight of        Source         Date
                                 Cancer                         Cancer Slope          Units             Evidence/
                                  Slope                            Factor                                Cancer
                                 Factor                         (for Dermal)                            Guideline
                                                                                                       Description

Arsenic                          1.5E+00       mg/kg-day           1.5E+00           mg/kg-day              A             IRIS        06/01/95

Key:
A: Known Human Carcinogen
IRIS: Integrated Risk Information System

                                                   Summary of Toxicity Assessment

This table provides carcinogenic risk information which is relevant to the contaminants of concern. Toxicity data are provided for both the oral
and dermal routes of exposure.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         TABLE 5
                                       Risk Characterization Summary - Noncarcinogens
Scenario Timeframe:              Future
Receptor Population:             Recreator
Receptor Age:                    Adult
                                                                                                                      Non-Carcinogenic Risk
                Exposure                                                            Primary
Medium                           Exposure Point        Chemical of Concern
                Medium                                                            Target Organ                                                      Exposure
                                                                                                       Ingestion      Dermal        Inhalation
                                                                                                                                                   Routes Total


                Exposed         Blackwater Branch
Sediment                                                       Arsenic                  Skin            4.0E-01       8.5E-02        5.5E-04          4.9E-01
                Sediment             Area C



Scenario Timeframe:              Future
Receptor Population:             Recreator
Receptor Age:                    Child
                                                                                                                      Non-Carcinogenic Risk
                Exposure                                                            Primary
Medium                           Exposure Point        Chemical of Concern
                Medium                                                            Target Organ                                                      Exposure
                                                                                                       Ingestion       Dermal       Inhalation
                                                                                                                                                   Routes Total


                Exposed         Blackwater Branch
Sediment                                                       Arsenic                  Skin           4.0E+00         5.1E-01        5.5E-04        4.8E+00
                Sediment             Area C


                                               Summary of Risk Characterization - Non-Carcinogens

  The table presents hazard quotients (HQs) for each route of exposure and the hazard index (sum of hazard quotients) for exposure to groundwater containing
site-related chemicals. The Risk Assessment Guidance for Superfund states that, generally, a hazard index (HI) greater than 1 indicates the potential for adverse
                                                                      non-cancer effects.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                     TABLE 6
                                       Risk Characterization Summary - Carcinogens
Scenario Timeframe:               Future
Receptor Population:              Recreator
Receptor Age:                     Lifetime (Adult/child)

  Medium          Exposure        Exposure Point            Chemical of                                     Carcinogenic Risk
                  Medium                                     Concern
                                                                                    Ingestion            Dermal          Inhalation         Exposure
                                                                                                                                           Routes Total


                  Exposed        Blackwater Branch
Sediment                                                      Arsenic                2.2E-04             3.1E-05           1.3E-08            2.5E-04
                  Sediment            Area C


                                              Summary of Risk Characterization – Carcinogens

The table presents site-related cancer risks for groundwater exposure. As stated in the National Contingency Plan, the point of departure is 10-6 and the
acceptable risk range for site-related exposure is 10-6 to 10-4. The cancer risk from arsenic in surface soil exceeds the acceptable risk range, indicating
an unacceptable risk from residential exposure to soil.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       TABLE 7
                                        ARARs and To Be Considered (TBC) Criteria

                                  CHEMICAL-SPECIFIC ARARS OR TBC CRITERIA
 REGULATOR              CRITERION        CITATION             DESCRIPTION                                 COMMENTS
NJ Statutes and    Remediation Standards NJAC     Establishes minimum remediation                   The Residential Direct
Rules              Rule                  7:26D    standards for direct contact exposure to          Contact Soil Remediation
                                                  soil.                                             Standard for Arsenic is 19
                                                                                                    mg/kg
Federal Acts and   OSWER Guidance for       OSWER        Guidance for deriving risk based eco-      May be used to screen
Regulations        Developing Ecological    9285.7.55    SSLs for soil contaminants of ecological   soil contaminants to
                   Soil Screening Levels                 concern.                                   determine if further
                                                                                                    ecological study is
                                                                                                    warranted.
Federal Acts and   OSWER Soil               OSWER        Guidance for developing site specific      May be used to identify
Regulations        Screening Guidance       9285.7.55    soil screening levels.                     areas of soil
                                                                                                    contamination.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         LOCATION-SPECIFIC ARARS OR TBC CRITERIA

 REGULATOR              CRITERION             CITATION                    DESCRIPTION                     COMMENTS
NJ Statutes and    Flood Hazard Control Act   NJAC 7:13    Floodplain Use and Limitations which           Pertinent to activities that
Rules                                                      establishes limits on land development         may occur within the
                                                           within flood hazard areas                      floodplain.
NJ Statutes and    Freshwater Wetlands        NJSA         Requires permits for regulated activity        Potentially applicable for
Rules              Protection Act             13:9B-1 et   disturbing freshwater wetlands                 construction
                                              seq                                                         activities performed in the
                                                                                                          vicinity of a freshwater
                                                                                                          wetland
NJ Statutes and    Endangered Plant Species   NJSA 13:1B   Establishes the requirement to protection
Rules              List Act                   et seq.      threatened and endangered plant species in
                                                           New Jersey by developing and adopting a list
NJ Statutes and    Endangered and Non-        NJSA         Standards for the protection of Federal and
Rules              Game Species               23:2A-1      NJ threatened and endangered species
                   Conservation Act
NJ Statutes and    Stream Encroachment        N.J.S.A.     Construction of structures and placement of    Potentially applicable for
Rules              Permit                     58:16A-50    fill within flood hazard areas including       construction activities
                                              et seq.;     floodplains and floodways                      performed in floodplains and
                                              N.J.A.C.                                                    floodways (e.g., treatment
                                              7:8-3.15                                                    facilities)
Federal Acts and   National Environmental     40 CFR 6,    Statement of Procedures on Floodplain
Regulations        Policy Act (NEPA)          Appendix A   Management and Wetlands Protection.
                                                           Establishes policy and guidance to avoid the
                                                           occupancy and modification of floodplains,
                                                           or the destruction or modification of
                                                           wetlands
Federal Acts and   Endangered Species         40 CFR       Standards for the protection of threatened
Regulations        Act                        400          and endangered species (wildlife, marine
                                              50 CFR 17,   and anadromous species and plants) and
                                              81, 223,     establish cooperation with the Federal
                                              224,         and State Governments
                                              226, 402

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                        LOCATION-SPECIFIC ARARS OR TBC CRITERIA

 REGULATOR               CRITERION              CITATION                     DESCRIPTION                            COMMENTS
Federal Acts and   Fish and Wildlife            16 USC 2901   Established EPA policy and guidance for               Potentially applicable for
Regulations        Conservation Act             et seq.       promoting the conservation of non-game fish and       construction activities
                                                              wildlife and their habitats                           performed which may impact
                                                                                                                    non- game fish and wildlife and
                                                                                                                    their habitats
Federal Acts and   Protection of Migratory      16 USC 703    Preservation of migratory birds and habitat           Potentially applicable for any
Regulations        Game & Insectivorous Birds                                                                       area with nesting migratory
                                                                                                                    birds
Federal Acts and   National Historic            16 USC 469    Establishes procedures to provide for preservation
Regulations        Preservation Act             et seq.; 40   of historical and archaeological data that might be
                                                CFR 6301      destroyed through alteration of terrain as a result
                                                              of a Federally licensed activity or program

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                           ACTION-SPECIFIC ARARS OR TBC CRITERIA

 REGULATOR              CRITERION             CITATION                       DESCRIPTION                       COMMENTS
NJ Statutes and    Well Construction and      NJAC 7:9D      Establishes requirements for construction         Applicable if wells are
Rules              Maintenance                               and decommission (sealing) of wells, and          constructed or
                                                             well driller / pump installer licensing           decommissioned
NJ Statutes and    New Jersey Soil Erosion    NJSA 4:24-     To establish soil erosion and sediment
Rules              and                        39 et seq      control standards for Department of
                   Sediment Control Act                      Transportation certification of its projects to
                                                             the Soil Conservation Districts
NJ Statutes and    New Jersey Air Pollution   NJAC 7:27-     Establishes standards for discharge of
Rules              Control Act                8, 16          pollutants to air
NJ Statutes and    Pollutant Discharge        NJAC           Establishes standards for discharge of            Potentially applicable if
Rules              Elimination System         7:14A          pollutants to surface and ground waters           wastewater is discharged to
                                                                                                               surface or ground water
NJ Statutes and    Technical Requirements     NJAC           Identifies requirements for institutional         Potentially applicable if
Rules              for Site Remediation       7:26E- 8       controls for contaminated soils left in place,    chemical residuals in soils
                   (TRSR) and                                and for contaminated groundwater; identifies      left in place are above the
                   Administrative                            administrative requirements for site              industrial SRS; potentially
                   Requirements for the                      remediation that may be applicable                applicable to CEA and MNA
                   Remediation of                                                                              implementation
                   Contaminated Sites
                   (ARRCS)
NJ Statutes and    Noise Control              NJAC 7:29      Establishes allowable noise levels                Potentially applicable in
Rules                                                                                                          residential areas
Federal Acts and   SDWA                       40 CFR         Underground injection control regulations
Regulations                                   144- 147       that provide for the protection of
                                                             underground sources of drinking water
Federal Acts and   Clean Water Act (CWA)      33 USC         Procedures to preserve surface water quality
Regulations                                   1251 et seq.   by reducing direct pollutant discharges into
                                                             waterways, finance municipal wastewater
                                                             treatment facilities and manage polluted
                                                             runoff

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              ACTION-SPECIFIC ARARS OR TBC CRITERIA

 REGULATOR              CRITERION                 CITATION                    DESCRIPTION                            COMMENTS
Federal Acts and   National Pollution             40 CFR        Establishes requirements for discharges              Water quality standards and
Regulations        Discharge Elimination          122- 125      associated with industrial activity, to water        best management practices
                   System (NPDES)                               bodies or wetlands                                   apply, and a discharge
                                                                                                                     permit is required
Federal Acts and   Ambient Water Quality          40CFR131,     Provides criteria developed for the protection
Regulations        Criteria (AWQC)                401           of freshwater and marine aquatic life and for
                                                                the protection of human health from the
                                                                ingestion of water and/or organisms
                   General Pretreatment           40 CFR 403    Prohibits discharge of pollutants to a Publically    Potentially applicable if water
                   Regulations for Existing and                 Operated Treatment Works (POTW) which cause          is discharged to a POTW
                   New Sources of Pollution                     or may cause pass-through or interference with
                                                                operation of the POTW
Federal Acts and   Fish and Wildlife              16 USC 661-   Requires consultation when a federal department
Regulations        Coordination Act               666           or agency proposes or authorizes any
                                                                modification of any stream or other water body
                                                                and adequate provision for protection of fish and
                                                                wildlife resources
Federal Acts and   Toxic Pollutant Effluent       40 CFR 129    Establishes effluent standards or prohibitions for
Regulations        Standards                                    certain toxic
                                                                pollutants such as pesticides and PCBs
Federal Acts and   RCRA                           42 USC 6901   Establishes responsibilities and standards for the   Applicable to solid waste
Regulations                                       et seq.; 40   management of hazardous and non-hazardous            streams from drill cuttings
                                                  CFR 260-270   waste                                                during well installation
Federal Acts and   Hazardous Materials            49 USC        Regulates transportation of hazardous materials in   Potentially applicable for
Regulations        Transportation Act (HMTA)      1801- 1813;   commerce                                             transportation of drill cuttings
                                                  49 CFR 107,
                                                  171-177
Federal Acts and   Clean Air Act (CAA)            42 USC 7401   Establishes requirements to preserve air quality
Regulations                                                     and to reduce air pollution
Federal Acts and   National Ambient Air           40 CFR 50     Establishes primary and secondary standards for
Regulations        Quality Standards (NAAQs)                    six pollutants to protect the public health and
                                                                welfare

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                      ACTION-SPECIFIC ARARS OR TBC CRITERIA

   REGULATOR                     CRITERION                  CITATION                           DESCRIPTION                            COMMENTS
 Federal Acts and         National Emission                 40 CFR 63         Establishes regulations for specific air pollutants
 Regulations              Standards for Hazardous Air                         (such as benzene and PCE)
                          Pollutants (NESHAPs)

Notes:
ARAR               Applicable or relevant and appropriate requirement
ARRCS              Administrative Requirements for the Remediation of Contaminated Sites
AWQC               Ambient Water Quality Criteria
CFR                Code of Federal Regulations
CAA                Clean Air Act
CEA                Classification Exception Area
CWA                Clean Water Act
EPA                U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
HMTA               Hazardous Materials Transportation Act
mg/kg              Milligrams per kilogram
MNA                Monitored Natural Attenuation
NAAQ               National Ambient Air Quality Standards
NEPA               National Environmental Policy Act
NESHAP             National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
NJ                 New Jersey
NJAC               New Jersey Administrative Code, Chapters as specified
NJSA               New Jersey Statutes
NPDES              National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
OSWER              Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response
PCB                polychlorinated biphenyl
PCE                perchloroethylene
POTW               Publicly Operated Treatment Works
RCRA               Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SDWA               Safe Drinking Water Act
SSL                Soil Screening Levels
TBC                To Be Considereds
TRSR               Technical Requirements for Site Remediation
USC                United States Code
Also note: While not an ARAR, all relevant sections of the Occupational Safety and Health Standards and Safety and Health Regulations for Construction (29 CFR 1910 and 1926)
will be complied with.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      APPENDIX III

Administrative Record Index

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                        FINAL
                                                                                     07/21/2016                                          REGION ID: 02
         Site Name: VINELAND CHEMICAL CO., INC.
         CERCLIS ID: NJD002385664
              OUID: 03
               SSID: 02B8
             Action: Blackwater Branch


                                                                          Image
DocID:   Doc Date:   Title:                                               Count:       Doc Type:          Addressee Name/Organization:          Author Name/Organization:
395954   7/21/2016   ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX FOR OU3 FOR THE               1   ARI / Administrative                                  R02: (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                     VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY INCORPORATED SITE                      Record Index                                       AGENCY)



99365    9/28/1989   RECORD OF DECISION FOR THE VINELAND CHEMICAL            225      RPT / Report                                       R02: (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                     COMPANY INCORPORATED SITE                                                                                           AGENCY)


395912   7/19/2016   FOCUSED FEASIBILITY STUDY FOR OU3 FOR THE VINELAND      110      RPT / Report
                     CHEMICAL COMPANY INCORPORATED SITE



396032   7/20/2016   FOCUSED FEASIBILITY STUDY ADDENDUM FOR OU3 FOR            4       MEMO /                                            R02: Young, Hunter (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                     THE VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY INCORPORATED SITE                 Memorandum                                          PROTECTION AGENCY)


395948   7/21/2016   PROPOSED PLAN FOR OU3 FOR THE VINELAND CHEMICAL          14     WP / Work Plan                                      R02: (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                     COMPANY INCORPORATED SITE                                                                                           AGENCY)




                                                                                    Page 1 of 1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX IV

 State Letter

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   ~hde of ~efu Wen~eJJ
                                               D EPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL P ROTECTION
CHR IS CHRISTIE                                         S ITE REMEDIATION PROGRAM                                           BOB MARTIN
Governor                                                      Mail Code 40 l -06                                            Commissioner
                                                               P. 0. Box 420
K IM GUADAGNO                                        Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0420
Lt. Governor                                               Tel. #: 609-292- 1250
                                                           Fax.#: 609-777-1914



                                                                                                             September 22, 2016

         Mr. Walter Mugdan, Director
         Emergency and Remedial Response Division
         U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
         Region II
         290 Broadway
         New York, NY 10007-1866

         Re:      Vineland Chemical Company Superfund Site
                  Record of Decision Amendment Operable Unit 3
                  EPA ID# NJD002385664
                  DEP PI# 0011 40

         Dear Mr. Mugdan :

         The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) completed its review of the
         "Record of Decision Amendment, Vineland Chemical Company Superfund Site, Cumberland
         County, New Jersey, Operable Unit 3: Exposed Sediment of the Blackwater Branch" prepared by
         the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Region II in August 2016 and concurs with the
         selected remedy to address arsenic contamination to protect local waterways.

         The new remedial actions included in this Record of Decision Amendment cover a discrete
         portion of OU 3 of the site involving exposed sediment/soil of the Blackwater Branch floodplain
         near the former Vineland Chemical Company property. The selected remedy, with an estimated
         present-worth cost of $ 14,897 ,663, is considered an interim remedial action that will be revisited
         at a future date once its long-term effectiveness as a part of the remedy for all operable units of
         the site is evaluated.

         During di scussions between EPA and DEP about this ROD amendment, it was noted that further
         evaluation of the site's current groundwater treatment system in Operations and Maintenance
         with state contractors should be included for review during these new remedial actions on site.
         The groundwater remedy began operation in spring 2000 and transitioned to state control in
         October 2014.




                            Ne111 Jersey is an £q11al Opportunity Employer 1 PrinJed on Raycled Paper and Recyclable

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The major components of this ROD Amendment to address certain areas of exposed
sediment/soil of the Blackwater Branch floodplain that have become re-contaminated with
arsenic above the cleanup goals identified in the 1989 ROD due to arsenic in grow1dwater
impacting these sediment/soil areas include the following:

     •   Installation of in-situ treatment technologies to prevent recontamination of the exposed
         sediment/soil to concentrations above remediation goals.
     •   Hot-spot excavations to remove exposed sediment/soil in the Blackwater Branch
         floodplain above remediation goals.
     •   Performance monitoring and assessment of the need for additional in-situ treatment
         and/or excavation.

The in-situ technology used may vary across the site and will depend on the geochemistry and
subsurface conditions in each particular location. Examples of such technologies include air
sparging in iron rich groundwater environments and iron chloride injection in addition to air
sparging or peroxide injection in iron poor groundwater enviro1m1ents. In-situ teclmologies may
also include pH adjustments and/or the installation reactive barriers. In addition, the need for
excavation of the exposed sediment/soil before and/or after in-situ treatment for each area of the
site will be determined during the remedial design and refined during the remedial action.

DEP appreciates the opportunity to participate in the decision making process to select an
appropriate remedy for this site. Further, DEP is looking forward to future cooperation with EPA
in remedial actions to ensure a full cleanup at all areas impacted by this site.

If you have any questions, please call me at 609-292-1251.




                                                              0
                                              Director,   1sion of Remediation Management
                                              Site Remediation & Waste Management Program


C:       Mark J. Pedersen, Assistant Commissioner,
                Site Remediation & Waste Management Program
         Edward W. Putnam, Assistant Director, Publicly funded Response Element, DEP
         Carole Petersen, Chief, New Jersey Remediation Branch, EPA Region II

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    APPENDIX V

Responsiveness Summary

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY
                                          FOR THE
                         RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT
                        VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SITE
                         CUMBERLAND COUNTY, NEW JERSEY




INTRODUCTION
This Responsiveness Summary provides a summary of comments and concerns provided during
the public comment period related to the Proposed Plan (Attachment A) for Operable Unit 3
(OU3) of the Vineland Chemical Company Superfund site (the site) and provides the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) responses to those comments. All comments
summarized in this document have been considered in EPA’s final decision in the selection of a
remedy to address the contamination at the site.

SUMMARY OF COMMUNITY RELATIONS ACTIVITIES

All documentation which the EPA used to develop the Proposed Plan and select the remedy in
this Record of Decision (“ROD”) Amendment, including the EPA’s Focused Feasibility Study
dated July 2016, are in the Administrative Record for the site which was made available to the
public beginning July 22, 2016 in the information repositories maintained in the EPA Docket
Room at the EPA Region 2 offices at 290 Broadway, New York, New York, at the Vineland
Public Library, 1058 East Landis Avenue, Vineland, New Jersey and on EPA’s website for the
site, www.epa.gov/superfund/vineland-chemical.

On July 22, 2016, EPA published a notice in the Press of Atlantic City newspaper informing the
public of the commencement of the public comment period for the Proposed Plan, the upcoming
public meeting on August 8, 2016, the preferred remedy for OU3, contact information for EPA
personnel, and the availability of site-related documents in the Administrative Record. Copies of
the notice can be found in Attachment B of this appendix. The Proposed Plan is available at each
of the repositories listed above, including online. The public comment period ran from July 22,
2016 to August 22, 2016. EPA held a public meeting on August 2, 2016 at 6:30 P.M. in the City
Council Chambers of Vineland City Hall at 640 E Wood Street, Vineland, New Jersey, to present
the findings of the Proposed Plan, and to answer questions from the public about the Proposed
Plan, the remedial alternatives evaluated, and EPA’s preferred alternative.


                                               1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SUMMARY OF COMMENTS AND RESPONSES

A summary of the comments provided at the public meeting and all written comments submitted
during the public comment period, as well as the EPA’s responses to them, are provided below.
The transcript from the public meeting and the comments submitted during the public comment
period can be found in Attachments C and D, respectively, of this appendix.


Comment 1: The City of Vineland Health Department endorses EPA’s preferred alternative.
EPA Response to Comment 1: EPA acknowledges the comments in support of its preferred
alternative.


ATTACHED TO THIS RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY ARE THE FOLLOWING:

Attachment A - Proposed Plan
Attachment B - Public Notice - Press of Atlantic City
Attachment C - August 8, 2016 Public Meeting Transcript
Attachment D - Comments Submitted During Public Comment Period




                                              2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Attachment A

Proposed Plan

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              Vineland Chemical Company Superfund Site
                               Blackwater Branch Exposed Sediment/Soil
                                                    Vineland, New Jersey



Superfund Proposed Plan                                                                                     July 2016

EPA ANNOUNCES PROPOSED PLAN                                  (FFS) and other related documents contained in the
                                                             publicly available Administrative Record for the site.
This Proposed Plan describes the remedial alternatives       EPA encourages the public to review these documents
that the United States Environmental Protection              to gain a more comprehensive understanding of the site
Agency (EPA) considered for amending the approach            and Superfund activities that have been conducted.
to remediate contaminated exposed sediment/soil of the       The current remedy for this portion of the site, selected
Blackwater Branch floodplain that are associated with        in a 1989 Record of Decision (ROD), consists of
the Vineland Chemical Company Superfund site                 dredging, excavation, and disposal of contaminated
located in Vineland, New Jersey. This Plan also              sediment and soil in the Blackwater Branch floodplain.
identifies EPA’s Preferred Alternative along with the        The Preferred Alternative identified in this Proposed
reasons for this preference.                                   MARK YOUR CALENDARS

This Proposed Plan includes summaries of cleanup               Public Comment Period
alternatives evaluated for use at the affected floodplain      July 22 –August 22, 2016
areas. This Proposed Plan was developed by EPA, the
lead agency for the site, in consultation with the New         EPA will accept written comments on the Proposed
                                                               Plan during the public comment period. Written
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
                                                               comments should be addressed to:
(NJDEP), the support agency. As described herein,
there are larger issues related to groundwater                 Hunter Young
contamination at the site that are still being evaluated.      Remedial Project Manager
As such, this Proposed Plan describes interim                  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
alternatives for the Blackwater Branch floodplain that         290 Broadway, 18th Floor
may be revisited at a future date. EPA, in consultation        New York, NY 10007
with NJDEP, will select an interim remedial action that        Email: young.hunter@epa.gov
amends the current remedy for exposed sediment/soil of         Written comments must be postmarked no later than
the Blackwater Branch floodplain after reviewing and           August 22, 2016.
considering all information submitted during the 30-day
public comment period. EPA, in consultation with               Public Meeting
NJDEP, may modify the Preferred Alternative or select          August 8, 2016 at 6:30 P.M.
another response action presented in this Plan based on       EPA will hold a public meeting to explain the
new information or public comments. Therefore, the            Proposed Plan and all of the alternatives presented in
public is encouraged to review and comment on the             the Feasibility Study. Oral and written comments will
                                                              also be accepted at the meeting. The meeting will be
alternatives presented in this Proposed Plan.
                                                              held at:
EPA is issuing this Proposed Plan in accordance with          Vineland City Hall – City Council Chambers
Section 117(a) of the Comprehensive Environmental             640 E Wood St, Vineland, NJ 08360
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA,
or Superfund) 42 U.S.C. 9617(a), and Section                   In addition, select documents from the administrative
300.435(c) (2) (ii) of the National Oil and Hazardous          record are available on-line at:
Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP). This
Proposed Plan summarizes information that can be               www.epa.gov/superfund/vineland-chemical
found in greater detail in the Focused Feasibility Study

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Plan would amend that ROD to require implementation            SCOPE AND ROLE OF RESPONSE ACTION
of in-situ treatment technologies to prevent
recontamination of the exposed sediment/soil (which is         The site is divided into four operable units (Figure 2).
generally defined as sediment located above the                The 1989 ROD selected remedies to address each of the
average high water line), excavation of localized areas        operable units, and several parts of the cleanup work
of sediment/soil in the Blackwater Branch floodplain           specified in the ROD have already been completed.
with significantly elevated concentrations of
contaminants, and performance monitoring to assure             Operable Unit 1 (OU1) consisted of the control of
the remedy is effective and to assess the need for             source material at the former Vineland Chemical
additional in-situ treatment and/or excavation.                Company plant site. To address arsenic-contaminated
                                                               soil, EPA constructed a soil washing facility that
COMMUNITY ROLE IN SELECTION PROCESS                            processed 70 tons of excavated soil per hour. The
                                                               facility processed over 400,000 tons of arsenic-
This Proposed Plan is being issued to inform the public        contaminated soil and sediment, and the remaining
of EPA’s proposed alternative and to solicit public            waste was disposed of at a permitted off-site disposal
comments pertaining to all of the remedial alternatives        facility. The soil remedy was completed in 2014.
evaluated, including the Preferred Alternative. Changes
to the Preferred Alternative, or a change to another           OU2 relates to management of the migration of
alternative, may be made if public comments or                 contamination through groundwater. To address
additional data indicate that such a change would result       contaminated groundwater, EPA constructed a system
in a more appropriate remedial action. The final               to pump out and treat about two million gallons of
decision regarding the selected remedy will be made            contaminated groundwater daily. Operation of the
after EPA has taken into consideration all public              facility began in the spring of 2000 and is ongoing. The
comments. EPA is soliciting public comments on all of          pump-and-treat operation is capturing the majority of
the alternatives considered in the Proposed Plan,              the flow of arsenic-contaminated groundwater from the
because EPA may select a remedy other than the                 plant site. The treated groundwater continues to meet
Preferred Alternative. This Proposed Plan has been             the site’s cleanup goal. Operation of the pump-and-treat
made available to the public for a public comment              system was transferred to NJDEP in October 2014.
period that concludes on August 20, 2016.
                                                               The primary objective of the response action described
A public meeting will be held during the public                herein involves portions of OU3, which relates to
comment period to present the information regarding            addressing contamination associated with the
the investigations of the Blackwater Branch floodplain,        sediment/soil in the river areas, including the Maurice
including the conclusions of studies performed to assess       River, the Blackwater Branch of the Maurice River and
treatment options and the FFS, to elaborate further on         their associated floodplains. Initial cleanup activities
the reasons for proposing the Preferred Alternative, and       were completed for OU3 in December 2012. However,
to receive public comments. The public meeting will            monitoring since that time has shown that certain areas
include a presentation by EPA of the Preferred                 of exposed sediment/soil of the Blackwater Branch
Alternative and other cleanup options.                         floodplain have become re-contaminated with arsenic
                                                               above the cleanup goals identified in the 1989 ROD due
Information on the public meeting and submitting               to arsenic in groundwater reaching the sediment/soil
written comments can be found in the “Mark Your                during the ongoing implementation of the OU2 remedy.
Calendar” text box on Page 1.                                  As such, additional actions may be required to address
                                                               this portion of OU3; alternatives are evaluated herein.
Comments received at the public meeting, as well as            This Proposed Plan does not fully address the Maurice
written comments received during the comment period,           River or the submerged sediment of the Blackwater
will be documented in the Responsiveness                       Branch, which are also portions of OU3 of the site.
Summary section of the ROD Amendment. The                      These portions are still under review.
ROD Amendment is the document that presents which
alternative has been selected and the basis for the            OU4 of the site relates to Union Lake, an 870-acre
selection of the remedy.                                       impoundment on the Maurice River. The upstream
                                                               remedial activities will be evaluated prior to proceeding
                                                           2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

with active cleanup of the lake. Arsenic contamination         Branch to its confluence with the Maurice River and
in sediment has been found in the lake. Surface water          then 7.5 miles downstream to Union Lake.
samples had elevated arsenic concentrations only when
agitated (mixed with contaminated sediment). Beach             The site was added to the EPA’s National Priorities List
monitoring in Union Lake began in the early 2000s and          (NPL) in September 1984. A Remedial Investigation
will continue until it is concluded that there are no          and Feasibility Study (RI/FS) was completed in 1989 to
further impacts to the lake. To date, no unacceptable          identify the types, quantities, and locations of
risks to beach users have been identified.                     contaminants, and to develop ways to correct the
                                                               problems posed by the contaminants.
Future amendments to the 1989 ROD may be required,
including for the remainder of OU3.                            Based on the RI/FS findings, EPA implemented a
                                                               number of response actions that included securing the
SITE BACKGROUND                                                site with a perimeter fence and removing thousands of
                                                               gallons of arsenic solutions and demolition of eight
Site Description                                               buildings.

The Vineland Chemical Company Superfund site is                A ROD for the site was signed in 1989 and determined
located in the northwestern portion of Vineland, in            that actual or threatened releases of hazardous
Cumberland County, south central New Jersey, in an             substances from the site, if not addressed by
area of mixed industrial, low-density residential and          implementing the response actions selected in the ROD,
agricultural properties (Figure 1). The site is bordered       may present an existing or potential threat to public
immediately to the north by other industrial properties        health, welfare or the environment. The ROD divided
and the Blackwater Branch, a perennial stream that             the site into four operable units (OUs) as described in
flows westward to the Maurice River.                           the “Scope and Role of Action” section above.

The Blackwater Branch of the Maurice River flows               Enforcement History
northeast to southwest, in proximity to, and partially
through, the site itself. A floodplain lies immediately        Potentially responsible parties (PRPs) identified for the
adjacent to the Blackwater Branch along the entire             site include the Vineland Chemical Company and its
length of the tributary extending to the Maurice River.        owners.
This area is the subject of this Proposed Plan.
                                                               In 1994, the PRPs entered into a judicial consent decree
Site History                                                   with EPA. The consent decree assured that the PRPs
                                                               funded the remedial work to the maximum extent
The Vineland Chemical Company operated from 1949               possible.
to 1994 and produced arsenical herbicides and
fungicides. There were seventeen buildings on the              SITE CHARACTERISTICS
plant site, some of which were used by the Vineland
Chemical Company for various manufacturing                     The site is located in the Atlantic Coastal Plain
purposes.                                                      physiographic province, which consists of a seaward-
                                                               dipping wedge of unconsolidated sediment (sand, silt,
As early as 1966, the New Jersey Department of Health          clay, and gravel) that range in age from Cretaceous to
observed untreated wastewater being discharged into            Quaternary periods. Locally, the site is situated on a
unlined lagoons at the site. This wastewater was               relatively level plain that slopes slightly from the
contaminated with arsenic at concentrations up to              southeast toward the northwest with topographic
67,000 parts per billion (ppb). Waste salts containing         elevations that range from 65 to 75 feet above mean sea
1-2 percent arsenic were stored outside in uncovered           level.
piles. Precipitation dissolved some of these salts and
carried them into the groundwater and eventually into          Groundwater levels vary seasonally at the site with an
nearby surface water bodies. Contaminated sediment             average of approximately 10 feet below ground surface
was mapped 1.5 miles downstream in Blackwater                  (bgs), and a typical minimum and maximum of between
                                                               4 and 19 feet bgs. When the groundwater treatment
                                                           3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

plant is not in operation, groundwater south of the           into the Blackwater Branch floodplain at some of the
Blackwater Branch moves in an east to west direction          locations sampled even with the pump and treat system
with groundwater discharging at several locations along       in operation, contaminating exposed sediment. The
Blackwater Branch. Under pumping conditions, the              OU3 remedy was selected based on the assumption that
direction of flow is somewhat altered to a more               groundwater discharging into the Blackwater Branch
southeast to northwest flow direction south of                floodplain would not impact the exposed sediment.
Blackwater Branch, and a northeast to southwest flow          Sampling of surface sediment was performed between
direction north of Blackwater Branch. Groundwater             2011 and 2012 along Phases 2, 3 and 4, soon after
that is not captured by the recovery system discharges        stream restoration and prior to re-diverting the surface
to Blackwater Branch.                                         water back to the stream. Samples were biased toward
                                                              the iron-stained sediment. Results indicate that arsenic
RESULTS OF THE REMEDIAL STUDIES                               in surface sediment samples accumulated soon after
                                                              restoration and concentrations exceed the 20 mg/kg
Implementation of 1989 ROD Remedy for OU3                     ROD goal for exposed sediment. Due to extensive
                                                              arsenic exceedances along the Phase 4 segment of the
The excavation and treatment of arsenic impacted              Blackwater Branch, surface water was not re-diverted
sediment from the Blackwater Branch and its floodplain        back to this section of the Blackwater Branch. The
were carried out in four phases from 2006 through             Blackwater Branch was eventually re-diverted back to a
2012. Phase I encompassed the area east of North Mill         stream alignment that was similar to the original but
Road and adjacent to the chemical plant site. Phase II        followed an alternate path around the areas where the
encompassed the area west of North Mill Road and east         arsenic exceedances were encountered.
of Route 55. Phase III encompassed the area west of
Route 55 and east of the Maurice River Parkway. Phase         Additional sediment sampling was conducted in Phases
IV encompassed the stream and floodplain west of the          1 and 2 between 2013 and 2015. Samples were biased
Maurice River Parkway to the Maurice River.                   to locations that were iron-stained and were collected
                                                              from floodplain areas as well as locations near the
In each phase, the Blackwater Branch was diverted to a        banks of the Blackwater Branch where sediment is
clean location before excavation of the contaminated          likely to be exposed during periods of low water level
material was performed. Once material with arsenic            conditions. During this time period, operation of the
concentrations exceeding 20 milligrams/kilogram               pump and treat system varied between full pumping, no
(mg/kg), the value identified in the 1989 ROD, was            pumping and partial pumping. Concentrations of
removed, the excavated area was backfilled with clean         arsenic in sediment samples exceeded 20 mg/kg while
material and stream flow was restored to the re-              the pump and treat system was fully operational as well
constructed stream channel.                                   as while the pump and treat system was shut down.

Soon after arsenic excavation in the floodplain of            In summary, sediment samples collected between 2010
Phases 1 and 2 was completed in 2009, iron staining           and 2015 demonstrated that groundwater that is
along the banks and within the Blackwater Branch was          discharging to the Blackwater Branch in certain areas is
observed in certain locations. Sediment and seep water        recontaminating the sediments due to localized
samples taken at a few of these iron-stained locations        geochemical conditions that result in the dissolved
were analyzed in 2010 to determine if these iron-             arsenic precipitating out as the groundwater discharges
stained sediment also contained arsenic. Phase 1              into the branch sediment. Over time, larger areas of
samples were taken after excavation, backfilling and          sediment may become recontaminated. It should be
flow had been restored to the channel. Phase 2 samples        noted that despite the elevated arsenic concentrations in
were collected after excavation and backfilling in the        the floodplain, surface water arsenic concentrations
floodplain had occurred, but before flow was restored         have not been found to be elevated.
to the original creek channel.
                                                              Bench Scale Studies
The sediment samples that were co-located with the
seep samples contained arsenic just above the                 Once it was determined that implementation of the
floodplain sediment goal of the 1989 ROD (20 mg/kg).          OU3 remedy would not prevent recontamination of the
These results provided evidence that arsenic is seeping       floodplain sediment/soil, preliminary bench scale
                                                          4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

(laboratory) testing was conducted to evaluate the
viability of in-situ (in-ground) treatment as a method of                  WHAT IS A "PRINCIPAL THREAT"?
controlling recontamination. In-situ treatments
                                                                 The NCP establishes an expectation that EPA will use treatment
evaluated at the bench scale focused on creating                 to address the principal threats posed by a site wherever
conditions for which the accumulation of arsenic in              practicable (NCP Section 300.430(a)(1)(iii)(A)). The "principal
sediment would be unfavorable either by reducing the             threat" concept is applied to the characterization of "source
movement of arsenic to the sediment/soil of the                  materials" at a Superfund site. A source material is material that
                                                                 includes or contains hazardous substances, pollutants or
floodplain or by reducing the availability of areas onto         contaminants that act as a reservoir for migration of
which arsenic can accumulate through bonding with the            contamination to groundwater, surface water or air, or acts as a
sediment.                                                        source for direct exposure. Contaminated groundwater generally
                                                                 is not considered to be a source material; however, Non-Aqueous
                                                                 Phase Liquids (NAPLs) in groundwater may be viewed as source
Results of the bench scale studies indicated that several
                                                                 material. Principal threat wastes are those source materials
methods of in-situ treatment can reduce arsenic                  considered to be highly toxic or highly mobile that generally
accumulation in sediment/soil so that concentrations in          cannot be reliably contained, or would present a significant risk
the Blackwater Branch floodplain would remain below              to human health or the environment should exposure occur. The
cleanup goals. These methods include in-situ treatment           decision to treat these wastes is made on a site-specific basis
                                                                 through a detailed analysis of the alternatives using the nine
with oxygen (such as by air sparging or the use of               remedy selection criteria. This analysis provides a basis for
peroxide), in-situ treatment with iron, and/or in-situ pH        making a statutory finding that the remedy employs treatment as
adjustment.                                                      a principal element.

In 2015, pilot (in-field) testing of in-situ treatment
options was initiated, and the preliminary results of this
testing are favorable. Because the results show that the         Human Health Risk Assessment
in-situ treatment is working, the pilot study will
continue and will remain operational until an amended            As part of the FFS for OU3, a human health risk
remedy is implemented.                                           assessment (HHRA) process was used for assessing
                                                                 site-related cancer risks and non-cancer health hazards
PRINCIPAL THREATS                                                associated with exposure to arsenic in the sediment/soil.
                                                                 The four-step process is comprised of: Hazard
Although arsenic in groundwater is acting as a source            Identification, Exposure Assessment, Toxicity
of recontamination of the exposed sediment/soil of the           Assessment, and Risk Characterization (see adjoining
Blackwater Branch floodplain, groundwater is                     box “What is Risk and How is it Calculated” for more
generally not considered to be a source material under           details on the risk assessment process).
the conceptual definition of a principal threat (see
related box “What is a “Principal Threat”?). The arsenic         The HHRA reviewed post-excavation exposed
in groundwater can also be reliably immobilized                  sediment/soil data collected between 2012 and 2015 in
through in-situ treatment. As such, the groundwater is           the Blackwater Branch floodplain against current risk-
not considered a principal threat waste for this OU of           based screening levels (RSLs). A screening evaluation
the site.                                                        was conducted for the future recreational user, or
                                                                 recreator, in the Blackwater Branch floodplain to assess
SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS                                            the protectiveness of the remedy that was selected in
                                                                 the original 1989 Record of Decision for OU3.
As part of the FFS, human health and ecological risk
evaluations were conducted for the exposed                       Calculation of risk-based RSLs for sediment/soil
sediment/soil of the Blackwater Branch floodplain to             (which looks at exposure through ingestion, dermal
estimate risks associated with current and future site           contact with and inhalation of contaminated
conditions. Three separate areas with contamination              sediment/soil) were based on standardized equations
were identified with unique geochemical conditions               that combine exposure information and assumptions
known as Areas A, B, and C (Figure 3).                           with available toxicity data. Recreator exposure
                                                                 parameters were used to best approximate site exposure
                                                                 during future recreational use of the Blackwater
                                                                 Branch. Any current site user (e.g., treatment plant

                                                             5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

worker or trespasser) would have less frequent
exposures, and thereby lower risks, than these future                   WHAT IS RISK AND HOW IS IT CALCULATED?
receptors. A reasonable maximum exposure scenario of
                                                                A Superfund baseline human health risk assessment is an analysis of the
4 hours per day and 40 days per year was considered, in
                                                                potential adverse health effects caused by hazardous substance releases
line with the 1989 Baseline Risk Assessment’s                   from a site in the absence of any actions to control or mitigate these
evaluation of recreational use.                                 under current and future land uses. A four-step process is utilized for
                                                                assessing site-related human health risks for reasonable maximum
The maximum detected arsenic concentrations in all              exposure scenarios.
three areas of the Blackwater Branch floodplain are             Hazard Identification: In this step, the contaminants of potential concern
greater than the human health-based RSLs, which                 (COPCs) at the site in various media (i.e., soil, groundwater, surface
indicates the potential for unacceptable risk and adverse       water, and air) are identified based on such factors as toxicity, frequency
health effects from recreational exposure to exposed            of occurrence, and fate and transport of the contaminants in the
                                                                environment, concentrations of the contaminants in specific media,
Blackwater Branch sediment/soil. Additionally, the
                                                                mobility, persistence, and bioaccumulation.
maximum concentrations of arsenic in all three areas of
the Blackwater Branch floodplain exceed the site 1989           Exposure Assessment: In this step, the different exposure pathways
cleanup level of 20 mg/kg for arsenic in exposed                through which people might be exposed to the contaminants identified
sediment by an order of magnitude or more.                      in the previous step are evaluated. Examples of exposure pathways
                                                                include incidental ingestion of and dermal contact with contaminated
                                                                soil and ingestion of and dermal contact with contaminated groundwater.
A semi-quantitative screening evaluation was                    Factors relating to the exposure assessment include, but are not limited
conducted for Area A of the Blackwater Branch                   to, the concentrations in specific media that people might be exposed to
floodplain. The results indicate that the current remedy        and the frequency and duration of that exposure. Using these factors, a
                                                                “reasonable maximum exposure” scenario, which portrays the highest
is likely not protective of human health for a future
                                                                level of human exposure that could reasonably be expected to occur, is
recreator. The estimated cancer risk for a child and            calculated.
adult recreator utilizing the Blackwater Branch in this
area would equal 2 x10-4, exceeding the 10-4 lifetime           Toxicity Assessment: In this step, the types of adverse health effects
excess cancer risk end of the risk range. The non-cancer        associated with chemical exposures, and the relationship between
                                                                magnitude of exposure and severity of adverse effects are determined.
hazard estimate for a child recreator is 5, exceeding           Potential health effects are chemical-specific and may include the risk
EPA’s non-cancer hazard index of 1.                             of developing cancer over a lifetime or other non-cancer health hazards,
                                                                such as changes in the normal functions of organs within the body (e.g.,
Ecological Risk Assessment                                      changes in the effectiveness of the immune system). Some chemicals are
                                                                capable of causing both cancer and non-cancer health hazards.
A different approach was used in evaluating ecological          Risk Characterization: This step summarizes and combines outputs of
risk associated with contamination in the exposed               the exposure and toxicity assessments to provide a quantitative
sediment/soil of the Blackwater Branch floodplain in            assessment of site risks for all COCs. Exposures are evaluated based on
comparison to the evaluation of human health risks. As          the potential risk of developing cancer and the potential for non-cancer
                                                                health hazards. The likelihood of an individual developing cancer is
is stated above, maximum concentrations of arsenic in           expressed as a probability. For example, a 10-4 cancer risk means a “one
all three areas of the Blackwater Branch floodplain             in ten thousand excess cancer risk;” or one additional cancer may be
exceed the site 1989 cleanup level of 20 mg/kg for              seen in a population of 10,000 people as a result of exposure to site
arsenic in exposed sediment/soil by an order of                 contaminants under the conditions identified in the Exposure
                                                                Assessment. Current Superfund regulations for exposures identify the
magnitude or more. As such, an evaluation was
                                                                range for determining whether remedial action is necessary as an
conducted to determine whether cleanup of the                   individual excess lifetime cancer risk of 10-4 to 10-6, corresponding to a
floodplain to concentrations below the 1989 ROD goal            one in ten thousand to a one in a million excess cancer risk.
would be protective of the environment.
                                                                For non-cancer health effects, a “hazard index” (HI) is calculated. The
                                                                key concept for a non-cancer HI is that a “threshold” (measured as an
The floodplain soil is considered to be representative of       HI of less than or equal to 1) exists below which non-cancer health
a terrestrial environment, thus concentrations of arsenic       hazards are not expected to occur. The goal of protection is 10-6 for
were compared to EPA’s Ecological Soil Screening                cancer risk and an HI of 1 for a non-cancer health hazard. Chemicals that
Level (Eco-SSLs), which are concentrations of                   exceed a 10-4 cancer risk or an HI of 1 are typically those that will require
contaminants in soil that are protective of ecological          remedial action at the site.
receptors that commonly come into contact with and/or
consume biota that live in or on soil. As such, these
values are presumed to provide adequate protection of
                                                            6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

terrestrial avian and mammalian receptors. The EPA                   containment, removal, or institutional controls,
Eco SSLs for arsenic are 18 mg/kg for plants, 43 mg/kg               for those areas with unacceptably high
for avian receptors and 46 mg/kg for mammalian                       sediment arsenic concentrations.
receptors.
                                                             This overall RAO for OU3 remains in effect. The
Comparison of these screening levels to the 1989 ROD         specific RAOs for the remedial alternatives discussed in
goal of 20 mg/kg for arsenic shows that this value is        this Proposed Plan are:
protective for avian and mammalian receptors. The
only ecological value in exceedance of 20 mg/kg is the           •   Reduce concentrations of arsenic in the
value that was derived to be protective to plants (18                exposed sediment/soil in the Blackwater
mg/kg). However, arsenic concentrations at or below                  Branch floodplain to below acceptable levels of
background values (20 mg/kg in 1989, 19 mg/kg                        risk.
currently) are not considered COPCs. Conversely, since           •   Prevent recontamination of exposed
concentrations above 46 mg/kg are present, this review               sediment/soil of the Blackwater Branch
shows that there is a potential risk to ecological                   floodplain from site-related groundwater
receptors.                                                           contamination.

Risk Assessment Summary                                      Due to the existence of larger groundwater
                                                             contamination issues at this site, it is EPA’s expectation
It is EPA’s judgment that the Preferred Alternative          that the remedy described in this Proposed Plan will be
identified in this Proposed Plan, or one of the other        revisited at a future date. Therefore, this action is
active measures considered in this Proposed Plan, is         considered an interim remedial action.
necessary to limit potential human health and
ecological risks from actual or threatened releases of       Preliminary Remediation Goal
hazardous substances into the environment.
                                                             To achieve RAOs, EPA has selected a soil cleanup goal
FOCUSED FEASIBILITY STUDY                                    for the exposed sediment/soil. The soil cleanup goal
                                                             for the COPC is consistent with New Jersey Residential
The FFS was prepared to evaluate alternative remedial        Direct Contact Soil Remediation Standards
actions for OU3. During the FFS phase, remedial              (NJRDCSRS). Therefore, the PRG for the COPC in
action objectives (RAOs) are developed, preliminary          exposed sediment/soil of the Blackwater Branch
remediation goals (PRGs) are identified, technologies        floodplain is as follows:
are screened based on overall implementability,
effectiveness and cost, and remedial alternatives are            •   Arsenic: 19 mg/kg
assembled and analyzed in detail with respect to the
nine criteria for remedy selection under the NCP at 40       The 1989 ROD identified a Preliminary Remediation
C.F.R. Part 300.430.                                         Goal of 20 mg/kg for arsenic in exposed sediment.
                                                             Since then, the state of New Jersey has conducted a
Remedial Action Objectives                                   much more robust study of statewide levels of arsenic
                                                             in soil, and from this study a statewide concentration of
RAOs describe what the proposed remedy is expected           19 mg/kg has been established. EPA has evaluated the
to accomplish. These objectives are based on available       protectiveness of 19 mg/kg and the PRG for arsenic in
information and standards such as applicable or              the exposed sediment/soil has been modified to meet
relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs), to-be-        the current New Jersey Soil Remediation Standard.
considered standards and guidance, and site-specific
risk-based levels.
                                                             The PRG will become the final remediation goal when
The 1989 ROD identified the following RAO for the            EPA makes a final decision to select an amended
sediment in OU3:                                             remedy for the exposed sediment/soil of the Blackwater
                                                             Branch floodplain, after taking into consideration
    •   Minimize public exposure, either through             public comments.


                                                         7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Remedial Alternatives                                           accessible areas of Blackwater Branch and the Maurice
                                                                River advising the public that sediment is contaminated
CERCLA §121(b)(1), 42 U.S.C. §9621(b)(1), mandates              with arsenic and there are risks associated with
that remedial actions be protective of human health and         prolonged exposure of arsenic. With the exception of
the environment, be cost-effective, and use permanent           the existing security fences, engineering controls would
solutions, alternative treatment technologies, and              not be implemented to prevent site access or exposure
resource recovery alternatives to the maximum extent            to site contaminants.
practicable. Section 121(b)(1) also establishes a
preference for remedial actions which use, as a                 Total Capital Cost:              $0
principal element, treatment to permanently and                 Annual O&M:                      $0
significantly reduce the volume, toxicity or mobility of        Total Present Net Worth:         $0
the hazardous substances, pollutants, and contaminants          Timeframe:                        0 years
at a site. CERCLA §121(d), 42 U.S.C. §9621(d),
further specifies that a remedial action must require a         Alternative 2 – Ongoing Hot Spot Excavation
level or standard of control of the hazardous substances,
pollutants, and contaminants, which at least attains            This alternative consists of periodic excavation and off-
ARARs under federal and state laws, unless a waiver             site disposal of the exposed sediment/soil of the
can be justified pursuant to CERCLA §121(d)(4), 42              Blackwater Branch floodplain as the arsenic
U.S.C. §9621(d)(4).                                             concentrations exceed the PRG. Excavated
                                                                sediment/soil would be transported and disposed of off-
Remedial alternatives for the site are summarized               site.
below. Capital costs are those expenditures that are
required to construct a remedial alternative. Operation         The sediment/soil would be sampled to determine if
and maintenance costs are those post-construction costs         they need to be disposed of as either hazardous waste or
necessary to ensure or verify the continued                     non-hazardous waste. Treatment of sediment/soil, if
effectiveness of a remedial alternative and are estimated       needed, would be conducted at and by the approved
on an annual basis. Present worth is the amount of              disposal facility.
money which, if invested in the current year, would be
sufficient to cover all the costs over time associated          Total Capital Cost:              $1,160,646
with a project, calculated using a discount rate of seven       Annual O&M:                      $4,642,584
percent and a 10-year time interval. Construction time          Present Worth Cost:              $33,768,213
is the time required to construct and implement the             Construction Time Frame:         Constant
alternative and does not include the time required to
design the remedy, negotiate performance of the                 Alternative 3 – In-Situ Treatment, Hot Spot
remedy, or procure contracts for design and                     Excavation, and Performance Monitoring
construction.
                                                                This alternative consists of installation of in-situ
    •   Alternative 1: No Further Action                        treatment technologies to prevent recontamination of
    •   Alternative 2: Ongoing Hot Spot Excavation              the exposed sediment/soil to concentrations above
    •   Alternative 3: In-Situ Treatment, Hot Spot              PRGs, hot-spot excavations to remove exposed
        Excavation, and Performance Monitoring                  sediment/soil in the Blackwater Branch floodplain
                                                                above PRGs, and performance monitoring to assure the
Alternative 1 - No Action                                       remedy is effective and assess the need for additional
                                                                in-situ treatment and/or excavation. In-situ technologies
The NCP requires that a “No Action” alternative be              are those technologies that are implemented in place,
evaluated to establish a baseline for comparison with           rather than removing the contamination and treating it.
other remedial alternatives. Under this alternative, no
further action would be implemented, and the current            The in-situ technology used may vary across the site
status of the site would remain unchanged. A                    and will depend on the geochemistry and subsurface
Classification Exception Area for the site already exists       conditions in each particular location. Examples of
to restrict use of groundwater. Signs are posted in             such technologies include air sparging in iron rich
                                                                groundwater environments and iron chloride injection
                                                            8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                               implementation of the remedial action through
     THE NINE SUPERFUND EVALUATION CRITERIA                                    performance monitoring.

1. Overall Protectiveness of Human Health and the Environment                  Total Capital Cost:              $7,281,988
evaluates whether and how an alternative eliminates, reduces, or
controls threats to public health and the environment through
                                                                               Annual O&M Year:                 $745,569
institutional controls, engineering controls, or treatment.                    Present Worth Cost:              $14,897,663
                                                                               Construction Time Frame:         1 year
2. Compliance with Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate
Requirements (ARARs) evaluates whether the alternative meets                   COMPARATIVE EVALUATION OF
federal and state environmental statutes, regulations, and other
requirements that pertain to the site, or whether a waiver is justified.       ALTERNATIVES

3. Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence considers the ability of             EPA uses nine criteria to evaluate the remedial
an alternative to maintain protection of human health and the                  alternatives individually and against each other to select
environment over time.
                                                                               a remedy. This section of the Proposed Plan profiles
4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume of Contaminants                  the relative performance of each alternative against the
through Treatment evaluates an alternative's use of treatment to               nine criteria, noting how it compares to the other
reduce the harmful effects of principal contaminants, their ability to         options under consideration. Each alternative must
move in the environment, and the amount of contamination present.              meet the first two threshold criteria, which are overall
5. Short-term Effectiveness considers the length of time needed to             protection of human health and the environment, and
implement an alternative and the risks the alternative poses to workers,       compliance with ARARs. Alternatives that meet the
the community, and the environment during implementation.                      threshold criteria are then analyzed against five primary
                                                                               balancing criteria: long-term effectiveness and
6. Implementability considers the technical and administrative
feasibility of implementing the alternative, including factors such as
                                                                               permanence; reduction to toxicity, mobility, or volume
the relative availability of goods and services.                               through treatment; short-term effectiveness;
                                                                               implementability; and cost. State and community
7. Cost includes estimated capital and annual operations and                   acceptance are modifying criteria that are also
maintenance costs, as well as present worth cost. Present worth cost is        considered in remedy selection. A detailed analysis
the total cost of an alternative over time in terms of today's dollar
value. Cost estimates are expected to be accurate within a range of            assessing the alternatives against each of the nine
+50 to -30 percent.                                                            evaluation criteria is in the FFS.

8. State/Support Agency Acceptance considers whether the State                 Overall Protection of Human Health and the
agrees with the EPA's analyses and recommendations, as described in
the RI/FS and Proposed Plan.
                                                                               Environment

9. Community Acceptance considers whether the local community                  Alternative 1 does not protect human health and the
agrees with EPA's analyses and preferred alternative. Comments                 environment because no action is taken to prevent
received on the Proposed Plan are an important indicator of community          exposure to sediment/soil that exceeds risk based
acceptance.
                                                                               cleanup levels for arsenic.

  in addition to air sparging or peroxide injection in iron                    Alternative 2 is protective of human health and the
  poor groundwater environments. In-situ technologies                          environment because sediment/soil is removed as it
  may also include pH adjustments and/or the installation                      reaches arsenic concentrations that exceed the risk
  of material into the ground which will intercept the                         based cleanup goals.
  groundwater flow and passively capture the
  contamination, also known as ‘reactive barriers’. Final                      Alternative 3 is protective of human health and the
  selection of the in-situ treatment technology appropriate                    environment because in-situ treatment systems are
  for each area of the site will be made after further                         installed and operated that prevent recontamination of
  studies during remedial design.                                              sediment/soil with arsenic, and sediment/soil currently
                                                                               exceeding risk based arsenic concentrations are
  In addition, the need for excavation of the exposed                          removed and disposed of off-site.
  sediment/soil before and/or after in-situ treatment for
  each area of the site will be determined during the
  remedial design and further refined during
                                                                           9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Compliance with ARARs                                            Alternative 3 does not reduce the overall volume of
                                                                 arsenic but does reduce the mobility of arsenic in the
Alternative 1 (No action) would not comply with                  groundwater, which reduces the volume entering the
ARARs in that it would leave exposed sediment/soil in            Blackwater Branch floodplain. This effectively reduces
place that exceed NJRDCSRS and pose unacceptable                 the toxicity of the groundwater entering the Blackwater
risk to human health and the environment.                        Branch floodplain.

Alternatives 2 and 3 provide compliance with chemical-           Short-Term Effectiveness
specific ARARs by removing contaminated soil above
NJRDCSRS. Alternative 2 would accomplish this by                 There would be no short-term impact to the local
removal of sediment/soil that exceeds ARARs, and                 community or the environment for Alternative 1.
Alternative 3 would accomplish this by in-situ
treatment that would prevent groundwater from                    The construction and implementation activities
recontaminating the sediment/soil. Location-specific             involved in Alternative 2 would be frequent and would
ARARs and Action-specific ARARs would both be met                have almost continuous impact on the local community
by proper design and implementation of the respective            with truck traffic to haul contaminated sediment/soil for
components such as general construction standards and            off-site disposal.
waste handling requirements. The Location-specific
ARARs and Action-specific ARARs for the disposal                 Alternative 3 would have some impacts to the nearby
phase would be met with proper selection of the                  community due to truck traffic to haul contaminated
disposal facility.                                               sediment/soil off-site and drilling activities to install the
                                                                 in-situ treatment systems. However, these impacts
Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence                           would be relatively short term and ongoing long term
                                                                 treatment activities at the site are expected to have
Although the three alternatives are interim remedial             minimal impact to the community.
actions, they were evaluated for long-term effectiveness
and permanence.                                                  Implementability

Alternative 1 does not provide adequate controls of              All the alternatives are easily implemented. There are
risks to human health over the long-term because there           no special techniques, materials, or labor required to
is no mechanism to prevent future exposure.                      implement Alternative 2.

Alternative 2 is only effective in the long-term with a          Cost
high level of constant maintenance. It does not treat the
source of contamination, and although steps would be             For Alternative 2, each time sediment/soil needs to be
taken to protect the surrounding community, there                excavated it is estimated it will cost $1,160,000.
would be nearly continuous operation of construction             Assuming this has to be performed every 3 months, that
equipment and hauling of contaminated soil off-site for          is an annual cost of $4,642,584. The present worth cost
an indefinite period of time.                                    over a 10-year period is estimated to be $33,768,213.

Alternative 3 is effective in the long-term in that it           The estimated capital cost of Alternative 3 is
prevents recontamination of the exposed sediment/soil            $7,281,988. The annual O&M cost is estimated to be
in the Blackwater Branch floodplain.                             $745,569 the first year and an annual cost of $557,670
                                                                 for the following years. This alternative also includes
Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume through               an annual monitoring cost of $213,438 the first year,
Treatment                                                        $135,461 the second year and $95,663 for the following
                                                                 years. The 10-year present worth value of this
Alternatives 1 and 2 do not reduce the toxicity,                 alternative is $14,897,663.
mobility, or volume of contaminants through treatment
and therefore do not meet EPAs preference for
treatment.

                                                            10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

State Acceptance                                                 The selection of the Preferred Alternative is
                                                                 accomplished through the evaluation of the nine criteria
The State of New Jersey concurs with EPA’s Preferred             as specified in the NCP. Alternative 3 satisfies the two
Alternative as presented in this Proposed Plan.                  threshold criteria and achieves the best combination of
                                                                 the five balancing criteria of the comparative analysis.
Community Acceptance                                             This alternative is preferred because it will achieve the
                                                                 RAOs in the shortest amount of time. Monitoring will
Community acceptance of the Preferred Alternative                provide the data to ensure that the RAOs and PRGs are
will be evaluated after the public comment period ends           achieved.
and will be described in the ROD Amendment. Based
on public comment, the Preferred Alternative could be            The EPA and NJDEP expect the Preferred Alternative
modified from the version presented in this proposed             to satisfy the following statutory requirements of
plan. The ROD Amendment formalizes the selected                  CERCLA Section 121(b): 1) be protective of human
remedy after EPA has considered all comments                     health and the environment; 2) comply with ARARs; 3)
received during the public comment period.                       be cost effective; 4) utilize permanent solutions and
                                                                 alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery
PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE                                            technologies to the maximum extent practicable; and 5)
                                                                 satisfy the preference for treatment as a principal
The Preferred Alternative for achieving remedial action          element. EPA will assess the modifying criteria of
objectives for the exposed sediment/soil of the                  community acceptance in the Record of Decision
Blackwater Branch floodplain impacted by site-related            Amendment following the close of the public comment
contamination is Alternative 3 (In-Situ Treatment, Hot           period.
Spot Excavation, and Performance Monitoring). This
alternative consists of installation of in-situ treatment          FOR FURTHER INFORMATION
technologies to prevent recontamination of the exposed
sediment/soil to concentrations above PRGs,                        The Administrative Record file, which contains copies
excavation of localized areas of sediment/soil in the              of the Proposed Plan and supporting documentation is
Blackwater Branch floodplain with concentrations of                available at the following locations:
contaminants above PRGs, and performance
monitoring to assure the remedy is effective and assess            EPA Region 2 Superfund Records Center
the need for additional in-situ treatment and/or                   290 Broadway, 18th Floor
excavation. This is considered an interim remedial                 New York, New York 10007-1866
                                                                   (212) 637-4308
action that will be revisited at a future date once the
                                                                   Hours: Monday-Friday – 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
long-term effectiveness as a part of the remedy for all
operable units of the site is evaluated.                           Vineland City Library
                                                                   1058 East Landis Ave.
The in-situ technology that will be used depends on the            Vineland, New Jersey 08360
geochemistry and subsurface conditions in each                     For Library Hours:
particular location. The actual technology will be                 http://www.vinelandlibrary.org/
selected during the Remedial Design. For the purposes
of cost estimation the following were used as                      In addition, select documents from the administrative
representative technologies: air sparging in iron rich             record are available on-line at:
groundwater environments; iron chloride injection in               www.epa.gov/superfund/vineland-chemical
addition to air sparging in iron poor groundwater                  In addition, select documents from the administrative
environments; sodium bicarbonate or sodium hydroxide               record are available on-line at:
injections for pH adjustments. As noted above, the final
selection of the in-situ treatment technology appropriate          http://www.epa.gov/region2/superfund/npl/vineland/
for each area of the site will be made after further
studies during remedial design.




                                                            11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        1




    3   2




    4




    6       5




    3




8           7





        9




        :




                                             




                                          




                                                 




                                          




                                                  
                                          




                                              




                                                  




                                          




                                              




                                          




                                                  
                                          




                                              




                                          




                                          
                                          




                                              




                                              




                                              




                                          




                Figure 1: Site Location

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Figure 2: Operable Unit Identification

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                ?
                                                                                                        




                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ?




                                                                                                                                                                                            ?




                                                                                    ?
                                                                                                                                    ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ?


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                        ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                         ?




                                                                                                        ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ?
                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                            ??
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                ?




                                                                                                        ?
                                                                                                                                    ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ?




                                                                                                                            




                                                                        ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ?




                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ?



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                            ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

                                                                                




                                                                                    ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                    ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                            ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                    




                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ?




                                                                    




                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ?




                                                                                        




                                                                                                                        

                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                            ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                    ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ?




                                                                                    



                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                            ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                    ?




                                                                                                ?
                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ?



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                            ?
                                                                                                                                    ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ?




                                                                




                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                




                                                                




                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ?




                                                                        ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                    ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ?




                                                                                                                                        ?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

                                                




                                                                                                                                                                

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ?




                                                




                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                ?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ?




                                                                    ?




                                                                                                    


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                        ?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                



                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                


                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                            ?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                    ?




                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ?




                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                        ?
                                                                                                                                        ?




                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    ?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                    
                                            ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ?




                                                                                                                                                            ?




                                                                                                                    




                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ?




                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                        



                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                    ?




                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                            




                                                                                                            
                                                                                                ?




Figure 3: Delineation of Areas A, B and C

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Attachment B

Public Notice

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

A8 • FRIDAY, JULY 22, 2016                                                                      LOCAL                                                               THE PRESS OF ATLANTIC CITY


CLOSING                                            VINEL AND                                                                                                            SCHOOL AID
                                         LAND
Continued from A1                                                                                                                                                       Continued from A3




                                 IVE
                                             IS AVE
                                                   NUE




                                EA DR




                                           BOUL HWEST
                                                    D



                                                                T
  A spokeswoman said




                                               EVAR



                                                          STREE
                                                          6TH
the Progresso brand will                                                                                                                                                   Christie’s plan would

                              DELS



                                           SOUT
                                                    ALMO
continue making soup                               STREE ND                                                                                                             distribute aid on a per-
                                                        T
in other plants. But         General Mills/                                                                                                                             student basis, with each
Kelsey Roemhildt of          Progresso plant CHESTNU                                                                                                                    student worth about
                                                     AVEN   T
General Mills couldn’t                                   UE                                                                                                             $6,600 in state aid. Under
say how many of that                   WALN                                                                                                                             that plan, the township
                                            UT RO
                                                 AD
giant food company’s 30           ELME
                                      R ROA                                                                                                                             would get an extra $8.7
                                           D      FEET
other production plants                                                                                                                                                 million per year.
                                               0       500
cook Progresso soups.                                                                                                                                                      School board President
  “As a category, canned                                                                                                                                                James Galvin said the
                                  NEW JERSEY
soup has been declining                                                                                                                                                 board cut $8 million this
                              VINELAND          Hamilton
for some time,” she said.                       Twp.     ATLANTIC                                                                                                       year to stay within the
  Brian String, presi-       Bridgeton
                                                          COUNTY                                                                                                        state spending cap.
                                                    EHT
dent of UFCW Local                  Millville            Atlantic                                                                                                          “We are one of the
152, said his union rep-     CUMBERLAND
                                                         City                                                                                                           worst in underfunding,”
                                                CAPE MAY Atlantic
resents about 275            COUNTY
                                                COUNTY Ocean                                                                                                            he said. “We have
Progresso workers. He        Delaware Bay
                                                                                                                             CRAIG MATTHEWS / STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER
                                                                                                                                                                        begged and begged, but
said the closing                                                    Nelly Lorenzana, of Vineland, is one of hundreds of workers affected by the Progresso plant’s       it falls on deaf ears.”
announcement came            KRISHNA MATHIAS / PRESS GRAPHIC        planned closing in 2017. General Mills spokeswoman Kelsey Roemhildt says, ‘We’ll start back            Sweeney, a Democrat,
just two months after                                               up on our regularly scheduled shifts Monday, and we hope to begin discussions with the              said his plan is more fair,
union members ratified          But the company’s                   unions in the coming weeks.’ More photos and a video are with this story at PressofAC.com.          because it would fund
a four-year contract.        highlighting its Vine-                                                                                                                     every district at 100 per-
  “People here are           land roots in those ads                time.                           to other companies.              the company.”                      cent of what it should
angry, and I don’t blame     has a bad taste to him                    U.S. Rep. Frank                 “We’re confident we             Progresso’s own                  receive under the formu-
them,” String said           now.                                   LoBiondo, R-2nd, is not         can fill this plant,” she        longevity dates to 1927,           la, though he said that
Thursday. “During four          “The point was that                 optimistic about con-           said via Twitter.                when the founding                  would mean some dis-
months of bargaining,        this was a homemade                    vincing General Mills to           Still, Roemhildt, the         Taormina and Uddo                  tricts that have been over-
the company never            type of soup, made right               stay in Vineland.               General Mills spokes-            families incorporated it.          funded would lose aid.
hinted that this plant       here in good old                          “They made it pretty         woman, called the clos-          In 1942, they opened                  “But how can you argue
might close. Its negotia-    Vineland,” he said. “It’s              clear to (Lt. Gov. Kim          ing “tentative,” not final.      their first Vineland plant         with everyone being
tors never asked for         mind-boggling that they                Guadagno) and me and               “We’ll start back up          on Chestnut Avenue,                treated the same?” he
concessions that our         could run those ads and                the union president that        on our regularly sched-          and started cooking                asked.
members surely would         all of a sudden decide to              the decision is irre-           uled shifts Monday, and          minestrone, lentil and                The plan would cost
have granted to keep         close that plant.”                     versible,” said LoBiondo,       we hope to begin dis-            other soups favored by             an additional $500 mil-
the plant open.”                Progresso’s South                   who used to deliver to          cussions with the                Italian-Americans.                 lion, phased in as $100
  State Sen. Jeff Van        Jersey roots were high-                Progresso and haul out          unions in the coming               The families sold                million per year over
Drew, D-Cape May,            lighted last year in ads:              loads of soup when he           weeks,” she said.                Progresso in 1969; a               five years.
Cumberland, Atlantic,        “In Vineland, it’s all                 worked at his family’s             String called the             year later, the company               Sen, Jim Whelan, D-
called the announce-         about the flavor.”                     Vineland trucking firm.         recent contract negotia-         built its current Vine-            Atlantic, said the Repub-
ment “heartbreaking”            Camden-based Camp-                     “It’s devastating news,      tions “standard, tough           land plant. It has been            lican governor’s plan
but held out hope it         bell’s Soup Co. com-                   and it’s unconscionable         bargaining, like it always       bought and sold by a               makes a good sound
could change.                plained those commer-                  how poorly they have            is.” He added that the           collection of big food             bite but is not equitable.
  “We must keep in           cials falsely implied                  handled this,” LoBiondo         workers even got raises          companies, including                  “Kids from Pleasant-
mind that the plant is       most Progresso soups                   said. “They really just         in their new deal.               Pillsbury, Pet and                 ville had higher needs
not going to close tom-      were Vineland-made                     hit us with a 2-by-4, and          But now, “I feel like         General Mills, which               than kids from Lin-
orrow. We have until next    with local produce. An                 that’s not the way to do        (the closing) is a done          bought the brand in                wood,” he said.
summer to see if the         arm of the Council of                  business. It’s not the          deal,” he said. “They’ve         2001.                                 Sweeney asked officials
plant can be retooled or     Better Business Bureaus                way to treat employees          closed other plants,               Roemhildt said the               to promote the plan to
changed, if products can     ruled the commercials                  at a plant that was prof-       mostly union plants.”            closing is no reflection           residents and have them
be changed or anything,”     gave an “unsupported                   itable for a long time.”           String said Progresso         on the workers.                    write to their legislators.
he said, although he         message that most ...                     Guadagno also                “pays people living                “It’s about excess                  Mayor James “Sonny”
added that officials will    ingredients are sourced                sounded resigned to             wages,” but they’re “all         capacity in our soup               McCullough said he got
look for other compa-        in Vineland.” General                  Progresso’s departure           over the board. ... A lot        network,” she said.                a call from the Governor’s
nies to fill the plant and   Mills had already                      but said its facilities         of it is predicated on the       Contact: 609-272-7237              Office asking him to
restore some jobs.           stopped the ads at that                could still be attractive       longevity they have with         MDeangelis@pressofac.com           support Christie’s plan.
                                                                                                                                                                           “I’ll support anything
                                                                                                                                                                        that can pass,” he said.
SWAT                       had to touch them,”                                                                                                                             Sweeney said he
Continued from A3          Poprik said. “I’m happy                                                                                                                      believes his plan has
                           this ended without any                                                                                                                       more support.
had not been located,      incident. This is usually                                                                                                                       Officials talked about
police said.               a very peaceful street.                                                                                                                      how as a Pinelands
   Using a search war-     When it was going on, I                                                                                                                      growth area the town-
rant, officers found two had all of my neighbors                                                                                                                        ship expanded rapidly in
handguns inside the        calling me and texting.”                                                                                                                     the 1990s, but state aid
residence, police said.       Poprik described the                                                                                                                      never kept up.
   Tamera Poprik ran to    suspect as a quiet per-                                                                                                                         “At one time, we were
the store only to return   son who had recently                                                                                                                         the fastest-growing mun-
to find police and SWAT moved in.                                                                                                                                       icipality in the state,” said
team members canvass-         During the incident,                                                                                                                      Township Administrator
ing her street. Poprik     Ventnor Avenue was                                                                                                                           Peter Miller. “Now we’re
had left her three boys    closed from Raleigh                                                                                                                          in a big (financial) hole.”
at home in the unit        Avenue to Columbia                                                                                                                              Board member Pete
above the incident.        Avenue.                                                                                                                                      Castellano said he is
   “I went to the store       “I woke up to the                                                                                                                         concerned that even if a
and came back to this,” sound of the police say-                                                                                                                        new formula passes, the
said Poprik, 31, as she    ing come out with your                                                                                                                       Legislature may not
tried to talk to police to hands up,” said Michael                                                                                                                      fund it in the budget
locate her children. “I    Fitchett, Poprik’s 14-                                                                                                                       process, which is what
just want to get my chil- year-old son. “I tried to                                                                                                                     happened with the cur-
dren.”                     prepare my brothers for                                                                            VIVIANA PERNOT / STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER       rent formula, especially
   Poprik was reunited     what was going on. I                     The SWAT team rescued Vincent Poprik, left, 10; Michael Fitchett, 14; and Nick Poprik, right,       during the recession.
with them after about      tried to stay calm.                      11. Tamera Poprik, 31, of Atlantic City, says of her kids, ‘When I saw them, I had to touch            Castellano and board
half an hour.              Luckily, we got out of                   them. I’m happy this ended without any incident. This is usually a very peaceful street.’           member Justin Riggs
   “When I saw them, I     there.”                                                                                                                                      said after the meeting
                                                                      Mazur praised the             comply with the police           apprehended.                       that the full board will
                                                                    department’s trained            officers, they are not           Contact: 609-272-7046              discuss the issue at a
                                                                    personnel and equip-            there to hurt you,” said         NHuba@pressofac.com                public meeting to see if
                                                                    ment, including the             Mazur, who added the             Twitter @ACPressHuba               members want to sup-
                                                                    armored rescue vehicle.         neighbors were clap-             Contact: 609-272-7202              port Sweeney’s bill.
                                                                      “You may be in a per-         ping and saying thank            VJackson@pressofac.com             Contact: 609-272-7241
                                                                    sonal crisis, but if you        you after Holley was             Twitter @ACPressJackson            DDamico@pressofac.com



                                                                                                                                       Wawa has 4-state hunt
                                                                                                                                       in yearlong coffee caper
                                                                                                                                       BRIAN IANIERI                           thefts in
                                                                                                                                       Staff Writer                            March and
                                                                                                                                                                               April, the
                                                                                                                                         WEST GOSHEN, Pa. —                    female is
                                                                                                                                       A woman who has                         wearing
                                                                                                                                       stolen nearly $3,000                    scrubs, and
                                                                                                                                       worth of Wawa coffee                    it is possible
                                                                                                                                       over the past year may    SUSPECT       she is a trav-
                                                                                                                                       be losing sleep at night.               eling health
                                                                                                                                         Authorities say they    care worker,” police said.
                                                                                                                                       have pictures of her and     Wawa surveillance
                                                                                                                                       are asking for help to    cameras captured at
                                                                                                                                       identify her.             least two different vehi-
                                                                                                                                         Police said the woman cles the woman has
                                                                                                                                       stole bagged coffee from driven: a silver sedan
                                                                                                                                       convenience stores 40 to and a maroon sport util-
                                                                                                                                       50 times in New Jersey,   ity vehicle.
                                                                                                                                       Pennsylvania, Delaware       Anyone with informa-
                                                                                                                                       and Maryland.             tion is asked to call
                                                                                                                                         “Wawa believes the      police at 610-696-7400.
                                                                                                                                       thefts began in early        Wawa has more than
                                                                                                                                       2016 and are ongoing,”    650 convenience stores in
                                                                                                                                       the department in         New Jersey, Delaware,
                                                                                                                                       Chester County said.      Maryland, Pennsylvania,
                                                                                                                                         The woman is appar-     Virginia and Florida. It’s
                                                                                                                                       ently not drinking the    the 36th largest private
                                                                                                                                       coffee, though. Police    firm in America with near-
                                                                                                                                       said she steals bags of   ly 27,000 employees and
                                                                                                                                       coffee from one store     about $9 billion in rev-
                                                                                                                                       and returns them to       enue, according to Forbes.
                                                                                                                                       another Wawa for cash.    Contact: 609-272-7253
                                                                                                                                         “In several of the      BIanieri@pressofac.com

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      Attachment C

Public Meeting Transcripts

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       1



1        VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SUPERFUND SITE

2        BLACKWATER BRANCH EXPOSED SEDIMENT/SOIL

3                  PUBLIC MEETING

4

5                    - - -

6             Monday, August 8, 2016

7                    - - -

8

9                        Hearing held in the
     above-captioned matter at Vineland City Hall -
10   City Council Chambers, 640 East Wood Street,
     Vineland, New Jersey, 08360 at 6:30 p.m., there
11   being present:

12

13
      WANDA AYALA, COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT COORDINATOR
14
      MICHAEL SIBAK, ACTING BRANCH CHIEF
15
      STEPHANIE VAUGHN, ACTING SECTION CHIEF
16
      HUNTER YOUNG, REMEDIAL PROJECT MANAGER
17
      ABBEY STATES, HUMAN HEALTH RISK ASSESSOR
18

19

20

21                     - - -

22

23

24

25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          2



1              WANDA AYALA:   Thank you for coming to

2    our meeting.   This meeting is to discuss the

3    proposed plan for the Vineland Chemical Company

4    Superfund Site.   As you guys know, the public

5    comment period is from July 22nd through August

6    22nd.   We're required by Superfund Law to have a

7    transcript of these proceeding.   That's why we

8    have the stenographer, Kate, here recording it

9    for us.   I'm accompanied today by Hunter Young,

10   who is the project manager for the Vineland

11   Chemical Site.    We have Stephanie Vaughn, who is

12   the acting chief for the Mega Projects Section,

13   Michael Sivak, who is acting branch chief for

14   the Special Projects Branch, and we have Abbey

15   States, who is our risk assessor.

16             I'd like to acknowledge any local

17   officials, besides Dale, that are attending.

18   Please put your phones on vibrate so we don't

19   disrupt the meeting and we're going to take

20   comments and questions after the presentation.

21             STEPHANIE VAUGHN:   Hi, everyone.   I'm

22   just going to very quickly go through the

23   Superfund process.   This site is on the national

24   priorities list, otherwise known as the

25   Superfund List, and there is a lengthy process

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            3



1    for determining if a site is eligible to be put

2    on the list and be eligible for federal funds

3    and efforts, and then there's a lengthy process

4    once the site is on the list.   So basically we

5    start out with a preliminary assessment and site

6    inspection and determine if it warrants being on

7    the list.    This particular site, the Vineland

8    Chemical, was listed way back in the '80s.    So

9    this has been on the Superfund List for a very

10   long time.

11               Once it is determined that it is on the

12   list, we initiate what's called a remedial

13   investigation where we investigate the site.      We

14   look at all the different media, the soil, the

15   sediment, the groundwater, whatever is

16   appropriate, the surface water, and we determine

17   the nature and extent of the contamination.    We

18   determine where the contamination came from and

19   where it is going.   We also do things like look

20   at the site history to determine how the

21   contamination got there, what the operations of

22   the facility were, what the ownership history

23   was.   We look for parties that may be

24   responsible for the contamination and try to

25   both hold them responsible and also to gain

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         4



1    information from people who may have been

2    involved, so that we just gain an understanding

3    of what happens at the site and what we may

4    expect to find.   Then we follow it up with

5    appropriate investigations to see what is

6    present.

7               Once we finish that, we also do a risk

8    assessment during that process.   We determine

9    the risk posed by that site to both human health

10   and the environment.   Once we complete that

11   process, assuming we find there are

12   unacceptable, then we do what's called a

13   Feasibility Study.   We determine how the

14   contamination at the site should be addressed.

15   We evaluate a number of options, including no

16   action.    We would do that whether there were

17   risks or not, but we evaluate a series of

18   remedies for the site, and then we, EPA, come up

19   with what we think is the best option for the

20   site.   Then we put out what's called a proposed

21   plan and that is the point in the process that

22   we are at now.    You may have all seen or have

23   copies of the proposed plan for this part of

24   this site.   Hunter will get into that into more

25   detail.    This site was divided into several

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            5



1    different pieces or operable units.

2                With the proposed plan, there's a 30-day

3    public comment period where people can read

4    about it.   They can ask us questions.   We hold

5    this public meeting.   They can submit comments,

6    either verbally or in writing.   And at end of

7    that 30-day process or however long it ends up

8    being, we issue what's called a Record of

9    Decision and that is our path forward for that

10   site or the section of the site.

11               In this particular case, what we are

12   looking to do is actually an amendment to the

13   original Record of Decision for this site that

14   was signed in '89.   So then once we make a

15   determination on how to proceed, we move into

16   remedial design and remedial action stage.    Once

17   we sign the Record of Decision, we will start

18   designing the remedy, figuring out all the

19   details of how we actually implement what might

20   be a conceptual idea in the Feasibility Study,

21   and then we implement that in remedial action.

22               Finally, at some point we finish our

23   work, construction completion.   We go to

24   operations and maintenance as necessary and

25   eventually the site may be deleted from the

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           6



1    Superfund List, if possible.   Throughout this

2    whole process, there is community involvement

3    and that's a key part of the process, to hear

4    what the public has to say and their input.

5    People have lived in this community for a long

6    time, and they really know things about the area

7    and about the site and about potential future

8    uses, and many other things that we just can't

9    know.   So it's a valuable part of our process,

10   and we also try to keep in mind re-use of the

11   site throughout the whole process.   That's

12   ultimately what we want to do, return these

13   sites to productive use for the communities.     I

14   think that's it.

15             HUNTER YOUNG:   So that brings us here to

16   Vineland and the Vineland Chemical Company

17   Superfund Site.    More specifically, here in

18   Vineland, we have the site itself right here and

19   we're looking at the Blackwater Branch today.

20   That's the part of the site we're going to be

21   talking about.    Here you have the Maurice River,

22   which that drains into, and that actually leads

23   to Union Lake.    The Vineland Chemical Company is

24   an old herbicide and fungicide plant, started

25   operations in 1949 and operated until 1994.     In

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            7



1    the '60s, New Jersey Department of Health

2    observed some untreated wastewater dumping into

3    some unlined lagoons.   This resulted in some

4    contamination in of the groundwater, which

5    eventually contaminated surface water bodies,

6    and the soil in the surrounding area became

7    contaminated.

8              Eventually, in 1989, we signed a Record

9    of Decision outlining a clean up for the site.

10   Here's a picture taken quite a while ago,

11   probably '90s.   You can see Vineland Chemical

12   Site is here.    This is the Blackwater Branch,

13   eventually leading out to the Maurice River.      So

14   the Record of Decision broke the site up into

15   four different operable units.   Operable units

16   are ways that EPA breaks Superfund sites, breaks

17   it down categorically, to make it more

18   manageable.   We break them down by area:   North,

19   south, east, west.    We break it down by media.

20   So maybe it is groundwater, surface water, air.

21   For Vineland Chemical, we broke it into four

22   sites:   First, site soil; second, groundwater;

23   third, the river area and sediments, which is

24   Blackwater Branch and the Maurice River; and

25   fourth, Union Lake.   Here's a little diagram of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           8



1    the different operable units.    You can see a

2    groundwater plume over here.    That's Unit 2.

3    The site itself over here, Unit 1.   Here is

4    Blackwater Branch and Maurice River.   That's

5    Unit 3.    Downstream you've got Union Lake.

6                So just to talk a little bit more about

7    the site history, in 1984, it was added to the

8    National Priorities List, as Stephanie mentioned

9    earlier.    In 1989, signed the ROD or Record of

10   Decision.   In March of 2000, we started

11   groundwater pump-and-treat to contain the

12   groundwater plume and contain contamination and

13   treat that groundwater.   In December 2007, we

14   completed cleaning the soil on site and we began

15   cleaning up Blackwater Branch.   So we went in

16   and we dredged the river.   However, in 2010, we

17   found recontamination happening.   We found some

18   seeps in groundwater discharging out of the

19   floodplain and recontaminating those sediments.

20   In 2012, we finished the clean up of Blackwater

21   Branch that was outlined in the original Record

22   of Decision.   In 2014, we transferred the

23   groundwater treatment to the State of New

24   Jersey, and then here we are today moving

25   forward to the proposed plan, which is going to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          9



1    address that recontamination that we talked

2    about earlier.

3                Here's a picture of what it looks more

4    like today.   Here is the site now.   Some of

5    these buildings are actually gone now.    Here's

6    Blackwater Branch.   You can see how it's

7    engineered.   This is actually what we did while

8    we were realigning this draining.     We built a

9    new stream channel and then took the old stream

10   channel, cleaned it out.   Then, eventually,

11   after this photo was taken, set that stream back

12   into its old channel.   So we are here now to do

13   this ROD Amendment because we found

14   recontamination and we found that we need to

15   make a decision to change that remedy in order

16   to address the recontamination.   The Record of

17   Decision documents remedial action.    The ROD

18   Amendment is when a fundamental change needs to

19   be made to the remedy and that's what we believe

20   needs to happen.   And, specifically, within

21   Operable Unit 3, which is the river area

22   sediment.   We're specifically talking about

23   Blackwater Branch and just the exposed sediment

24   in Blackwater Branch.   This is where we kept

25   seeing these seeps of recontamination.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            10



1             We did some sediment sampling between

2    2010 and 2015, and we confirmed that

3    recontamination was happening.   That sampling

4    led us to point out three distinct areas.      We've

5    been calling them Areas A, B, and C.    These are

6    three areas of our main focus, but there is the

7    option of other areas being included.   We looked

8    at these three areas and we completed some bench

9    scale and pilot studies.   These are test things

10   that you do in a laboratory and small tests in

11   the field to determine the effectiveness of

12   different treatments.   We used this information

13   to develop Focus Feasibility Study.    Focus

14   Feasibility Study outlines several different

15   remedial actions that we can take and compares

16   them against each other to see which one is most

17   effective.   We also looked at risk.   We looked

18   at how contamination of the site effects human

19   health, and we looked at how it effects

20   ecological health.

21            Then we outlined goals and objectives

22   for our Record of Decision Amendment.   We

23   decided one of our main goals was going to be

24   reducing arsenic contamination in the sediment

25   and, second, would be to prevent those from

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           11



1    being recontaminated.   So we want to clean it

2    up, and we want to make sure it stays clean.     We

3    outlined a sediment clean-up goal of

4    19-milligrams per kilogram, which is the state

5    standard.   We put forth a proposed plan out of

6    three different alternatives.   The first

7    alternative was no action, which is required

8    under the Superfund process.    It acts as a

9    baseline to compare the other alternatives

10   against.    The second alternative was Ongoing Hot

11   Spot Excavation.    The third alternative was

12   In-Situ Treatment, Hot Spot Excavation,

13   Performance Monitoring.

14               Alternative 1, not even going to talk

15   about anymore.   Alternative 2, is Ongoing Hot

16   Spot Excavations.   So we would periodically go

17   in and dig out the contaminated sediments.      We

18   estimated approximated every three months we

19   have to dig up and dispose of them off-site.

20   Alternative 3, In-Situ Treatment, Hot Spot

21   Excavation, Performance Monitoring.    The in-situ

22   treatment is going to be a chemical treatment in

23   place.   We can implement this remedy without

24   having to remove the media that we're treating.

25   So with this remedy, we would sort of do a

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         12



1    surgical approach and apply in-situ treatment,

2    excavation, and monitoring in all of the areas

3    in order to effectively clean up the sediment.

4    So we would go in and, you know, sometimes we

5    might have to do excavation up front in order to

6    clean up some already contaminated sediments,

7    and then we would implement in-situ treatment to

8    prevent them from becoming contaminated, and we

9    would do some monitoring to make sure that it

10   doesn't become recontaminated.

11             So we took those three alternatives and

12   we compared them against nine criteria that are

13   in Superfund process.   The first two, and the

14   most important, are overall protection of human

15   health and the environment.   Second, is

16   compliance with applicable or relevant and

17   appropriate requirements, which are state and

18   federal laws.   Then we look at the balancing

19   criteria, long-term effectiveness and

20   permanence, reduction of toxicity, mobility, or

21   volume through treatment, short-term

22   effectiveness, implementability, is this

23   technically feasible, and of course, we look at

24   cost.   Lastly are the ongoing criteria that we

25   look at, which are state acceptance and

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         13



1    community acceptance.   We always want the state

2    to agree with our remedy, and we always want the

3    community to agree with our remedy.   We went

4    through that process and we determined

5    Alternative 3 to be the most effective

6    treatment, which is in-situ treatment, the

7    excavation, and the monitoring.

8             This satisfies the two important

9    threshold criteria, achieves the best

10   combination of all five of the balancing

11   criteria, and achieves our remedial action

12   objectives and our community goals.   So, again,

13   to touch on in-situ treatment just to make sure

14   everyone understands, these are technologies

15   that are place.   Some examples of those would be

16   air sparging, injecting air into the ground,

17   other chemical injections, PH adjustments,

18   reactive barriers.   The final such of the type

19   of technology that we use will be made after we

20   do further studies and more testing throughout

21   the remedial design phase.   As we learn more

22   about the site, we will identify exactly what

23   type of treatment technology we need.

24            So the next steps are to sign the Record

25   of Decision, develop remedial action plan,

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            14



1    implement the remedy.     Hopefully, all that will

2    go well.   Then we are going to eventually look

3    at other contamination that is part of the

4    Vineland site.   We might need to re-evaluate the

5    groundwater.    We're going to look at Union Lake

6    downstream, and we're always monitoring Maurice

7    River.   So public comment period lasts through

8    August 22nd.    You can write comments to me

9    specifically.    My address and e-mail are on the

10   website and they're on the proposed plan.      We

11   will also accept comments in this meeting

12   verbally or written.    That's all.    Any

13   questions?

14              WANDA AYALA:    Comments?

15              HUNTER YOUNG:   Thank you.

16              WANDA AYALA:    The meeting is adjourned.

17   Thank you so much for coming.

18                      - - -

19              (Whereupon, the hearing was concluded at

20   approximately 6:55 p.m.)

21                      - - -

22

23

24

25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             15



1                CERTIFICATE

2                    - - -

3

4    I hereby certify that the witness was duly sworn

5    by me and that the deposition is a true record

6    of the testimony given by the witness.

7

8

9

10   ________________________________

11   KATE M. REGENSBURGER
     Professional Court Reporter
12   Notary Public

13

14

15
  (The foregoing certification of this transcript does not apply
16   to any reproduction of the same by any means,
     unless under the direct control and/or
17   supervision of the certifying reporter.)

18

19                   - - -

20

21

22

23

24

25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  Attachment D

Written Comments

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Young, Hunter

From:                             Jones Dale <djones@vinelandcity.org>
Sent:                             Tuesday, August 09, 2016 3:39 PM
To:                               Young, Hunter
Cc:                               Mayors Office; Fanucci Anthony R; Tonetta Richard; Dickinson(Health) Robert; Dickenson
                                  Bob; Lopez Emma
Subject:                          Vineland Chemical Company Super Fund Site


Hunter,
    Please accept this email as comment to the EPA’s proposed plan to amend the approach to remediate contaminated
exposed sediment/soil of the Blackwater Branch floodplain that is associated with the Vineland Chemical Company
Superfund site located in Vineland, New Jersey. I was in attendance at your August 8, 2016 public meeting which was
held at City Hall regarding this matter. During this meeting you discussed the remedial action objectives and three
remedial alternatives in addressing the contaminated sediment/soil in the floodplain of the Blackwater Branch.
Presently there is groundwater that is discharging in the Blackwater Branch in certain areas and is recontaminating the
sediment within the floodplain of the Blackwater Branch. I support the EPA’s decision to use alternate #3 which is the in-
situ treatment, hot spot excavation and performance monitoring as an amendment to the original plan. Hopefully this
alternative will provide a more permanent solution to the area being recontaminated. The in-situ technology will be
monitored and adjusted as needed which makes more sense than constantly removing the soil/sediment each time it is
recontaminated and not addressing the source.

Respectfully submitted.

Dale Jones
Health Director
Vineland Health Department
640 E. Wood Street, Vineland NJ 08360
P]856-794-4000 *4115
F]856-405-4608
E]djones@vinelandcity.org

Visit our website at www.vldhealth.org




                                                            1
