LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES FOR OU1 FOR THE FRIED INDUSTRIES SITE
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/407772
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 4ab4e452cfd52a269fa5e7e84a07ae0e07489c341ff9e931ca97293e3a17b0ab
Source PDF pages: 6
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                    EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES

                          FRIED INDUSTRIES SUPERFUND SITE


Site Name and Location

Fried Industries Superfund Site
Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey

Introduction

This decision document presents an Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) for the Fried
Industries Superfund Site (#NJD041828906), located in East Brunswick Township, New Jersey.

Under Section 117(c) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act of 1980, 42 U.S.C. § 9601 et seq., as amended (CERCLA or Superfund), EPA is
required to publish an ESD when, after issuance of a Record of Decision (ROD), subsequent
enforcement or remedial actions lead to significant, but not fundamental, changes in the selected
site remedy. Sections 300.435(c)(2)(i) and 300.825(a)(2) of the National Oil and Hazardous
Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP) set forth the criteria for issuing an ESD and
requiring that an ESD be published if the remedy is modified in a way that differs significantly in
scope, performance, or cost from the remedy selected in the ROD for the site.

This ESD presents the details of a significant difference to the remedy selected in the June 27,
1994 ROD for the site. This ESD provides a brief history of the site, describes the original
remedy, and explains the rationale for an increase in the scope of the selected remedy subsequent
to the issuance of the 1994 ROD.

This ESD will become part of the Administrative Record for the site (NCP 300.825(a)(2)), which
has been developed in accordance with § 113 (k) of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. § 9613 (k).

This ESD and the Administrative Record are available for review online at
www.epa.gov/superfund/fried-industries and at the information repository maintained at the
Reference Desk, East Brunswick Library, 2 Jean Walling Civic Center Drive, East Brunswick,
New Jersey 08816. The ESD and the Administrative Record are also available for review at the
U.S. EPA Region 2 Administrative Record File Room, 290 Broadway, 18th Floor, New York,
New York 10007, Monday - Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.

Statement of Purpose

The purpose of this ESD is to add institutional controls as a component of the selected remedy.
Institutional controls are non-engineering measures, usually legal controls, intended to limit
human activity in such a way as to prevent or reduce exposure to hazardous substances. This
ESD documents that an institutional control, in the form of a Classification Exception Area/Well
Restriction Area (CEA/WRA), has been filed to enhance the remedy’s protectiveness by

                                                                                      *407772*
                                                                                           407772

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

reducing the future risk of ingestion of contaminated groundwater by potential users in the
vicinity of the site.

Site History and Contamination

Site History

The Fried Industries site is located at 11 Fresh Ponds Road in the Township of East Brunswick,
Middlesex County, New Jersey. The Fried Industries property is approximately 26 acres located
in a predominantly residential setting. The site contains a three-acre pond located in a former
clay borrow pit, a marsh area, several wetland areas, and woodland/upland areas. Surface water
at the site drains to an unnamed stream that flows north towards Bog Brook, which empties into
Lawrence Brook, a tributary of the Raritan River. The site is underlain by unconsolidated
overburden materials and bedrock. In both the shallow overburden aquifer and the bedrock
aquifer, groundwater flow is in a north to north-northeasterly direction.

From 1906 to 1920, the Milltown Sand and Clay Company operated a clay quarry at the site.
Once quarry operations ceased, no significant activities are known to have occurred at the site
until 1965, when Fried Industries, Inc. began operations. For more than 20 years, Fried Industries
manufactured industrial strength aqueous detergent solutions, floor-finishing products,
adhesives, algaecides, and other chemical products. Fried also leased facilities at the site to other
companies for the manufacture of automotive antifreeze products.

The site was placed on the National Priorities List in 1986.

Initial Response

In 1983, the Township of East Brunswick Department of Health and the Middlesex County
Department of Health collected well water and septic tank samples at the site. The samples
contained volatile organic compounds (VOCs) at concentrations ranging up to 2,000 parts per
billion, above the applicable standards. EPA and other federal, state, county, and local agencies
obtained a search warrant to inspect the site in December 1983. Additional samples indicated the
presence of soil contamination, likely caused by multiple chemical spills and improper storage of
hazardous wastes.

Site Contamination

Investigations indicated the presence of many sources of contamination, including buried,
leaking, and improperly stored drums, drum spill areas, and stained soil areas. Process
wastewaters and other contaminated waters from drum storage and handling areas had been
discharged directly to the ground surface. Other sources of contamination included abandoned
laboratory equipment and chemicals, and contaminated process and septic tanks.

In 1985, EPA pumped approximately 7,000 gallons of process and septic wastes from
underground tanks and transported the wastes off-site for treatment and disposal. The Township




                                                 2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

of East Brunswick provided hookups to the public water supply for homes still using residential
wells as their source of potable water.

On April 30, 1985, EPA notified Mr. Philip S. Fried, the property owner at the time, in writing
that it intended to conduct a remedial investigation and feasibility study (RI/FS) at the site. The
RI/FS was subsequently undertaken by contractors funded by EPA. On May 26, 1987, a consent
decree relating to the site was entered in the U.S. District Court, District of New Jersey. Under
the terms of that consent decree, Mr. Fried agreed to cease all manufacturing and production
operations at the site and to allow federal officials and agents to enter the site for activities
related to the RI/FS.

EPA funded a Phase I RI in December 1987 to evaluate the physical characteristics, the sources
of contamination, and the nature, magnitude and extent of contamination at the site. The Phase I
RI sample results indicated significant soil contamination in the vicinity of the site buildings. In
addition, EPA determined that many of the drums and containers at the site contained hazardous
materials and required removal. EPA authorized a Superfund removal action in September 1989
to install a security fence and remove and dispose of nearly 1,200 drums/containers and 4,200
laboratory items containing solid and liquid hazardous materials. This removal action was
completed in February 1992 and greatly reduced the immediate threat of exposure to hazardous
substances.

EPA funded a Phase II RI in October 1991, including the advancement of soil borings, the
installation of monitoring wells, the performance of an aquifer pump test, and a wetlands
evaluation. Analyses of samples collected from surface water, groundwater, sediments, and
surface and subsurface soils indicated contamination at the site in areas located away from the
buildings and structures.

The chemicals of concern identified in soil were arsenic and VOCs. The chemicals of concern
identified in groundwater were chlorinated VOCs, predominantly 1,1,1-trichloroethane and
associated breakdown products, and benzene. Some or all of the contaminants identified are
hazardous substances as defined in § 104(14) of CERCLA, 42, U.S.C. § 9601(14), and 40 C.F.R.
§ 302.4.

Selected Remedy

On June 27, 1994, EPA signed a ROD which selected the remedy to clean up the Fried Industries
site. The remedial action objectives of the 1994 ROD are as follows:

   •   Prevent exposure to areas with arsenic concentrations in surface soils (approximately 900
       cubic yards greater than 27 parts per million); and

   •   Restore contaminated groundwater, in the shallow and bedrock aquifers, to applicable
       drinking water standards.

The major components of the remedy selected in the 1994 ROD include the following:




                                                 3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   •   Excavation, and off-site treatment and disposal, of approximately 900 cubic yards of
       surface soil contaminated with arsenic;

   •   Excavation, and off-site treatment and disposal, of approximately 2,700 cubic yards of
       soil contaminated with VOCs;

   •   Extraction of groundwater contaminated with VOCs from the bedrock and shallow
       aquifers, with on-site treatment and discharge to surface water; and

   •   Appropriate environmental monitoring to ensure the effectiveness of the remedy.

Remedy Implementation


EPA implemented the design and construction of the remedy in four phases. The first phase
involved demolition of the building complex and removal of all on-site aboveground structures,
including buildings, tanks, railroad cars, and loading ramps to facilitate soil excavation. The
remedial design of the first phase was completed in 1996 and the work was conducted from 1997
to 1998. The scope of work included the removal and disposal of drums containing investigation
derived waste; the abatement and disposal of asbestos-containing materials (roof, siding, floor
tile, pipe wrap, and insulation block); the demolition and disposal of aboveground storage tanks
and warehouse structures and debris; and the remediation and removal of underground storage
tanks and their contents. These activities are summarized in the 1998 Phase I Remedial Action
Report – Demolition and Disposal.

The second phase involved the soil excavation component of the remedy. The remedial design
for this phase was completed in 1997 and the work was conducted from 1998 to 1999. EPA
removed approximately 15,450 tons of contaminated soils from nine areas of the site, more than
600 55-gallon drums and numerous pails, bottles, tanks, construction debris, and wooden pallets,
and approximately 580,000 gallons of non-hazardous VOC-contaminated water. These activities
are summarized in the 1999 Soils Mitigation Report.

The third phase was an evaluation of the groundwater conditions following the soil excavation
activities. This phase was conducted from 2001 to 2005 and included the advancement of direct
push soil borings for soil and groundwater sample collection, installation of new overburden and
bedrock monitoring wells, rehabilitation of existing wells, surface water and sediment sampling,
and aquifer testing. The analytical data were used in preparing the 2006 Human Health Risk
Assessment, the 2006 Site Conceptual Model, and the 2007 Alternatives Analysis. These
documents updated earlier reports of the environmental conditions at the site and formed the
basis for the design of the groundwater remedy.

The fourth and final phase of the remedy involved the design and construction of the
groundwater extraction and treatment system. The pre-design investigation included vapor
intrusion investigation, bedrock monitoring well installation, and groundwater modeling in 2009.
The remedial design was completed in 2010, the contract was awarded in 2011, and construction
took place from 2011 to 2012. The system includes extraction wells pumping contaminated


                                               4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

groundwater to the surface followed by treatment to remove VOCs, and discharge of the treated
effluent to the unnamed stream in accordance with a permit equivalency under the New Jersey
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System program. The construction is documented in the 2013
Final Interim Remedial Action Report for the Groundwater Extraction and Treatment System
Construction.

System Operation and Maintenance

The system was designed to operate for 30 years. EPA has funded the system operation and
maintenance to date. The first year of operation (shake-down) took place from 2012 to 2013.
Since then, the site has been in the long-term remedial action phase consisting of ongoing
operation and maintenance (O&M) of the groundwater extraction and treatment system. The
O&M manual for the site specifies the procedures for operating, inspecting, and maintaining the
remediation system, and for monitoring the cleanup progress in the groundwater. Annual O&M
reports have been issued after each year of operation.

Description of Significant Differences and Basis for the ESD

Institutional controls were not included in the 1994 ROD. This ESD adds institutional controls as
a component of the remedy to enhance the protectiveness of the remedy. Institutional controls
are non-engineering measures, usually legal controls, intended to limit human activity in such a
way as to prevent or reduce exposure to hazardous substances.

A CEA/WRA is an institutional control that provides notice of groundwater pollution in a
localized area and protects human health by reducing the future risk of ingestion of contaminated
groundwater by potential users in that area. Because a CEA/WRA prevents water supply wells
from being drilled within the designated CEA/WRA area, it provides additional long-term
protectiveness until groundwater standards are achieved. A full description of the CEA/WRA
requirements is found in the New Jersey Administrative Code in Section 7:26E-8.3.

The CEA/WRA for the site was filed on March 9, 2017. The contaminants subject to the
CEA/WRA are chlorinated VOCs, predominantly 1,1,1-trichloroethane and associated
breakdown products, and benzene. The CEA/WRA covers approximately 6 acres to a depth of
approximately 100 feet below ground surface and is expected to remain in place for
approximately 22 years.

Support Agency Comments

EPA consulted with the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and provided it
with the opportunity to comment on this ESD in accordance with NCP § 300.435 (c)(2) and
§ 300.435 (c)(2)(i) and CERCLA § 121(f). The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection concurred with this ESD in correspondence dated March 21, 2017.




                                                5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Statutory Determination

EPA has determined that these significant changes comply with the statutory requirements of
CERCLA § 121,42 U.S.C. § 9621, are protective of human health and the environment, comply
with Federal and State requirements that are applicable or relevant and appropriate to the
remedial action, are cost-effective, and utilize permanent solutions and alternative treatment
technologies to the maximum extent practicable.

Public Participation

The public participation requirements set out in the NCP, at § 300.435(c)(2), have been met by
publishing this ESD, making it available to the public in the Administrative Record, and
publishing a notice summarizing the ESD in a major local newspaper.

Authorizing Signature

1 have determined that the remedy for the Fried Industries site, as modified by this ESD, is
protective of human health and the environment, and will remain so provided the actions
presented in this ESD are implemented as described above. This ESD documents the significant
changes related to the remedy at the Site.

EPA selected these changes with the concurrence of New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.

U.S. EnvironmentaL otection Agency




John Prince, Acting Director
Emergency and Remedial Response Division

Date;
           I
               I
