LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: RECORD OF DECISION FOR OU1 FOR THE MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SITE
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/528291
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 393a8e828d5030f791c1fa7d83906f4ec8919b99ccabe4767ca20d7a61d5d15d
Source PDF pages: 156
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                        Record of Decision

                Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site

Operable Unit 1: Contaminated Potable Wells at Residential Properties

                          Byram Township
                     Sussex County, New Jersey




           United States Environmental Protection Agency

                              Region 2

                          September 2017



                                                                        *528291*
                                                                          528291

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              DECLARATION STATEMENT
                                 RECORD OF DECISION


SITE NAME AND LOCATION

Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site (NJN000206345), Byram Township, Sussex County, New
Jersey. Operable Unit 1 – Contaminated Potable Wells at Residential Properties.

STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

This decision document presents the remedy selected to address contaminated potable wells at
residential properties at the Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site in Byram Township, Sussex
County, New Jersey. The selected remedy was chosen in accordance with the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA), as amended, and
to the extent practicable, the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan
(NCP). This decision is based on the Administrative Record established for this Site.

The State of New Jersey concurs with the selected remedy.

ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE

The remedy selected in the Record of Decision (ROD) is necessary to protect public health or the
environment from actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from the Site into the
environment.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY

The selected remedy described in this document represents the first of two planned remedial
phases, or operable units (OUs), for the Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site which is located
in Byram Township, Sussex County, New Jersey.

The selected remedy addresses the contaminated potable wells at residential properties at the
Site. The second OU will address the Site-wide contaminated groundwater, vapor intrusion and
potential residual soil contamination.

The major components of the selected remedy include:

      Provision of potable water to impacted properties through the construction of a water line
       and connections;

      Any necessary upgrades to the water supply system; and

      The abandonment of private residential potable wells.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

Part 1: Statutory Requirements

The selected remedy is protective of human health and the environment, complies with federal
and state requirements that are applicable or relevant and appropriate to the remedial actions, is
cost effective, and utilizes permanent solutions and treatment technologies to the maximum
extent practicable.

Part 2: Statutory Preference for Treatment

Treatment is not a principal element in the OU1 selected remedy.

Part 3: Five-Year Review Requirements

Because the remedy will result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants remaining
above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, a statutory five-year review
will be required. The first review will be conducted within five years of construction completion
for the Site to ensure that the remedy is, or will be, protective of human health and the
environment.

ROD DATA CERTIFICATION CHECKLIST

The following information is included in the Decision Summary section of this ROD. Additional
information can be found in the Administrative Record for the OU1 ROD.

          Chemicals of concern and their respective concentrations may be found in the “Site
           Characteristics” section.

          Baseline risk represented by the chemicals of concern may be found in the “Summary
           of Site Risks” section.

          A discussion of remediation goals may be found in the “Remedial Action Objectives”
           section.

          A discussion of source materials constituting principal threats may be found in the
           “Principal Threat Waste” section.

          Current and reasonably anticipated future land use assumptions are discussed in the
           “Current and Potential Future Site and Resource Uses” section.

          Estimated capital, annual operation and maintenance (O&M) and total present worth
           costs are discussed in the “Description of Alternatives” section.

          Key factors that led to selecting the remedy (i.e., how the selected remedy provides
           the best balance of tradeoffs with respect to the balancing and modifying criteria,

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         highlighting criteria key to the decision) may be found in the "Comparative Analysis
         of Alternatives" and "Statutory Determinations" sections.




                                                               9· 2'1 ,Ii-
Angela Carpentef, Acting Director                                 Date
Emergency & Remedial Response Division
EP A - Region 2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                        Decision Summary


                Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site

Operable Unit 1: Contaminated Potable Wells at Residential Properties

                          Byram Township
                     Sussex County, New Jersey




           United States Environmental Protection Agency

                              Region 2

                          September 2017

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                       PAGE


SITE NAME, LOCATION, AND DESCRIPTION ................................................................... 1
SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES ......................................................... 1
HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION ........................................................... 3
SCOPE AND ROLE OF THIS OPERABLE UNIT .................................................................. 3
SITE CHARACTERISTICS........................................................................................................ 4
CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES ........................... 6
SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS...................................................................................................... 6
REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES ..................................................................................... 11
DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES ............................................................. 11
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES............................................................ 13
PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE ............................................................................................... 17
SELECTED REMEDY .............................................................................................................. 17
STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS ....................................................................................... 19
DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES ........................................................... 21


APPENDICES

APPENDIX I                   TABLES & FIGURES
APPENDIX II                  ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX
APPENDIX III                 STATE LETTER
APPENDIX IV                  RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE NAME, LOCATION, AND DESCRIPTION

The Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site (Site) is located in a residential neighborhood in
Byram Township, Sussex County, New Jersey. The Site consists of former waste disposal
trenches in a wooded area and groundwater contamination in the area. Trichloroethylene (TCE)
from the former waste disposal trenches has migrated into the groundwater to nearby residential
potable wells. The former waste disposal trenches are bounded to the north, south, and west by
upland woods, and by a former rail line to the east (Figure 1). The Operable Unit 1 (OU1) Study
Area includes the impacted residential potable wells. The OU2 Study Area includes the Site-
wide contaminated groundwater, potential residual soil contamination and related vapor intrusion
at the Site.

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is the lead agency, and the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) is the support agency for this Site.

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES

It is suspected that the Site was used as a dump for septic and other industrial wastes from the
late 1950s through at least the early 1970s. In May 2005, the Sussex County Department of
Health and Human Services and NJDEP became aware of TCE contamination in residential
potable wells serving homes on Brookwood and Ross Roads, and notified residents in the
neighborhood of the contamination. Point-of Entry-Treatment Systems (POETS) were installed,
primarily by NJDEP, at impacted residential properties to provide safe drinking water. By June
2005, 13 residential potable wells were known to be contaminated with TCE at concentrations in
excess of New Jersey Ground Water Quality Standards (NJ GWQS) and additional POETS were
installed. Currently, nineteen homes are equipped with POETS, installed by NJDEP or by
homeowners, to remove the contamination and to ensure a safe potable water source for area
residents.

In addition, from 2006 to 2008, NJDEP collected indoor air and sub-slab soil gas samples from
homes throughout the affected neighborhood. NJDEP installed vapor intrusion mitigation
systems or modified existing radon mitigation systems in five of the affected homes to prevent
the migration of harmful vapors from entering the homes.

NJDEP first identified the former waste disposal trenches at the Site in 2009 during an effort to
determine the source of the contamination detected in the nearby residential potable wells along
Brookwood and Ross Roads. On October 16, 2009, NJDEP submitted a request to the EPA
Emergency and Remedial Response Division (ERRD), to evaluate the Site for a Removal Action
under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, as
amended (CERCLA). Subsequent reconnaissance efforts conducted by NJDEP, EPA, and
contractors in December 2009 and May 2010 indicated disposal trenches that were designated
Dump Areas A, B, C, D and E (Figure 2). EPA collected soil and sludge-like-waste, groundwater
(on-site monitoring wells), and residential well samples from February to May 2010. EPA also
installed a background monitoring well, MW-3, south of NJDEP’s previously installed
monitoring wells, MW-1 and MW-2 (Figure 3). Concurrently, in February and March of 2010,
EPA collected well water samples from 21 residences along Brookwood Road and Ross Road

                                               1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

and from the Byram Intermediate School wells. The school well samples did not exceed
Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs), set by state and federal drinking water standards, for
site-related contaminants.

Based on NJDEP and EPA’s sampling from 2009 to 2010, the groundwater plume was found to
begin at the former waste disposal trenches and extend downgradient toward the Brookwood
Road and Ross Road residential area. The contaminated waste and soil that was present within
the trench areas was determined to be a source of TCE to the underlying aquifer and presented a
direct contact threat to the public via groundwater. After performing a Removal Site Evaluation
(RSE), EPA concluded that a CERCLA removal action was warranted to address the threats
posed by the former waste disposal areas (i.e., trenches) at the Site.

In March 2011, based on the impacted disposal and residential areas outlined above, the Site was
added to the National Priorities List (NPL). On September 29, 2011, an Action Memorandum
was approved by EPA for the excavation and off-Site disposal of TCE-contaminated soil at the
Site. From February 21 to May 30, 2012, EPA completed excavation activities to remove soil
contamination from Dump Areas A, B, C, D and E. Approximately 11,170 tons of non-
hazardous soil and debris and 383 tons of hazardous soil were removed from the Site and
transported to approved off-site disposal facilities. The removal action was completed on July
23, 2012. The contaminated waste disposal trenches were excavated to bedrock and re-graded
and restored to match the former topography.

From August 2013 to December 2015 as part of the Site-wide groundwater investigation, EPA
performed remedial investigation activities at the Site. During this time, EPA installed ten multi-
level monitoring wells and eleven overburden groundwater wells (Figure 3). EPA collected
environmental data, including overburden soil samples, subsurface soil samples, rock core
samples, groundwater samples, and performed site reconnaissance activities. Samples were taken
from both the former source area and the downgradient residential neighborhood. Additional
environmental data will be collected as part of the OU2 investigation. In April 2014, EPA
collected water samples from residential potable wells equipped with POETS, plus an additional
eight wells. NJDEP continues to monitor and maintain POETS at impacted residences in
accordance with the state Spill Compensation Fund.

Enforcement Activities

Currently, the properties containing the former waste disposal trenches are owned by two parties:
the estate of Anna McConnell (who, along with her husband Dennis J. McConnell owned the
Site when it was in operation) and the Hopatcong Land Development Company, Inc., which
purchased part of the Site from the McConnells in 1990. To date, EPA has sent request for
information letters to potentially responsible parties. A Notice of Potential Liability pursuant to
Section 107(a) of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. Section 9601(a), was sent to Hopatcong Land
Development, Inc. in October 2014 and to the Estate of Anna McConnell in July 2015. EPA has
funded the removal work and remedial work performed to date.




                                                 2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

EPA has worked closely with local residents, public officials, and other interested members of
the community since NJDEP requested assistance with the Site in 2009. At the completion of the
Focused Feasibility Study (FFS) for OU1, EPA prepared a Proposed Remedial Action Plan
(Proposed Plan) presenting remedial alternatives as well as EPA’s preferred remedy for the
contaminated residential potable wells. The Proposed Plan and supporting documentation for
OU1 were released to the public for comment on June 13, 2017. The Proposed Plan and index
for the Administrative Record were made available to the public online, and the Administrative
Record files were made available at the EPA Administrative Record File Room, 290 Broadway,
18th Floor, New York, New York and the Sussex County Library Louise Childs Branch, 21 Sparta
Road, Stanhope, New Jersey.

On June 13, 2017, EPA published a Public Notice in the NJ Herald newspaper that provided
information about the public comment period, the public meeting for the Proposed Plan, and the
availability of the Administrative Record for the OU1 Proposed Plan. EPA also published a press
release on June 13, 2017, to announce the release of the Proposed Plan. The public comment
period closed on July 13, 2017.

A public meeting was held on June 27, 2017, at the Byram Township Municipal Building, 10
Mansfield Drive, Sparta, New Jersey. The purpose of this meeting was to inform residents, local
officials, and interested members of the public about the Superfund process, present details about
the Proposed Plan, and to take comments and respond to questions from area residents and other
interested parties on the Proposed Plan. Responses to the comments received at the public
meeting, and in writing during the public comment period, are included in the Responsiveness
Summary, attached as Appendix IV to this ROD.

SCOPE AND ROLE OF THIS OPERABLE UNIT

The selected remedy described in this document represents the first of two planned remedial
phases, or operable units (OUs), for the Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site. The OU1 Study
Area includes residential properties downgradient of the former waste disposal trenches where
residential potable wells are known to be impacted (Figure 4) by the Site’s contaminated
groundwater plume. To address current exposure, NJDEP has installed POETS at impacted
properties where contaminant concentrations above the NJ GWQS have been confirmed. NJDEP
monitors and maintains these POETS in accordance with the Spill Compensation Fund. NJDEP
will install and maintain additional POETS as necessary until EPA implements the OU1
response action.

The scope of the response action for OU1 is to address human health risks associated with
contaminants above the most stringent of the state and federal drinking water standards in
residential potable wells impacted by contaminated groundwater at the Site. Groundwater
restoration, vapor intrusion and potential residual soil contamination within the former source
area will be addressed in OU2.




                                                3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE CHARACTERISTICS

The Site is bordered to the east by a steep, narrow valley. An abandoned railroad bed and a
waterway, Cowboy Creek, that flows north are located on the valley floor. Cowboy Creek flows
to Lubbers Run and the Musconetcong River. Both Lubbers Run and the Musconetcong River
are used for recreation, including fishing, boating, and hiking. Information obtained from the
New Jersey Division of Fish and Wildlife indicates that portions of the Musconetcong River are
fished for human consumption. Segments of the Musconetcong River downstream of the Site are
federally designated as a Wild and Scenic River. Water samples taken from the unnamed stream
did not indicate any contamination.

At the Site, contamination from the former waste disposal trenches entered groundwater through
the bedrock. Bedrock outcrops are located across the Site, and the depth to bedrock throughout
the Site ranges from near-surface to approximately 25 feet below ground surface (feet bgs). In
the residential area north of the Site, the bedrock elevation drops almost 300 feet from the ridge
north toward Cowboy Creek. The shallow, intermediate and deep bedrock aquifers are
considered to be up to 50 feet, 50 to 200 feet, and more than 200 feet below bedrock surface,
respectively.

Based on the topography and the detections of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in the
residential potable wells, it is likely that shallow groundwater flows beneath Former Dump Area
A, which lies on the west side of the ridge, to the west-northwest toward the Brookwood and
Ross Roads neighborhood. The ridge forms a local groundwater divide and sources to the east
(i.e., former Dump Areas B, D, and E) overlie a separate surficial aquifer. Groundwater was
encountered in overburden near Dump Area E at 10 feet bgs. Prior investigations have shown no
receptors to be impacted by this surficial aquifer. Site-wide investigation is ongoing, including in
areas to the southeast and east of the former dump areas.

Nature and Extent of Contamination

Source Area

Dump Area A consisted of two trenches located on a ridgeline that trends southwest to northeast,
directly upslope of and overlooking the Brookwood and Ross Roads neighborhood to the west,
while Dump Areas B, C, D, and E were situated on the east side of the ridge. The Dump Area A
lower trench was approximately 120 feet long and 10 feet wide. The upper trench A was
approximately the same length as the lower trench. On the east side of the ridge, Dump Area B
consisted of a single trench approximately 132 feet long and 15 feet wide. Dump Area C
consisted of an open, roughly circular patch of disturbed vegetation approximately 140 feet in
diameter adjacent to Dump Area B. Dump Area D consisted of four trenches (designated as
Trenches 1 - 4). Dump Area E, first observed during the May 2010 reconnaissance, was found to
consist of four parallel mounds, which are likely to be small berms surrounding the Area D
trenches.

The waste disposal trenches consisted of contaminated soil and sludge-like-waste from unknown
origins. Analytical results of soil and waste samples collected during the waste-source-

                                                 4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

delineation phase indicated the presence of VOCs, such as TCE, 1,2-dichloroethylene (1,2-
DCE), and benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene, and xylene (BTEX) compounds, as well as various
chlorinated benzene compounds throughout the former waste disposal trenches.

Although former Dump Area C was observed to be littered with tires and miscellaneous trash,
and was considered an additional area of concern, no evidence was found of the same type and
method of waste deposition as the other disposal trenches (i.e., excavated trenches and sludge-
like-waste material). Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) were detected in composite samples
collected from the former Dump Area A lower trench, Dump Area B, and Dump Area D,
trenches 1 and 2. Contaminants were not detected in the former Dump Area D, Trench 4.

Sampling done by NJDEP in 2009 showed elevated concentrations of TCE, 1,2-DCE, and vinyl
chloride (VC) in groundwater.

Groundwater Downgradient of Source Area

Groundwater flow through the bedrock is mostly restricted to connected water-bearing fractures
and conductive zones. Geophysical studies of monitoring well boreholes were used to evaluate
these bedrock fractures. Contaminated groundwater in bedrock appears to migrate laterally into
overburden north and northwest of the former source area as the bedrock surface drops off along
Brookwood Road.

Previous investigations included installation of overburden groundwater monitoring wells and
multi-level bedrock groundwater monitoring wells to determine the nature and extent of
groundwater contamination. Twenty-four monitoring wells were sampled in the shallow and
deep groundwater aquifer between March 2014 and December 2015 (Figure 3). Sampling during
this time period found that TCE levels exceeded the NJ GWQS of 1 µg/L in six out of 13
shallow groundwater samples and 62 out of 94 deep groundwater samples. Concentrations of
TCE ranged between 0.11 µg/L and 320 µg/L. Continued sampling is planned to further
delineate the extent of groundwater contamination as part of the ongoing OU2 investigation.
Additional data from Site-wide investigation work will be documented as part of the OU2
Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study report (RI/FS).

Residential Groundwater Sampling

The March 2006 sampling of the residential potable wells in the Brookwood and Ross Roads
neighborhood conducted by NJDEP indicated the presence of TCE concentrations that ranged
from 3.9 to 70 µg/L. Sampling performed by EPA in 2010 detected TCE in 15 of the sampled
residential potable wells serving 56 residents. In April 2014, EPA collected water samples from
residential potable wells equipped with POETS, plus an additional eight wells. Samples were
taken prior to treatment. To date, approximately 75 residential potable wells have been sampled
and 19 POETS have been installed since 2005, at properties where contamination was confirmed
above NJ GWQS for TCE. The standard for NJ MCLs and NJ GWQSs for TCE is 1 mg/L, and is
more stringent than the federal MCL for TCE, which is 5 mg/L. NJDEP continues to monitor and
maintain POETS at impacted residences in accordance with the state Spill Compensation Fund.
All Chemicals of Concern (COCs) identified in residential potable wells were compared to the

                                                5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

lesser of NJ GWQS and state and federal MCLs in the Brookwood and Ross Road neighborhood.
A full discussion of COCs at the Site can be found in the Baseline Human Health Risk
Assessment (BHHRA).

CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES

Groundwater Uses

Area groundwater is classified by NJDEP as a Class IIA resource; it is a current source of
drinking water, and it is expected to remain a source of drinking water in the future. Properties
with potable wells that have tested above NJ GWQSs have been referred to NJDEP for further
evaluation and action, which includes confirmation sampling, and the installation and
maintenance of POETS until EPA has implemented a remedy for the OU1 Study Area.

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS

As part of the OU1 FFS, EPA conducted a baseline risk assessment to estimate the current and
future effects of contaminants on human health. A baseline risk assessment is an analysis of the
potential adverse human health and ecological effects of releases of hazardous substances from a
site in the absence of any actions or controls to mitigate such releases, under current and future
land and groundwater uses. It provides the basis for taking action and identifies the contaminants
and exposure pathways that need to be addressed by the remedial action. This section of the
ROD summarizes the results of the baseline human health risk assessment for the Site.

Human Health Risk Assessment

A four-step process is utilized for assessing site-related human health risks for a reasonable
maximum exposure scenario:

      Hazard Identification – uses the analytical data collected to identify the contaminants of
       potential concern at the site for each medium, with consideration of a number of factors
       explained below;
      Exposure Assessment - estimates the magnitude of actual and/or potential human
       exposures, the frequency and duration of these exposures, and the pathways (e.g.,
       ingesting contaminated well-water) by which humans are potentially exposed;
      Toxicity Assessment - determines the types of adverse health effects associated with
       chemical exposures, and the relationship between magnitude of exposure (dose) and
       severity of adverse effects (response); and
      Risk Characterization - summarizes and combines outputs of the exposure and toxicity
       assessments to provide a quantitative assessment of site-related risks. The risk
       characterization also identifies contamination with concentrations which exceed
       acceptable levels, defined by the NCP as an excess lifetime cancer risk greater than 1 x
       10-6 – 1 x 10-4, an excess of lifetime cancer risk greater than 1 x 10-6 (i.e., point of
       departure) combined with site-specific circumstances, or a Hazard Index greater than 1;
       contaminants at these concentrations are considered COCs and are typically those that


                                                 6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       will require remediation at the Site. Also included in this section is a discussion of the
       uncertainties associated with these risks.

Hazard Identification

In this step, the chemicals of potential concern (COPCs) in each medium were identified based
on such factors as toxicity, frequency of occurrence, fate and transport of the contaminants in the
environment, concentrations, mobility, persistence and bioaccumulation. The risk assessment for
the OU1 study area focused on groundwater related to the Mansfield Trail Dump site which may
pose significant risk to human health. Analytical information that was collected to determine the
nature and extent of contamination revealed the presence of VOCs in groundwater at
concentrations of potential concern.

This ROD focuses on the groundwater plume in the area immediately downgradient of the
former waste disposal trenches. Groundwater is used by residents for drinking water purposes.
Although POETS have been installed within impacted homes, if additional wells become
contaminated or the POETS are not maintained, exposure to contaminated groundwater could
occur. A comprehensive list of all COPCs can be found in the BHHRA in the Administrative
Record. Only the COCs, or the chemicals requiring remediation at the Site, are listed in Table 1.

Exposure Assessment

Consistent with Superfund policy and guidance, the BHHRA is a baseline human health risk
assessment and therefore assumes no remediation or institutional controls to mitigate or remove
hazardous substance releases. Cancer risks and noncancer hazard indices were calculated based
on an estimate of the reasonable maximum exposure (RME) expected to occur under current and
future conditions at the Site. The RME is defined as the highest exposure that is reasonably
expected to occur at a site.

The primary land use in the OU1 study area is residential. It is anticipated that the future land use
for this area will remain consistent with current use.

Exposure pathways were identified for each potentially exposed population and each potential
exposure scenario for exposure to groundwater. Exposure pathways assessed in the BHHRA are
presented in Table 2 and include exposure of residents to groundwater ingestion, dermal contact
with groundwater and inhalation of volatiles while showering. Adult and child residents have
been identified as potentially exposed populations. Typically, exposures are evaluated using a
statistical estimate of the exposure point concentration, which is usually an upper-bound estimate
of the average concentration for each contaminant, but in some cases may be the maximum
detected concentration. A summary of the exposure point concentrations for the site-related
COCs in groundwater can be found in Table 1, while a comprehensive list of the exposure point
concentrations for all COPCs can be found in the BHHRA.




                                                 7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Toxicity Assessment

Under current EPA guidelines, the likelihood of carcinogenic risks and noncancer hazards due to
exposure to site chemicals are considered separately. Consistent with current EPA policy, it was
assumed that the toxic effects of the site-related chemicals would be additive. Thus, cancer and
noncancer risks associated with exposures to individual COPCs were summed to indicate the
potential risks and hazards associated with mixtures of potential carcinogens and
noncarcinogens, respectively.

Toxicity data for the human health risk assessment were provided by the Integrated Risk
Information System (IRIS) database, the Provisional Peer Reviewed Toxicity Database
(PPRTV), or another source that is identified as an appropriate reference for toxicity values
consistent with EPA’s directive on toxicity values. This information for the site-related COCs is
presented in Table 3 (noncancer toxicity data summary) and Table 4 (cancer toxicity data
summary). Additional toxicity information for all COPCs is presented in the BHHRA.

Risk Characterization

Noncarcinogenic risks were assessed using a hazard index (HI) approach, based on a comparison
of expected contaminant intakes and benchmark comparison levels of intake (reference doses,
reference concentrations). Reference doses (RfDs) and reference concentrations (RfCs) are
estimates of daily exposure levels for humans (including sensitive individuals) which are thought
to be safe over a lifetime of exposure. The estimated intake of chemicals identified in
environmental media (e.g., the amount of a chemical ingested from contaminated drinking water)
is compared to the RfD or the RfC to derive the hazard quotient (HQ) for the contaminant in the
particular medium. The HI is obtained by adding the hazard quotients for all compounds within a
particular medium that impacts a particular receptor population.

The HQ for oral and dermal exposures is calculated as below. The HQ for inhalation exposures
is calculated using a similar model that incorporates the RfC, rather than the RfD.

HQ = Intake/RfD

Where:         HQ = hazard quotient
               Intake = estimated intake for a chemical (mg/kg-day)
               RfD = reference dose (mg/kg-day)

The intake and the RfD will represent the same exposure period (i.e., chronic, subchronic, or
acute).

As previously stated, the HI is calculated by summing the HQs for all chemicals for likely
exposure scenarios for a specific population. An HI greater than 1 indicates that the potential
exists for noncarcinogenic health effects to occur as a result of site-related exposures, with the
potential for health effects increasing as the HI increases. When the HI calculated for all
chemicals for a specific population exceeds 1, separate HI values are then calculated for those
chemicals which are known to act on the same target organ. These discrete HI values are then

                                                  8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

compared to the acceptable limit of 1 to evaluate the potential for noncancer health effects on a
specific target organ. The HI provides a useful reference point for gauging the potential
significance of multiple contaminant exposures within a single medium or across media. A
summary of the noncarcinogenic hazards associated with these chemicals for each exposure
pathway is contained in Table 5.

Table 5 shows that the total HI for noncancer effects is 107 for the adult resident and 100 for the
child resident from exposure to cis-1,2-DCE, TCE, VC, chromium, cobalt and nickel in
groundwater. The noncarcinogenic risks for both populations were attributable primarily to TCE.

For carcinogens, risks are generally expressed as the incremental probability of an individual
developing cancer over a lifetime as a result of exposure to a carcinogen, using the cancer slope
factor (SF) for oral and dermal exposures and the inhalation unit risk (IUR) for inhalation
exposures. Excess lifetime cancer risk for oral and dermal exposures is calculated from the
following equation, while the equation for inhalation exposures uses the IUR, rather than the SF:

Risk = LADD x SF

Where:          Risk = a unitless probability (1 x 10-6) of an individual developing cancer
                LADD = lifetime average daily dose averaged over 70 years (mg/kg-day)
                SF = cancer slope factor, expressed as [1/(mg/kg-day)]

These risks are probabilities that are usually expressed in scientific notation (such as 1 x 10-4).
An excess lifetime cancer risk of 1 x 10-4 indicates that one additional incidence of cancer may
occur in a population of 10,000 people who are exposed under the conditions identified in the
assessment. Again, as stated in the NCP, the point of departure is 10-6 and the acceptable risk
range for site-related exposure is 10-6 to 10-4.

A summary of the estimated cancer risks is presented in Table 6. The results indicated that the
cancer risks exceeded the acceptable risk range for residential exposure to tap water and shower
vapors due to groundwater concentrations of TCE, VC and chromium.

Ecological Risk Assessment

An Ecological Risk Assessment was not done for OU1 because this OU addresses human
exposure to contaminated potable water wells. An Ecological Risk Assessment will be included
as part of the OU2, which will address Site-wide groundwater contamination, vapor intrusion
and potential residual soil contamination.

Uncertainties

The procedures and inputs used to assess risks in this evaluation, as in all such assessments, are
subject to a wide variety of uncertainties. In general, the main sources of uncertainty include:

        environmental data
        exposure parameter estimation

                                                  9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      exposure point concentrations
      toxicity values
      risk characterization

Two of the primary sources of uncertainty identified in the HHRA were associated with exposure
parameters and toxicological data. Uncertainty in exposure parameters was related to many of
the parameters being associated with default values since site-specific values were not available.
This would provide a conservative estimate of potential risk and hazards.

Another important source of uncertainty was toxicological data. The toxicity factors used in the
quantitative evaluation of potential risks and hazards were primarily selected from the Integrated
Risk Information System (IRIS). For many chemicals, there is a lack of appropriate information
on effects in humans (i.e., epidemiologic studies). Therefore, animal studies are generally used to
develop toxicity values in human health risk assessments, which may under- or over-estimate
potential risks and hazards.

The chromium and nickel maximum values used for exposure point concentrations in the HHRA
were anomalously higher (several orders of magnitude) compared to other wells onsite and
results from previous sampling events. A statistical outlier test was performed to determine
whether these concentrations can be considered representative of site exposure based on data
collected from other monitoring wells within the groundwater plume. The outlier testing
concluded that both chromium and nickel sampling results contained outliers from the same
sample multi-level system (MLS-3) location. When these outliers were replaced with the next
highest concentration detected from that location, the total risk from all carcinogens decreased to
5x10-3 (one-in-one thousand). Although the adjusted risk still exceeds EPA thresholds, the outlier
test indicated TCE and VC are the primary contributors of site-related risk. Exposure to TCE and
VC individually accounted for risks of 5x10-4 and 4x10-3, respectively. In addition, cancer risk
due to chromium may be overestimated because it was assumed that all of the chromium present
is in the more toxic hexavalent form. This is conservative since chromium in the environment is
generally dominated by the less toxic, trivalent form.

More specific information concerning uncertainty in the health risks is presented in the baseline
human health risk assessment report.

Risk Assessment Summary

In summary, VOCs contributed to unacceptable risks and hazards to future residents from
exposure to Site groundwater. Based on the results of the human health risk assessment, the
response action selected in the ROD is necessary to protect the public health or welfare or the
environment from actual or threatened releases of contaminants into the environment.




                                                10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES

Remedial action objectives (RAOs) are specific goals to protect human health and the
environment. These objectives are based on available information and standards such as
applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs) and risk-based levels established
in the risk assessment.

A primary objective of any remedial strategy is overall protectiveness. The RAO for the
Mansfield Trail Dump OU1 Study Area is:

      Prevent or minimize current and future human exposures from ingestion of, inhalation of,
       and dermal contact with contaminants in potable water attributable to contaminated
       groundwater at the Site.

Groundwater restoration and potential vapor intrusion and residual soil contamination within the
former source area will be addressed in OU2.

DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

CERCLA requires that remedial actions be protective of human health and the environment, be
cost-effective, comply (or waive) ARARs, and utilize permanent solutions and alternative
treatment technologies and resource recovery alternatives to the maximum extent practical. In
addition, CERCLA includes a preference for the use of treatment as a principal element for the
reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume of the hazardous substances.

Potential technologies applicable to groundwater remediation were identified and screened by
effectiveness, implementability, and cost criteria, with emphasis on effectiveness. Because all
alternatives would result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants remaining at the
properties above levels that would allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, EPA would
review conditions at the Site every five years.

Detailed descriptions of the remedial alternatives for alternate water supplies for OU1 are
presented below. The use of the 30-year timeframe does not imply that the remedy would
become ineffective or be removed after 30 years. Construction time is the time required to
construct and implement the alternative and does not include the time required to design the
remedy, negotiate performance of the remedy with responsible parties, or procure contracts for
design and construction. Detailed information regarding the alternatives can be found in the final
FFS Report.

Alternative 1 - No Action

The NCP requires that a “No Action” alternative be evaluated to establish a baseline for
comparison with other remedial alternatives. Under the no action alternative, no remedial actions
would be taken to reduce the levels of contamination in residential potable wells. Additionally,
this option does not include the cost of continuation of any existing treatment systems, nor the
implementation of any new institutional controls or remedial action. Any improvement of
groundwater quality would be through natural attenuation processes.
                                                11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Total Capital Cost:                  $0
Operation and Maintenance:           $0
Total Present Net Worth:             $0
Construction Timeframe:              0 years

Alternative 2 – Treatment via POETS

Alternative 2 relies on the continued operation of existing POETS. The existing POETS would
be assessed and necessary upgrades would be evaluated. The cost estimate includes upgrades to
five of the systems. All existing systems would then need to be operated, monitored, and
maintained in accordance with current practices.

Previous investigations do not indicate the imminent spread of groundwater contamination
beyond the area that has been impacted, but monitoring of potable wells in the vicinity would be
conducted to assure that they meet drinking water standards of 1 µg/L of TCE. POETS would
need to be installed, operated, monitored, and maintained if potable wells at these homes were to
become impacted.

Capital Cost:                                  $381,872
Annual O&M Cost (Year 1 to 5):                 $219,612
Annual O&M Cost (Year 6 to 30):                $231,844
Present-Worth Cost:                            $3,209,000
OM&M of POET Systems:                          30 years
Time to Install POETS:                         5 weeks

Alternative 3 – Connection to an Existing Water Supply System

Alternative 3 includes the provision of potable water to impacted properties through construction
of a water line and abandonment of residential potable wells. Service connections to each
impacted house from an existing water supply system in the area would be made in accordance
with Byram Township, Sussex County, and New Jersey regulations.

For cost estimation purposes, the closest privately owned water supplier, East Brookwood Estate
Property Owners Association (EBEPOA), was used as the water supply system. In order to add
the impacted area to the EBEPOA, upgrades to the existing system and consent of the owners of
the EBEPOA would be necessary. The specifications of the water supply and water line, along
with any upgrades necessary for connection of additional homes, will be determined during
remedial design.

During the design and construction phases of the water line, POETS that have been installed at
potable wells where water exceeds the TCE standard of 1 µg/L would need to be operated and
maintained in accordance with current practices, until individual residences are switched over to
the alternate water supply. EPA would periodically monitor residential potable wells in the
vicinity of the impacted area that are currently not impacted above state and federal drinking
water standards. If these wells were to become impacted, POETS would need to be installed at

                                                 12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

these additional locations until the remedy has been constructed and an alternate potable water
source is available.

After the remedy is in place, homes in the vicinity of the impacted area would continue to be
monitored. If any of any of the potable wells at these monitored homes were to become
impacted, connection to the water line would be made available. The capacity of the water
supply system would then be reassessed.

Capital Cost:                         $8,333,160
Annual O&M Cost (year 1):             $77,278
Annual O&M Cost (year 1 to 30):       $27,016
Present-Worth Cost:                   $8,746,000

Time to Complete Construction: 8 months

COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES

In selecting a remedy, EPA considered the factors set out in CERCLA §121, 42 U.S.C. §9621,
by conducting a detailed analysis of the viable remedial response measures pursuant to the NCP,
40 CFR §300.430(e)(9) and OSWER Directive 9355.3-01. The detailed analysis consisted of an
assessment of each of the individual response measures per remedy component against each of
nine evaluation criteria and a comparative analysis focusing upon the relative performance of
each response measure against the criteria.

Threshold Criteria – The first two criteria are known as “threshold criteria” because they are
the minimum requirements that each response measure must meet in order to be eligible for
selection as a remedy.

1. Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment

Overall protection of human health and the environment addresses whether each alternative
provides adequate protection of human health and the environment and describes how risks
posed through each exposure pathway are eliminated, reduced, or controlled, through treatment,
engineering controls, and/or institutional controls.

Alternative 1, No Action, would not provide overall protection of human health and the
environment. This alternative would not achieve the RAO because it does not prevent the current
and future use of contaminated groundwater which presents an unacceptable human health risk.

Alternatives 2 and 3 would be protective of human health as both alternatives prevent ingestion
and dermal contact with contaminated groundwater. Alternative 2, would be protective of human
health because contaminated groundwater would continue to be treated prior to use by residents
within the impacted area. This alternative relies on consistent long-term maintenance of
individual systems in order to ensure effectiveness of the treatment.

Alternative 3, would be protective of human health in the impacted area by providing potable
water through construction of a water line and abandonment of residential potable wells. Other

                                               13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

homes in the vicinity of the impacted area would be monitored, as a safeguard, and offered
connection to the system if the potable wells showed TCE contamination exceeding 1 µg/L.

Because the “no action” alternative, Alternative 1, is not protective of human health and the
environment, it was eliminated from further consideration under the remaining eight criteria.

2. Compliance with applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs)

Section 121(d) of CERCLA and NCP §300.430(f) (ii) (B) require that remedial actions at
CERCLA sites at least attain legally applicable or relevant and appropriate federal and state
requirements, standards, criteria, and limitations which are collectively referred to as “ARARs,”
unless such ARARs are waived under CERCLA section 121(d)(4).

Applicable requirements are those cleanup standards, standards of control, and other
substantive requirements, criteria, or limitations promulgated under federal environmental or
state environmental or facility siting laws that specifically address a hazardous substance,
pollutant, contaminant, remedial action, location, or other circumstance found at a CERCLA
site. Only those State standards that are identified by a state in a timely manner and that are
more stringent than federal requirements may be applicable. Relevant and appropriate
requirements are those cleanup standards, standards of control, and other substantive
requirements, criteria, or limitations promulgated under federal environmental or state
environmental or facility siting laws that, while not “applicable” to a hazardous substance,
pollutant, contaminant, remedial action, location, or other circumstance at a CERCLA site,
address problems or situations sufficiently similar to those encountered at the CERCLA site that
their use is well-suited to the particular site. Only those State standards that are identified in a
timely manner, and are more stringent than Federal requirements, may be relevant and
appropriate.

Compliance with ARARs address whether a remedy will meet all of the applicable or relevant
and appropriate requirements of other federal and state environmental statutes or provides a
basis for invoking a waiver.

ARARS for groundwater are the most stringent of the state and federal drinking water standards.
A listing of ARARs is provided in Table 7 (see Appendix I). Alternatives 2 and 3 would both
comply with action-specific and location-specific ARARs. Alternative 2 and Alternative 3
through the use of POETs during the construction of the water line would meet chemical-specific
ARARs by providing potable water to meet state and federal drinking water standards as long as
the POETS are maintained. POETS require diligent operation and maintenance to assure that
they continue to properly address groundwater contamination in each residence over time in
order to provide safe potable water. However, Alternative 3 is the alternative that best meets this
criterion as it provides for residences to be connected to an alternate water supply, because
operators of water supply systems are legally required to meet state and federal drinking water
standards as well as other legal requirements.




                                                 14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Primary Balancing Criteria – The next five criteria, criteria 3 through 7, are known as
“primary balancing criteria.” These criteria are factors by which tradeoffs between response
measures are assessed so that the best options will be chosen, given site-specific data and
conditions.

3. Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence

Long-term effectiveness and permanence refers to expected residual risk and the ability of a
remedy to maintain reliable protection of human health and the environment over time, once
cleanup levels have been met. This criterion includes the consideration of residual risk that will
remain on-site following remediation and the adequacy and reliability of controls.

Alternative 3 provides the greatest degree of long-term effectiveness and permanence because
this alternative relies on permanent infrastructure to convey water from a reliable source of
potable water. Alternative 2 would require significantly more maintenance to remain reliable,
such as confirmation sampling and carbon replacement in order for POETS to remain protective,
and is therefore not considered as permanent as Alternative 3.

4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume through Treatment

Reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment refers to the anticipated
performance of the treatment technologies that may be included as part of a remedy.

Alternatives 2 and 3 would not reduce the toxicity, mobility, or volume of the contaminants in
groundwater through treatment but would prevent the exposure of the residents to the
contaminants. The POETS would control exposure to contaminant concentrations above MCLs
by treatment at the point of use. Connection to a water system would provide an alternate supply
of potable water, therefore eliminating exposure to the contaminants.

5. Short-Term Effectiveness

Short-term effectiveness addresses the period of time needed to implement the remedy and any
adverse impacts that may be posed to workers, the community and the environment during
construction and operation of the remedy until cleanup levels are achieved.

Alternative 2 would require limited site work, resulting in minimal short-term impacts to the
community and workers. Potential upgrades to systems, as part of Alternative 2, are estimated to
take two hours per system, resulting in minimal implementation time. The necessity to construct
parts of the remedies on the property of land owners, in roadways and right-of-ways for
Alternative 3 would result in some short-term adverse effects to the surrounding community.

Construction of Alternative 3 would result in the most significant short-term effects in the
community, with the installation of a water line. These effects would be limited to the
construction work in the neighborhood and on private property for connections. However, EPA
would work with the community to alleviate concerns. In addition, standard health and safety

                                                15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

practices would be used to mitigate any impacts on workers. There would be no adverse
environmental impacts to habitats or vegetation as implementation would only affect previously
developed areas such as roads and private properties. Duration time for construction of a water
main, as part of Alternative 3, is estimated at 8 months.

Air monitoring, engineering controls and appropriate worker personal protective equipment
would be used to protect the community and workers as necessary for Alternatives 3.

6. Implementability

Implementability addresses the technical and administrative feasibility of a remedy from design
through construction and operation. Factors such as availability of services and materials,
administrative feasibility, and coordination with other governmental entities are also considered.

Alternatives 2 and 3 are implementable as no special techniques, materials or labor are required
to implement these alternatives. Under Alternative 2 it is expected that not all homes would need
upgrades to their existing systems. The limited site work would be easily implemented.

Alternative 3 would be implementable using conventional construction methods and readily
available materials. Due to construction required on roads, disruptions to local traffic would be
likely. Right-of-way access and coordination with local government would be needed as well.
The public water supply selected, the distance from the impacted properties and the capacity of
the system might affect implementability.

7. Cost

Includes estimated capital and O&M costs, and net present worth value of capital and O&M
costs.

The estimated present worth of Alternative 2 is $3,209,000. This cost includes an estimated
number of upgrades to existing systems as well as the installation of an estimated number of new
systems in the vicinity of the impacted properties. Also included in this cost is residential water
sampling to ensure POETS are operating properly. This alternative assumes O&M on the POETS
and monitoring over a 30-year time period.

The present worth of the estimated cost for Alternative 3 is $8,746,000. This estimate includes
construction of the proposed water line as well as O&M of the alternate supply system for one
year. O&M costs for the monitoring program are estimated over a 30-year time period.

For costing purposes, each alternative has an estimated duration of 30 years. The OU2
investigation will address the Site-wide groundwater contamination and consider duration and
costs of groundwater remedial alternatives.




                                                16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Modifying Criteria – The final two evaluation criteria, criteria 8 and 9, are called “modifying
criteria” because new information or comments from the state or the community on the
Proposed Plan may modify the preferred response measure or cause another response measure
to be considered.

8. State Acceptance

Indicates whether based on its review of the RI/FS reports and the Proposed Plan, the state
supports, opposes, and/or has identified any reservations with the selected response measure.

The State of New Jersey concurs with the selected remedy.

9. Community Acceptance

Summarizes the public’s general response to the alternatives described in the Proposed Plan and
the RI/FS reports. This assessment includes determining which of the response measures the
community supports, opposes, and/or has reservations about.

EPA solicited input from the community on the remedial response measures proposed for the
Site. Oral comments presented at the public meeting were recorded, and EPA received written
comments during the public comment period. The Responsiveness Summary addresses all public
comments received by EPA during the public comment period. Overall, the community
members, elected officials, and stakeholders were in favor of EPA’s recommended alternative.

PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE

Principal threat wastes are considered source materials, i.e., materials that include or contain
hazardous substances, pollutants or contaminants that act as a reservoir for migration of
contamination to groundwater, surface water, or as a source for direct exposure. Contaminated
groundwater is generally not considered to be source material; however, Non-Aqueous Phase
Liquids (NAPLs) in groundwater may be viewed as source material. Investigation of Site-wide
groundwater will be addressed as part of OU2 of the Site. EPA’s removal actions at the source
area of the Mansfield Trail Dump Site addressed hazardous materials and soils in former waste
disposal trenches. These actions removed the “principal threat waste” at the Site.

SELECTED REMEDY

Based upon consideration of the results of the Site investigations, the requirements of CERCLA,
the detailed analysis of the remedial alternatives, and public comments, EPA has determined that
Alternative 3, connection to an alternate water supply and abandonment of impacted residential
potable wells, is the appropriate remedy for OU1. The remedy best satisfies the requirements of
CERCLA Section 121 and the NCP’s nine evaluation criteria for remedial alternatives, 40 CFR §
300.430(e)(9). The major components of the selected remedy include:



                                                17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      Provision of potable water to impacted properties through the construction of a water line
       and connections;

      Any necessary upgrades to the water supply system; and

      The abandonment of private residential potable wells.

The selected remedy alternative for OU1 was selected over the other alternatives because EPA
believes an alternate water supply would effectively mitigate exposure to contaminated drinking
water. The preference for Alternative 3 is based upon two factors: (1) Site-wide groundwater
investigation is ongoing and groundwater restoration will be evaluated under OU2; and (2) the
reliability and permanence of an alternate water supply as compared to individual treatment
systems. The installation of an alternate water supply in the area affected by the contaminated
groundwater would eliminate risks to residents from consumption of, inhalation of, and dermal
contact with contaminated drinking water. The operator of the water supply system to which the
EPA connects the homes with contaminated potable wells will be required to meet the
requirements of the Safe Drinking Water Act. EPA expects this to be the final remedy for
impacted residential potable wells at the Site.

POETS will need to be operated and maintained until individual residences are switched over to
the alternate water supply. EPA will periodically monitor residential potable wells in the vicinity
of the impacted area that are not currently above 1 µg/L, the applicable standard for TCE. If
these wells become impacted above that criterion, they will be referred to NJDEP for further
evaluation and action, including confirmation sampling, and the installation and maintenance of
POETS until EPA has implemented a remedy and an alternate potable water source is available.
Properties connected to the alternate water supply will be responsible for payment of water bills
once the connections are complete.

Based on the information available at this time, EPA and NJDEP believe the selected remedy
provides the best balance of trade-offs among the response measures with respect to the nine
evaluation criteria.

Summary of the Rationale for the Selected Remedy

The selection of Alternative 3 provides the best alternative with respect to the evaluation criteria.
EPA and NJDEP agree that the selected alternative will be protective of human health and the
environment, complies with federal and state requirements that are legally applicable or relevant
and appropriate to the remedial action, is cost-effective, and will utilize permanent solutions to
the maximum extent practicable.

Summary of the Estimated Remedy Costs

The estimated capital and total present-worth cost for the selected alternate water supply remedy
are $8,333,160 and $8,746,000, respectively. Table 8 provides the basis for the cost estimate for
Alternate 3.


                                                 18

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

It should be noted that these cost estimates are order-of-magnitude engineering cost estimates
that are expected to be within plus 50 to minus 30 percent of the actual project cost. These cost
estimates are based on the best available information regarding the anticipated scope of the
selected remedy. Changes in the cost estimates are likely to occur as a result of new information
and data collected during the engineering design of the remedy.

Groundwater Use

Under the selected remedy, residential use of groundwater at impacted properties will be
terminated after the remedy is fully operational. A survey will be conducted during the design
phase to provide an accurate number of properties requiring public water. After impacted
properties are connected to the alternate water supply, residential potable wells within the OU1
Study Area will be abandoned in accordance with applicable requirements. Groundwater will no
longer be used as a source of drinking water accessed through residential wells at these
properties.

Green Remediation

Consistent with EPA Region 2’s Clean and Green policy, EPA will evaluate the use of
sustainable technologies and practices with respect to implementation of all components of the
selected remedy.

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

As was previously noted, CERCLA §121(b)(1) mandates that remedial actions must be
protective of human health and the environment, cost-effective, and utilize permanent solutions
and alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery technologies to the maximum extent
practicable. Section 121(b)(1) also establishes a preference for remedial actions which employ
treatment to permanently and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity or mobility of the
hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants at a site. CERCLA §121(d) further specifies
that a remedial action must attain a degree of cleanup that satisfies ARARs under federal and
state laws, unless a waiver can be justified pursuant to §121(d)(4).

Protection of Human Health and the Environment

The selected remedy, Alternative 3, will be protective of human health and the environment
through the connection of residential properties to an existing water supply. The next phase of
the remedy, OU2, will address the Site-wide groundwater contamination, potential residual soil
contamination and related vapor intrusion at the Site.

The remedy will, once complete, eliminate all significant risks to human health associated with
the TCE-contaminated groundwater posed by residential wells. This action will result in the
reduction of potential exposure to contaminated groundwater to within EPA's generally
acceptable risk range. Implementation of the selected remedy will not pose unacceptable short-
term risks or adverse cross-media impacts.



                                               19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Compliance with ARARs

The selected remedy will comply with chemical-specific, action-specific and location-specific
ARARs.

The selected remedy for potable water has been developed to meet federal and state ARARs for
drinking water. A comprehensive ARAR discussion is included in the final FFS and a complete
listing of ARARs for the selected remedy is included in Table 7 (see Appendix I).

Cost Effectiveness

EPA has determined that the selected remedy is cost-effective and represents a reasonable value.
In making this determination, the following definition was used: "A remedy shall be cost-
effective if its costs are proportional to its overall effectiveness." (NCP §300.430 (f) (1) (ii) (D)).
EPA evaluated the "overall effectiveness" of those alternatives that satisfied the threshold criteria
(i.e., were both protective of human health and the environment and ARAR-compliant). Overall
effectiveness was evaluated by assessing three of the five balancing criteria in combination
(long-term effectiveness and permanence; reduction in toxicity, mobility, or volume through
treatment; and short-term effectiveness). Overall effectiveness was then compared to costs to
determine cost-effectiveness. The relationship of the overall effectiveness of the selected remedy
was determined to be proportional to costs and hence, this alternative represents a reasonable
value for the money to be spent.

Each of the alternatives has undergone a detailed cost analysis. In that analysis, capital and
annual operation and maintenance costs have been estimated and used to develop present-worth
costs. In the present-worth cost analysis, annual operation and maintenance costs were calculated
for the estimated life of an alternative using a 7% discount rate. The estimated present-worth cost
of the selected OU1 alternate water supply remedy is $8,746,000. EPA believes that the cost of
the selected alternative is proportional to its overall effectiveness because it eliminates exposure
to contaminated water, providing greater protectiveness than Alternative 2.

Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment Technologies

EPA has determined that the selected remedy represents the maximum extent to which
permanent solutions and treatment technologies can be utilized in a practicable manner at the
Site. Of those alternatives that are protective of human health and the environment and comply
with ARARs (or provide a basis for invoking a waiver), EPA has determined that the selected
remedy provides the best balance of trade-offs in terms of the five balancing criteria, while also
considering the statutory preference for treatment as a principal element and State and
community acceptance.

The selected remedy will provide adequate long-term control of risks to human health and the
environment through provision of potable water to impacted properties through the construction
of a water line and connections, abandonment of residential potable wells, and long-term
monitoring of properties in the vicinity of the impacted area. The selected remedy does not
present short-term risks different from the other alternatives.

                                                  20

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element

The statutory preference for remedies that employ treatment as a principal element is not
satisfied under the selected alternate water supply remedy since no treatment is included. EPA’s
prior removal actions at the Mansfield Trail Dump site addressed hazardous materials and soils
in the former waste disposal trenches that are considered principal threat waste

Five-Year Review Requirements

Because the remedy will result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants remaining
above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, a statutory five-year review
will be required. The first review will be conducted within five years of construction completion
for the OU1 remedy to ensure that the remedy is, or will be, protective of human health and the
environment.


DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES

The Proposed Plan for the OU1 Study Area was released for public comment on June 13, 2017.
The comment period closed on July 13, 2017. The Proposed Plan identified Alternative 3
(connection to an existing water supply) as the preferred alternative to address contaminated
residential potable wells at the Site. Upon review of all comments submitted, EPA has
determined that no significant changes to the preferred alternative, as it was presented in the
Proposed Plan, are warranted.




                                               21

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 APPENDIX I
Tables & Figures

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   TABLE 1
                                                    Summary of Chemicals of Concern and
                                                 Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
Scenario Timeframe: Current/Future
Medium:             Groundwater
Exposure Medium:    Groundwater

                                                         Concentration
                                                                                                                     Exposure Point
                                                           Detected            Concentration      Frequency of                            EPC
    Exposure Point           Chemical of Concern                                                                     Concentration                    Statistical Measure
                                                                                   Units            Detection                             Units
                                                                                                                         (EPC)
                                                         Min         Max

Groundwater                 cis-1,2-Dichloroethene       1.7          90              ug/L            10/10                53              ug/L      95% Student’s-t UCL

                                                                                      ug/L                                                           95% Adjusted Gamma
                            Trichloroethylene            3.8         270                              10/10               184              ug/L
                                                                                                                                                             UCL

                            Vinyl Chloride              0.18 J        50              ug/L            6/10                19.7             ug/L         95% KM (t) UCL

                            Chromium                    0.48 J       622              ug/L            10/10               622              ug/L               Max

                                                                                      ug/L                                                 ug/L      95% Adjusted Gamma
                            Cobalt                       1.2         19.5                             5/10                14.2
                                                                                                                                                             UCL

                            Nickel                       1.1        1260              ug/L            9/10                1260             ug/L               Max

J – qualifier for estimated value
95% Student’s-t UCL – 95% upper confidence limit, Student’s-t statistic (mean, STD)
95% Adjusted Gamma-UCL – 95% upper confidence limit, Adjusted Gamma statistic (mean, STD)
95% KM (t)-UCL – 95% upper confidence limit, Kaplan Meier statistic (mean, STD)
Max – maximum detected concentration

                               Summary of Chemicals of Concern and Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
This table presents the chemicals of concern (COCs) and exposure point concentrations (EPCs) for the COCs in groundwater. The table includes the range of concentrations
 detected for each COC, as well as the frequency of detection (i.e., the number of times the chemical was detected in the samples collected at the site), the EPC and how it
                                                                                was derived.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                      TABLE 2
                                                          Selection of Exposure Scenarios
     Scenario                              Exposure                                Receptor
                        Medium                              Exposure Point                          Receptor Age      Exposure Route     Type of Analysis
    Timeframe                              Medium                                 Population

                                                                Tap                                Adult and Child
  Current/Future      Groundwater          Tap Water        Water/Shower           Resident         (birth to <6        Ing/Der/Inh        Quantitative
                                                               Head                                    years)

Ing – Ingestion
Der – Dermal
Inh – Inhalation


                                                       Summary of Selection of Exposure Pathways

 This table describes the exposure pathways that were evaluated for the risk assessment. Exposure media, exposure points, and characteristics of receptor
                                                               populations are included.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                      TABLE 3
                                                                          Non-Cancer Toxicity Data Summary
Pathway: Oral/Dermal
                                                                                                                                                          Combined
                                                                             Absorp.                                                                                                           Dates of RfD:
                             Chronic/      Oral RfD                                           Adjusted RfD   Adj. Dermal                                 Uncertainty    Sources of RfD:
  Chemical of Concern                                    Oral RfD Units     Efficiency                                          Primary Target Organ
                            Subchronic      Value                                               ( Dermal)     RfD Units                                  /Modifying      Target Organ
                                                                            (Dermal)
                                                                                                                                                           Factors

cis-1,2-Dichloroethene        Chronic       2.0E-01       mg/kg-day             1                2.0E-01     mg/kg-day                Kidney                   3,000         IRIS              11/12/2016

                                                                                                                                  Heart, Immune
                                                                                                                                     System,
Trichloroethylene             Chronic       5.0E-04       mg/kg-day             1                5.0E-04     mg/kg-day                                    10 to 1,000        IRIS              11/12/2016
                                                                                                                                  Developmental,
                                                                                                                                      Kidney

Vinyl Chloride                Chronic       3.0E-03       mg/kg-day             1                3.0E-03     mg/kg-day                 Liver                    30           IRIS              11/12/2016

Chromium1                     Chronic       3.0E-03       mg/kg-day           0.025              7.5E-05     mg/kg-day             None reported               300           IRIS              11/12/2016

Cobalt                        Chronic       3.0E-04       mg/kg-day             1                3.0E-04     mg/kg-day                Thyroid                  3,000        PPRTV                8/25/2008

Nickel2                       Chronic       2.0E-02       mg/kg-day           0.04               8.0E-04     mg/kg-day
                                                                                                                                  Body and organ
                                                                                                                                                               200           IRIS                12/1/2016
                                                                                                                                     weight

Pathway: Inhalation

   Chemical of Concern       Chronic/       Inhalation      Inhalation         Primary Target Organ           Combined Uncertainty                 Sources of RfC:                    Dates:
                            Subchronic         RfC           RfC Units                                         /Modifying Factors                   Target Organ


cis-1,2-Dichloroethene          NA             NA              NA                        NA                                NA                            NA                               NA


Trichloroethylene             Chronic        2.0E-03         mg/m3          Heart, Immune System, Liver              10 to 100                          IRIS                        11/12/2016


Vinyl Chloride                Chronic        1.0E-01         mg/m3                       Liver                             30                           IRIS                        11/12/2016

Key
NA: No information available
IRIS: Integrated Risk Information System
PPRTV: Provisional Peer Reviewed Toxicity Value
1
  based on chromium (VI)
2
  based on nickel, soluble salt
                                                                              Summary of Toxicity Assessment

This table provides non-carcinogenic risk information which is relevant to the contaminants of concern. When available, the chronic toxicity data have been used to develop oral reference doses
(RfDs) and inhalation reference concentrations (RfCs).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                      TABLE 4
                                                                            Cancer Toxicity Data Summary
Pathway: Oral/Dermal

           Chemical of Concern            Oral Cancer Slope             Units             Adjusted Cancer Slope       Slope Factor Units         Weight of Evidence/          Source         Date
                                                Factor                                            Factor                                     Cancer Guideline Description
                                                                                              (for Dermal)

                                                                                                                                           Inadequate information to assess
cis-1,2-Dichloroethene                           NA                      NA                        NA                        NA                                                IRIS       11/12/2016
                                                                                                                                                carcinogenic potential

Trichloroethylene                              4.6E-02                mg/kg-day                  4.6E-02                  mg/kg-day                Carcinogenic to humans      IRIS       11/12/2016

Vinyl Chloride                                 7.2E-01                mg/kg-day                  7.2E-01                  mg/kg-day                          A                 IRIS       11/12/2016

Chromium1                                      5.0E-01                mg/kg-day                 2.0E+01                   mg/kg-day           Likely to be carcinogenic to
                                                                                                                                                                              NJDEP        4/8/2009
                                                                                                                                                         humans

Cobalt                                           NA                      NA                        NA                        NA                             NA                 NA               NA

Nickel                                           NA                      NA                        NA                        NA                             NA                 NA               NA

Pathway: Inhalation
           Chemical of Concern                Unit Risk                 Units                            Weight of Evidence/                                      Source                 Date
                                                                                                     Cancer Guideline Description

cis-1,2-Dichloroethene                           NA                      NA              Inadequate information to assess carcinogenic potential                    IRIS               11/12/2016

Trichloroethylene                              4.1E-06                 (ug/m3)-1                           Carcinogenic to humans                                   IRIS               11/12/2016

Vinyl Chloride                                 4.4E-06                 (ug/m3)-1                                     A                                              IRIS               11/12/2016

  Key:
  A: Human Carcinogen
  1 – based on chromium (VI)


  NA: No information available
 IRIS: Integrated Risk Information System
 NJDEP: New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection

                                                                                Summary of Toxicity Assessment

This table provides carcinogenic risk information which is relevant to the contaminants of concern. Toxicity data are provided for both the oral and inhalation routes of exposure.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                      TABLE 5
                                                                 Risk Characterization Summary - Noncarcinogens
Scenario Timeframe:            Current/Future
Receptor Population:           Site Resident
Receptor Age:                 Adult
                                                                                                                                                               Non-Carcinogenic Risk
    Medium             Exposure Medium        Exposure Point           Chemical of Concern               Primary Target Organ
                                                                                                                                                                                                Exposure
                                                                                                                                          Ingestion         Dermal           Inhalation
                                                                                                                                                                                               Routes Total

                                                                       cis-1,2-Dichloroethene                    Kidney                      0.8              NA                NA                 0.8

                                                                                                         Heart, Immune System,
                                                                          Trichloroethylene
                                                                                                       Developmental, Kidney, Liver
                                                                                                                                             11               1.9                80                 93

                                            Tap water/shower               Vinyl Chloride                         Liver                      0.2             0.01               0.2                0.4
Groundwater              Groundwater
                                                  head
                                                                             Chromium                        None reported                   6.2              2.8               NA                  9

                                                                               Cobalt                            Thyroid                     1.4             0.003              NA                 1.4

                                                                               Nickel                     Body and organ weight              1.9             0.05               NA                  2

                                                                                                                                                                      Hazard Index Total=          107
Scenario Timeframe:            Current/Future
Receptor Population:           Site Resident
Receptor Age:                 Child
                                                                                                                                                               Non-Carcinogenic Risk
    Medium             Exposure Medium        Exposure Point           Chemical of Concern               Primary Target Organ
                                                                                                                                                                                                Exposure
                                                                                                                                          Ingestion         Dermal           Inhalation
                                                                                                                                                                                               Routes Total

                                                                       cis-1,2-Dichloroethene                    Kidney                      1.3              NA                NA                 1.3

                                                                                                         Heart, Immune System,
                                                                          Trichloroethylene
                                                                                                       Developmental, Kidney, Liver
                                                                                                                                             18               3.1                57                 78

                                            Tap water/shower               Vinyl Chloride                         Liver                      0.3             0.02               0.1                0.4
Groundwater              Groundwater
                                                  head
                                                                             Chromium                        None Reported                   10               4.5               NA                  15

                                                                               Cobalt                            Thyroid                     2.4             0.005              NA                 2.4

                                                                               Nickel                     Body and organ weight              3.1             0.09               NA                 3.2

                                                                                                                                                                        Hazard Index Total         100
                                                                     Summary of Risk Characterization - Non-Carcinogens
   The table presents hazard quotients (HQs) for each route of exposure and the hazard index (sum of hazard quotients) for exposure to groundwater containing site-related chemicals. The Risk Assessment
                                    Guidance for Superfund states that, generally, a hazard index (HI) greater than 1 indicates the potential for adverse non-cancer effects.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           TABLE 6
                                        Risk Characterization Summary - Carcinogens
Scenario Timeframe:              Future
Receptor Population:             Site Resident
Receptor Age:                    Lifetime (Adult/child)

   Medium           Exposure        Exposure Point            Chemical of Concern                               Carcinogenic Risk
                    Medium
                                                                                             Ingestion      Dermal       Inhalation      Exposure
                                                                                                                                        Routes Total

                                                              cis-1,2-Dichloroethene            NA             NA            NA              NA

                                                                Trichloroethylene             1.6E-04       2.6E-05        3.2E-04          5E-04

                                         Tap                      Vinyl Chloride              9.2E-04       4.9E-05        2.8E-03          4E-03
Groundwater       Groundwater       water/shower
                                        head                        Chromium                  4.0E-03       1.8E-03          NA             6E-03

                                                                     Cobalt                     NA             NA            NA              NA

                                                                      Nickel                    NA             NA            NA              NA

                                                                                                                        Total Risk =        1E-02

                                            Summary of Risk Characterization – Carcinogens

The table presents site-related cancer risks for groundwater exposure. As stated in the National Contingency Plan, the point of departure is 10-6 and
the acceptable risk range for site-related exposure is 10-6 to 10-4. The cancer risk from trichloroethylene, vinyl chloride and chromium in groundwater
exceeds the acceptable risk range, indicating an unacceptable risk from exposure to groundwater.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                          Table 7
                                                      Chemical‐Specific ARARs, Criteria, and Guidance
                                                             Mansfield Trail Dump Site ‐ OU1
                                                       Byram Township, Sussex County, New Jersey
Regulatory
                           ARAR                        Status                     Requirement Synopsis                                      Comments
  Level
                                                                  Establishes health‐based standards for public drinking     Note that these MCLs are considered
             National Primary Drinking
                                                                  water systems. Also establishes drinking water quality     applicable for groundwater which is a
 Federal     Water Standards‐MCLs and                   ARAR
                                                                  goals set at levels at which no adverse health effects     current source of drinking water
             MCLGs (40 CFR 141)
                                                                  are anticipated with an adequate margin of safety.         (CERCLA Section 300.430[e][2][i][B]).
                                                                                                                             The standards will be used during
             NJDEP Safe Drinking Water
                                                                  Sets MCLs for public drinking water supplies that are      construction of the water line for the
  State      Standards (N.J.A.C. 7:10                   ARAR
                                                                  generally equal to or more stringent than MCLs.            POETS which continue to treat potable
             Subchapter 5)
                                                                                                                             wells

  Key:
  ARAR ‐ applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements                        N.J.A.C. ‐ New Jersey Administrative Code
  MCL ‐ Maximum Contaminant Level                                                   NJDEP ‐ New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
  MCLG ‐ Maximum Contaminant Level Goals                                            PRG ‐ preliminary remediation goal
  CFR ‐ Code of Federal Regulations                                                 OSHA ‐ Occupational Safety and Health Administration
  LSRPs ‐ Licensed Site Remediation Professional                                    POET ‐ Point of entry treatment system
  TBC- To Be Considered

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                             Table 7
                                                          Action‐Specific ARARs, Criteria, and Guidance
                                                                Mansfield Trail Dump Site ‐ OU1
                                                          Byram Township, Sussex County, New Jersey
Regulatory
                            ARAR                          Status                      Requirement Synopsis                                        Comments
   Level
General Site Remediation
               Policy on Floodplains and
               Wetland Assessments for                                Policy guiding actions affecting floodplains and           TBC construction implemented at the
  Federal                                                  TBC
               CERCLA Actions (OSWER                                  wetlands.                                                  site.
               Directive 9280.0-12, 1985)
               State of New Jersey
               Groundwater Quality                                    Establishes standards for the protection of ambient
   State       Standards (N.J.A.C. 7:9-6                  ARAR        groundwater quality. Used as the primary basis for         ARAR for Class IIA aquifers.
               Groundwater Quality                                    setting numerical criteria for groundwater cleanups.
               Standards)
                                                                      Requires soil erosion and sediment control measure
               New Jersey Soil Erosion and                                                                                        This standard will be applied to any
                                                       Potentially    for construction that will potentially result in erosion
   State       Sediment Control Act (N.J.A.C.                                                                                    construction implemented at the site as
                                                       Applicable     of soils and sediment. Applicable to land disturbance
               2:90)                                                                                                             part of the remedy.
                                                                      activities involving greater than 5,000 square feet.
               New Jersey Ambient Air                                                                                            This standard will be applied to any
                                                                      This standard provides the requirement for ambient
   State       Quality Standards (N.J.A.C.                ARAR                                                                   construction implemented at the site as
                                                                      air quality control.
               7:27‐13)                                                                                                          part of the remedy.
               New Jersey Noise Control                                                                                          This standard will be applied to any
                                                                      This standard provides the requirement for noise
   State       (N.J.A.C. 7:29-1; NJSA 13:1G-1             ARAR                                                                   construction implemented at the site as
                                                                      control.
               et. seq.)                                                                                                         part of the remedy.

   Key:
   ARAR ‐ applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements                         N.J.A.C. ‐ New Jersey Administrative Code
   MCL ‐ Maximum Contaminant Level                                                    NJDEP ‐ New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
   MCLG ‐ Maximum Contaminant Level Goals                                             PRG ‐ preliminary remediation goal
   CFR ‐ Code of Federal Regulations                                                  OSHA ‐ Occupational Safety and Health Administration
   LSRPs ‐ Licensed Site Remediation Professional                                     POET ‐ Point of entry treatment system
   TBC- To Be Considered

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                             Table 7
                                                          Action‐Specific ARARs, Criteria, and Guidance
                                                                Mansfield Trail Dump Site ‐ OU1
                                                           Byram Township, Sussex County, New Jersey
Regulatory
                            ARAR                        Status                      Requirement Synopsis                                         Comments
  Level
Water Supply
               NJDEP Granular Activated
               Carbon Point‐of‐Entry                                                                                          This standard will be applied to any POET
                                                                    This standard provides the minimum specifications for
  State        Treatment System Minimum                  ARAR                                                                 systems installed and/or maintained at
                                                                    a POET system.
               Specifications for LSRPs                                                                                       the site.
               (NJDEP GAC-LSRP 3/26/2015)
               Sealing of Abandoned Wells -                         General requirements for sealing of all wells (e.g.,
                                                                                                                              ARAR if any existing wells need to be
  State        Well Abandonment                          ARAR       single cased, multiple cased, hand dug, test wells,
                                                                                                                              abandoned and sealed.
               Procedures (NJAC 7:9-9)                              boreholes and monitoring wells, abandoned wells).
               State of New Jersey Division of                      Regulates new water supply connections and
                                                                                                                              ARAR for Alternate Water
  State        Water Supply - Water Supply               ARAR       extensions, responsible for managing New Jersey’s
                                                                                                                              Supply/Municipal Well Connection.
               Allocation Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:19)                     water supply.

   Key:
   ARAR ‐ applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements                        N.J.A.C. ‐ New Jersey Administrative Code
   MCL ‐ Maximum Contaminant Level                                                   NJDEP ‐ New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
   MCLG ‐ Maximum Contaminant Level Goals                                            PRG ‐ preliminary remediation goal
   CFR ‐ Code of Federal Regulations                                                 OSHA ‐ Occupational Safety and Health Administration
   LSRPs ‐ Licensed Site Remediation Professional                                    POET ‐ Point of entry treatment system
   TBC- To Be Considered

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         Table 7
                                                     Location-Specific ARARs, Criteria, and Guidance
                                                            Mansfield Trail Dump Site - OU1
                                                      Byram Township, Sussex County, New Jersey
Regulatory
                             ARARs                        Status                Requirement Synopsis                                          Comments
  Level
              National Historic Preservation Act                       This statute requires federal agencies to take      If historical and/or archeological material is
              (40 CFR 6.301)                                           into account the effect of any federally            encountered during installation of the
                                                                       assisted undertaking on historical structures       water line, applicability of the National
                                                       Potentially     and archeological data. If the project results in   Historic Preservation Act will be evaluated.
 Federal
                                                       applicable
                                                                       adverse effects, the agency must consult with
                                                                       NJHPO to develop ways to avoid, reduce,
                                                                       minimize and mitigate the impacts.
              Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C.                        This statute restricts activities where             This will be applicable if endangered species
              1531)                                                    endangered species may be present.                  are observed at the site during ecological
                                                                                                                           site assessments.
                                                       Potentially
 Federal
                                                       applicable



              New Jersey Highlands Water                               This requirement preserves open space and           Since the site is located within the
              Protection and Planning Act                              natural resources (including water resources)       preservation area, remedial alternatives
              (N.J.S.A. 13:20-1 et seq.)                               within the Highlands Region of New Jersey.          that are considered "major Highlands
  State                                                   ARAR                                                             development" as defined by this act.
                                                                                                                           Consultation with NJDEP will establish
                                                                                                                           compliance.


  Key:                                                                            CERCLA - Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
  Liability Act ARAR - applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements        NEPA - National Environmental Policy Act
  CFR - Code of Federal Regulations                                               N.J.A.C. - New Jersey Administrative Code
  CWA - Clean Water Act                                                           NJDEP - New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
  EPA - Environmental Protection Agency                                           N.J.S.A. - New Jersey Statutes Annotated
  EO - Executive Order                                                            OSWER - Office of Solid Waste and Environmental Response
  USC - United States                                                             TBC- To Be Considered

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

TABLE 8
Cost Estimate for Alternative 3:
Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site-OU1 ROD
Cost Estimate Summary
No.                                                Description                                         Cost
      Remedial Action
01    General Requirements                                                                $710,000
02    Alternate Water Supply                                                              $5,603,000
          Subtotal                                                                        $6,313,000
      Contingency (20%)                                                                   $1,262,600
          Subtotal                                                                        $7,575,600
      General Contractor Markup (Insurance, Bonds, Fees, etc.) 10%                        $757,560
          Subtotal of Remedial Action                                                     $8,333,160

      OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS
02    Annual O&M Cost for Alternate Water Supply (Year 1)                                 $77,278
02    Annual Monitoring and Sampling Cost (Year 1 to Year 30)                             $27,016
      Present Worth for O&M (Year 0 to Year 30)                                           $412,521
      Includes 1 Year of Alternate Water Supply O&M Cost and 30 Years of Monitoring and
      Sampling

      Total Present Worth                                                                 $8,746,000

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

TABLE 8
Cost Estimate for Alternative 3:
Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site-OU1 ROD
Individual Cost Item Backup
                              Description
01 - General Requirements
Assume project will take a total of 8 months to complete
Assume pre-construction work plans and meetings will take 1.5 months
General Conditions
                                                                       Quantity                 Unit                     Unit Cost     Total
A) Project Management
Assume the following staff for 20 hours per week for the duration of project:
  Project Manager                                                      672                      hour                     $150          $100,800
  Project Engineer                                                     672                      hour                     $110          $73,920
  Procurement Staff                                                    672                      hour                     $90           $60,480
     Subtotal                                                                                                                          $235,200
B) Work Plan Preparation
  Project Engineer                                                     252                      hour                     $110          $27,720
  Project Manager (Half-Time)                                          126                      hour                     $150          $18,900
     Subtotal                                                                                                                          $46,620
C) Permits
  Permit Specialist                                                    40                       hour                     $125          $5,000
  Project Manager                                                      20                       hour                     $150          $3,000
     Subtotal                                                                                                                          $8,000
D) Safety and Health Requirements
Safety and Health Requirements to include the Site Health and Safety Officer (SHSO) and personnel protective equipment and supplies.
Assume SHSO is onsite during any onsite activities, approximately 20 hours a week.
Total Construction Duration:                                           8                        months

  SHSO                                                               672                       hour                      $125          $84,000
  PPE for All Onsite Staff                                           168                       day                       $100          $336,000
    Subtotal                                                                                                                           $420,000

TOTAL COST FOR GENERAL REQUIREMENTS                                                                                                    $710,000

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 TABLE 8
 Cost Estimate for Alternative 3:
 Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site-OU1 ROD
 Individual Cost Item Backup
                                 Description
 02 - Alternate Water Supply
 Costs are based on the Hopewell 100% Design Cost Estimate to USACE. Unit costs were derived from dividing total costs by total LF used in Hopewell Design
 All costs include the following GR costs: project-dedicated supervisory staff and equipment, temporary facilities, surveying, and best management practices

                                                                                    Quantity           Unit                 Unit Cost                          Total
 A) Project Management
   Upgrade Well No. 2 Pump from 18 gpm to 30 gpm                                                                                                               $15,000
   Upgrade Well No. 2 Electrical & Back-up Power Improvement                                                                                                   $90,000
   Well Treatment Facility with Submersible Wastewater Pump &                                                                                                  $1,400,000
   Finished Water Pump System
   Raw Water Main from Well No. 2 to Well Treatment Facility                        1,350              linear foot          $400                               $540,000
   Wastewater Force Main from Well Treatment Facility                               1,000              linear foot          $300                               $300,000
   8" Water Main from Well Treatment Facility to Impacted Area                      6,400              linear foot          $450                               $2,880,000
   Install Water Service Line, Remove POET Systems & Abandon Private                18                 each                 $21,000                            $378,000
   Wells
      Subtotal                                                                                                                                                 $5,603,000

 TOTAL CAPITAL COST FOR ALTERNATE WATER SUPPLY                                                                                                                 $5,603,000
 TOTAL ANNUAL O&M COST FOR ALTERNATE WATER SUPPLY (178 CONNECTIONS)*                                                                                           $77,278

*A more detailed breakdown of the O&M Costs can be found in the Mansfield Trail Dump OU1 FFS Report.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

TABLE 8
Cost Estimate for Alternative 3:
Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site-OU1 ROD
Individual Cost Item Backup
                              Description
03 - Monitoring and Sampling (M&S)
Assume 11 nearby properties will be monitored annually for 30 years. If any of the nearby properties become impacted within the 30-year period, the option for additional connections to
the water supply system will be evaluated at that point in time and is not included in this cost estimate.

Estimated Number of Monitored Only Homes                                                          11                      homes

Assume the following Monitoring and Sampling Event Schedule
Pre-construction Work Plans and Meetings                                                          3                       days
Field Mobilization, Installation, and Demobilization                                              3                       days
Project Closeout                                                                                  3                       days
Total Project Duration                                                                            9                       days
                                                                                       Quantity           Unit                      Unit Cost                          Total
A) Project Management and Site Supervisory
Assume the following staff for 10 hours per week for the duration of project:
    Project Manager                                                         $150                  hour                    9                               $1,350
    Project Engineer                                                        $110                  hour                    9                               $990
    Procurement                                                             $90                   hour                    9                               $810
       Total Management and Office Support:                                                                                                               $3,150

B) Onsite supervisory
Assume the following full time site supervisory staff for the 3 days of field events
   Site Superintendent                                                         $120               hour                    36                              $4,320
   Pickup Truck                                                                $100               day                     3                               $300
   Per Diem                                                                    $142               day                     3                               $426
       Total Onsite Supervisory Staff for Field Duration:                                                                                                 $6,000

Safety and Health Requirements to include the Site Health and Safety Officer (SHSO) and personnel protective equipment and supplies
Assume PPE required for 2 people per work day for the duration of O&M activities.


SHSO                                                                          $125                hour                    36                              $4,500
PPE                                                                           $10                 day                     3                               $600

       Subtotal Cost for Monitoring and Sampling General Requirements Annually                                                                            $15,000

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

TABLE 8
Cost Estimate for Alternative 3:
Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site-OU1 ROD
Individual Cost Item Backup
                            Description                                                                                                                       Cost
03 - Monitoring and Sampling (M&S)
                                                                          Quantity         Unit                    Unit Cost                     Total
C) Field Sampling (Assume 1 person, 3 days x 12 hours per day for sampling)
    Project Manager                                                       2                hour                    $150                          $300
    Purchasing Specialist                                                 3                day                     $90                           $270
    Project Scientist                                                     3                day                     $1,200                        $3,600
    Van/Car Rental                                                        3                day                     $100                          $300
    Equipment and PPE                                                     3                day                     $300                          $900
    Shipping                                                              3                day                     $100                          $300
    Per Diem for 1 Person                                                 3                day                     $142                          $426
    Miscellaneous                                                         3                hour                    $100                          $300
Subtotal (Annually)                                                                                                                              $6,396

D) Sample Analysis
(Assume raw water from impacted homes and monitored homes will be sampled annually but a sample will be taken between GAC tanks from each POET system quarterly)

   Year 1 through Year 5 (1st Quarter)
   Field Samples                                                         11                count
   Field Duplicates                                                      1                 count
   Trip Blanks                                                           1                 count
   VOC Analysis                                                          13                each                    $80                           $1,040
   Data Management                                                       6.5               hour                    $100                          $650
   Data Analysis/Summary                                                 13                hour                    $110                          $1,430
          Subtotal (Annual)                                                                                                                      $3,120

   Sampling Report
   Project Manager                                                       2                 hour                    $150                          $300
   Project Engineer                                                      20                hour                    $110                          $2,200
         Annual Subtotal Reporting Cost                                                                                                          $2,500

   TOTAL ANNUAL OM&M COST                                                                                                                        $27,016

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

TABLE 8
Cost Estimate for Alternative 3:
Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site-OU1 ROD
Individual Cost Item Backup

   Present Worth Calculation for Operation and Maintenance Cost

                                                                          This discount
                                   This is a recurring cost every year
                                                                          factor is (P/A,i,n
                                      This discount factor is (P/A,i,n)
                                                  P = Present Worth
                                                 A = Annual amount
                                                      i = interest rate   7%

                                                      P= A x (1+i)n - 1
                                                               i(1+i)n

                                              O&M Cost for 30 Years
                                                n = number of years       30
                                                                          12.409 for 30
                                            The multiplier for (P/A) =
                                                                          years

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  APPENDIX II
Administrative Record

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                               FINAL
                                                                            09/07/2017                                          REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP
          CERCLIS ID: NJN000206345
               OUID: 01
                SSID: A238
              Action:


                                                                   Image
DocID:    Doc Date: Title:                                         Count:     Doc Type:          Addressee Name/Organization:         Author Name/Organization:
510503   09/07/2017 ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX FOR OU1 FOR THE        3    Administrative                                      (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                    MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SITE                                Record Index                                       AGENCY)


395977   05/01/2016 REDACTED REVISED DATA EVALUATION SUMMARY         299        Report       (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (EES JV)
                    REPORT, VOLUME 1 OF 2 TEXT FOR THE MANSFIELD                             AGENCY)
                    TRAIL DUMP SITE


471815   02/06/2017 FINAL HUMAN HEALTH RISK ASSESSMENT FOR THE       206        Report       (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (CDM SMITH)
                    FOCUSED FEASIBILITY STUDY OU1 FOR THE                                    AGENCY)
                    MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SITE


451935   02/21/2017 FINAL FOCUSED FEASIBILITY STUDY FOR OU1 FOR       85        Report                                          (CDM SMITH)
                    THE MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SITE




510564   06/08/2017 PROPOSED PLAN FOR OU1 FOR THE MANSFIELD           11     Publication                                        (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                    TRAIL DUMP SITE                                                                                             AGENCY)


279202   11/17/2009 CORRESPONDENCE REGARDING EPA'S                     1        Letter       PUTNAM,EDWARD (US ENVIRONMENTAL    ROTOLA,JOSEPH (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                    CONFIRMATION OF THE NJDEP'S REMOVAL ACTION                               PROTECTION AGENCY)                 PROTECTION AGENCY)
                    REQUEST FOR THE MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SITE



363178   03/01/2011 NPL SITE LISTING NARRATIVE FOR THE MANSFIELD       1     Publication                                        (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                    TRAIL DUMP SITE                                                                                             AGENCY)


263724   03/04/2011 REMOVAL SITE EVALUATION (RSE) FOR THE             10        Report                                          MAGRIPLES,NICK (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                    MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SITE                                                                                   PROTECTION AGENCY)




                                                                            Page 1 of 3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                      ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                   FINAL
                                                                                09/07/2017                                           REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP
          CERCLIS ID: NJN000206345
               OUID: 01
                SSID: A238
              Action:


                                                                       Image
DocID:    Doc Date: Title:                                             Count:    Doc Type:            Addressee Name/Organization:         Author Name/Organization:
263723   09/29/2011 ACTION MEMORANDUM RV1 - REQUEST FOR                   26    Memorandum       ENCK,JUDITH,A (US ENVIRONMENTAL     DIGUARDIA,LOUIS (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                    APPROVAL AND FUNDING FOR A REMOVAL ACTION                                    PROTECTION                          PROTECTION AGENCY)
                    AND $2 MILLION EXEMPTION FOR THE MANSFIELD                                   AGENCY)|MUGDAN,WALTER,E (US
                    TRAIL DUMP SITE                                                              ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)


263721   12/01/2011 REMOVAL ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX FOR THE            7    Administrative
                    MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SITE                                    Record Index

279405   01/03/2013 FINAL REMOVAL ACTION REPORT - EPA CONTRACT           368        Report
                    NO.: EP-W-06-072 - TDD NO.: TO-0027-0023 - DCN
                    NO.: RST-2-02-F-2132 FOR THE MANSFIELD TRAIL
                    DUMP SITE FOR THE MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SITE



503992   02/15/2013 WORK PLAN - VOLUME I, REVISION 3, TECHNICAL           62      Work Plan      (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION        (EES JV)
                    APPROACH, REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION / FEASIBILITY                               AGENCY)
                    STUDY FOR THE MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SITE




503998   09/04/2013 FINAL RELEASE - PUBLIC HEALTH ASSESSMENT,             68        Report                                           (NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH)
                    PUBLIC HEALTH IMPLICATIONS OF SITE-RELATED
                    EXPOSURES TO TRICHLOROETHYLENE FOR THE
                    MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SITE


506523   09/18/2013 REDACTED QUALITY ASSURANCE PROJECT PLAN,             650      Work Plan      (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION        (EES JV)
                    REVISION 3, REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION / FEASIBILITY                             AGENCY)
                    STUDY, APPENDIX A FOR THE MANSFIELD TRAIL
                    DUMP SITE




                                                                                Page 2 of 3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                FINAL
                                                                             09/07/2017                                        REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP
          CERCLIS ID: NJN000206345
               OUID: 01
                SSID: A238
              Action:


                                                                    Image
DocID:    Doc Date: Title:                                          Count:     Doc Type:        Addressee Name/Organization:         Author Name/Organization:
503999   06/05/2017 TRANSMITTAL OF THE DRAFT PROPOSED PLAN OU1          2        Email     Garcia,Diego (US ENVIRONMENTAL      MUMFORD,FRED (NEW JERSEY
                    WITH NEW JERSEY FINAL EDITS FOR THE MANSFIELD                          PROTECTION AGENCY)                  DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
                    TRAIL DUMP SITE                                                                                            PROTECTION)




                                                                             Page 3 of 3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX III
 State Letter

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT AL PROTECTION
CHRIS CHRISTIE                               SITE REMEDIATION & WASTE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM                            BOB MARTIN
Governor                                                       Mail Code 401-06                                     Commissioner
                                                                P. 0. Box 420
KIM GUADAGNO                                           Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0420
Lt. Governor                                                Tel.#: 609-292-1250
                                                            Fax.#: 609-777-1914


                                                           September 21, 2017



           Mr. John Prince, Acting Director
           Emergency and Remedial Response Division
           U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
           Region II
           290 Broadway
           New York, NY 10007-1866

           Re:    Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site
                  Record of Decision Operable Unit 1
                  EPA ID# NJN000206345
                  DEP PI# 253990

        Dear Mr. Prince:

        The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) completed its review of the "Record of
        Decision, Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site, Operable Unit 1: Contaminated Potable Wells at
        Residential Properties, Byram Township, Sussex County, New Jersey" prepared by the U.S.
        Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Region II in September 2017 and concurs with the selected
        remedy to address contaminated potable wells at residential properties.

        The selected remedy included in this Record of Decision covers the first of two planned remedial phases,
        or operable units, for the Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site. Operable Unit 1 includes extending a
        public water line to provide potable water to approximately 18 residential properties. Operable Unit 2 will
        address the site-wide contaminated groundwater, vapor intrusion and potential residual soil contamination
        from the site.

        The major components of the selected remedy include:

                 Provision of potable water to impacted properties through the construction of a water line and
                 connections;

                 Any necessary upgrades to the water supply system; and,

                 The abandonment of private residential potable wells.




                            New Jersey is an Equal Opportunity Employer, Printed on Recycled Paper and Recyclable

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

DEP appreciates the opportunity to participate in the decision-making process to select an appropriate
remedy for this site. Further, DEP is looking forward to future cooperation with EPA during remedial
actions to provide safe drinking water for residential properties and to ensure appropriate cleanup of
groundwater and further monitoring at this site.

If you have any questions, please call me at 609-292-1250.




C:     Kenneth J. Kloo, Director, Division of . ._{"',1f'. l"'..,('..,J,..!".T~!rJ.nu Management, DEP
                                                          1


       Edward Putnam, Assistant Director, Publicly Funded Response Element, DEP
       Carole Petersen, Chief, New Jersey Remediation Branch, EPA Region II




                                                              2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    APPENDIX IV
Responsiveness Summary

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY
Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site
Byram, New Jersey

INTRODUCTION

This Responsiveness Summary provides a summary of the public's comments and concerns
regarding the Proposed Plan for the Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site's (Site) Operable Unit
1 (OU1) preferred remedy, and EPA's responses to those comments. All comments summarized
in this document have been considered in EPA's final decision for the selection of remedial
alternatives for the Site.

This Responsiveness Summary is divided into the following sections:

      I.   BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS
           This section provides the history of community involvement and interests regarding the
           Site.

     II.   COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY OF MAJOR QUESTIONS, COMMENTS,
           CONCERNS AND RESPONSES
           This section contains summaries of oral comments received by EPA at the public
           meeting, EPA's responses to these comments, as well as responses to written comments
           received during the public comment period.

III.       ATTACHMENTS

The last section of this Responsiveness Summary includes attachments, which document public
participation in the remedy selection process for this Site. These attachments are:

Attachment A contains the Proposed Plan that was distributed to the public for review and
comment;
Attachment B contains the public notices that appeared in the NJ Herald;
Attachment C contains the transcript of the public meeting; and
Attachment D contains the written comments received by EPA during the public comment
period.

I.         BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS

EPA has worked closely with local residents, public officials, and other interested members of
the community since the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP)
requested assistance with the Site in the early 2000s. The Site was added to the NPL in March
2011. EPA then completed removal of former waste disposal trenches containing source material
from February to May of 2012. On May 9, 2016, EPA released the Proposed Plan and supporting
documentation for the potable water remedy to the public. The Proposed Plan and index for the
Administrative Record were made available to the public online, and the Administrative Record
files were made available at the EPA Administrative Record File Room, 290 Broadway, 18th

                                                  1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Floor, New York, New York; and the Sussex County Library Louise Childs Branch, 21 Sparta
Road, Stanhope, New Jersey.

On June 13, 2017, EPA published a Public Notice in the NJ Herald newspaper that provided
information about the public comment period, the public meeting for the Proposed Plan, and the
availability of the administrative record for the Site. EPA also published a press release on June
13, 2017, to announce the release of the Proposed Plan. The public comment period closed on
July 13, 2017.

A public meeting was held on June 27, 2017, at the Byram Township Municipal Building at 10
Mansfield Drive, Stanhope, New Jersey. The purpose of this meeting was to inform residents,
local officials, and interested members of the public about the Superfund process, present details
about EPA’s remedial plan, receive comments on the Proposed Plan, and respond to questions
from area residents and other interested parties.

II.    COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY OF MAJOR QUESTIONS, COMMENTS,
       CONCERNS, AND RESPONSES

Part 1: Verbal Comments

This section provides a summary of verbal comments received from the public during the public
comment period and EPA’s responses.

A. SUMMARY OF QUESTIONS AND EPA’S RESPONSES FROM THE PUBLIC
   MEETING CONCERNING THE MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SITE – June 27, 2017

A public meeting was held on June 27, 2017, at the Byram Township Municipal Building at 10
Mansfield Drive, Stanhope, New Jersey. In addition to a presentation of the investigation
findings, EPA presented the Proposed Plan and preferred alternatives for the Site, received
comments from meeting participants, and responded to questions regarding the remedial
alternatives under consideration. A transcript of the public meeting is provided in Attachment C.

A summary of comments raised by the public following EPA’s presentation are categorized by
relevant topics and presented below:

General Comments

       Comment 1: Several commenters asked if they would be offered the ability to hook up to
       the waterline even if their Point-of-Entry Treatment Systems (POETS) are not currently
       being maintained by the state.

       EPA response: All properties with potable wells which are known to be contaminated
       with TCE at concentrations in excess of New Jersey Ground Water Quality Standards
       (eligible properties) will be eligible for connection to water lines provided as part of
       EPA's remedy regardless of whether those homes have POETS maintained by NJDEP.
       There would be no cost to residences or owners for the installation, connection to the
                                                2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

water line, or for associated restoration work. Homeowners would be responsible for the
payment of water bills after the remedy is implemented.

Comment 2: A commenter asked if the state or EPA would continue to maintain a
POETS if a homeowner decided not to hook up to the waterline.

EPA response: EPA will not be maintaining POETS for homeowners who decide not to
hook up to the waterline. Also, it is EPA’s understanding that after the waterline is
installed and connections are offered to the impacted properties, the NJDEP will not be
maintaining the existing POETS. Thus, homeowners that choose not to hook up to the
alternate water supply will be responsible for maintaining their own POETS. For
confirmation of NJDEP’s intentions, please contact NJDEP.

Comment 3: Several commenters asked if there was a way for the federal government to
pay for maintenance of the treatment systems for both homes that have already been
dropped from the state’s program or for the new owners if they were to sell their homes.
One stated that they thought it should be included as part of the remedy.

EPA response: EPA does not pay for maintenance of POETS at this Site; that
responsibility lies with NJDEP. One of the reasons that EPA selected Alternative 3 is
because it provides a more permanent solution than POETS. It is EPA’s understanding
that NJDEP will continue to maintain existing systems for properties in accordance with
the state Spill Compensation Fund, until EPA’s remedy has been implemented and that
properties that are currently privately maintained will need to be privately maintained
until the remedy is implemented at the Site. For confirmation of NJDEP’s intentions,
please contact NJDEP.

Comment 4: A commenter asked if a homeowner were to rent their home would the state
still maintain the POETS.

EPA response: Questions regarding eligibility under the NJDEP Spill Compensation
Fund and are deferred to NJDEP.

Comment 5: A commenter asked if there were any new homes that were affected.

EPA response: As part of a recent private property inspection, testing at an additional
residential potable well indicated trichloroethylene (TCE) levels exceeding New Jersey
Safe Drinking Water Standards. The property was referred to NJDEP for further
evaluation and action, which included confirmation sampling, and the installation and
maintenance of POETS. The NJDEP informed EPA that they will install POETS if the
TCE levels in a residential potable well are at or exceed 1 part per billion, and that
POETS would be sampled and maintained by the NJDEP until EPA’s remedy is
implemented at the Site.

Comment 6: A commenter asked if a homeowner wanted their well tested would EPA or
the state pay for the testing.

                                        3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      EPA response: Residents in close proximity to the Site may be contacted by EPA in the
      future to sample their well, or should contact EPA to discuss previous and future testing
      of their property. EPA will be conducting additional sampling, at residential properties in
      the proximity of the Site as determined by EPA, throughout the OU2 Remedial
      Investigation (RI) and the OU1 Remedial Design (RD) phase.

      Comment 7: A commenter asked if the funding for the preferred alternative was already
      approved and if not what the likelihood of getting funding would be?

      EPA response: No. Before a remedy can be implemented, EPA will need to begin the
      RD phase of the remedy. Once the RD phase is completed, the project will then seek
      funding for the construction phase of the project. EPA is also currently determining the
      extent of TCE in the source areas. While EPA cannot guarantee that funds will be
      available when needed for cleanups, there is a process for securing funds. EPA first tries
      to get private funding from Potentially Responsible Party(s) (PRPs), to implement a
      remedy, so that public monies are not spent unless necessary. At this time, no viable
      PRPs have been identified for the Site. If the project is federally funded, the project will
      be evaluated with other EPA projects, and different factors are weighed in the process of
      providing funding. If the project is federally funded, the state contributes ten percent, as
      well.

Alternate Water Supply Remedy

      Comment 8: A commenter asked how long it would take for a water source to be
      connected to the impacted homes.

      EPA response: Once the OU1 ROD is final, the remedial process progresses in phases.
      First, the RD phase will begin, during which specifications and plans for the selected
      remedy are developed. A Remedial Action (RA) phase is initiated after RD is completed.
      At this stage construction of the remedy begins. The process of RD is expected to take
      several years. Construction of EPA’s preferred Alternative is estimated to take 8 months
      but may be longer depending on the conclusion of the RD.

      Comment 9: A commenter asked if the current systems would be maintained until the
      alternate water supply is constructed and who would maintain the systems?

      EPA response: NJDEP has informed EPA that the POETS which are currently sampled
      and maintained by NJDEP will continue to be sampled and maintained by NJDEP in
      accordance with the state Spill Compensation Fund, until the OU1 remedy is
      implemented for the Site. NJDEP has also informed EPA that properties with POETS
      that are not sampled and maintained by NJDEP will need to be privately maintained until
      the OU1 remedy is implemented at the Site. NJDEP, as the agency responsible for
      POETS, should be contacted with further questions regarding the POETS.



                                                4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Comment 11: A commenter stated that they were hesitant to join a water company that is
run by volunteers and that has their own contamination issues. They then asked if EPA
would monitor the water system after the water line was constructed and connections
were made.

EPA response: The Superfund program does not monitor water systems once connection
to a water line is complete. It is the responsibility of the water system to ensure that
drinking water supplied to residents meets all current state and federal regulations.
However, EPA would only select a water supply which is able to meet applicable federal
and state drinking water standards at the time that the water supply is connected to
residences. Necessary upgrades to any selected water system are included in the preferred
remedy and would be funded by EPA.

Comment 12: A commenter asked when we would make public our decision as to which
water supply will be used. This commenter also asked which water sources we have
already been in discussions with.

EPA response: EPA will be in communication with the community throughout RD of
the project, which is expected to take several years. Area water systems such as West
Brookwood, Stanhope public water and East Brookwood Estates Property Owners
Association (EBEPOA) have already been contacted in regard to the preferred remedy.
EPA will have more formal discussions with necessary water system stakeholders
throughout RD.

Comment 13: A commenter asked if other water systems, besides EBEPOA, were still in
consideration.

EPA response: A comprehensive search in the nearby area for public and private water
systems was completed as part of the Feasibility Study. As part of the remedy, EPA will
formally begin discussions with appropriate nearby water systems to explore the
feasibility of these options. Selection of the alternate water supply will be finalized in the
RD phase of the project.

Comment 14: A commenter stated that they felt it was premature to choose a waterline
remedy before choosing a water supply source.

EPA response: EPA selected Alternative 3 on the basis that it would provide a
permanent solution. Specifics including selection of the alternate water supply and
configuration of the new connections will be determined in the RD phase. EPA does not
believe it would be appropriate to make a final decision regarding a water supply source
until a Record of Decision is issued.

Comment 15: A commenter asked if, when a water system is selected, the community
members that are a part of that system will be able to discuss the decision.




                                          5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       EPA response: EPA has historically apprised the township and community stakeholders
       of project milestones during Community Advisory Group (CAG) meetings and via
       telephone, email, and community updates. EPA expects to continue to have meaningful
       public input throughout the implementation of the remedy in this manner. In addition,
       the commenter should refer to any rules or regulations of the body which governs the
       selected public or private water system to determine what, if any processes, will be
       followed prior to agreeing to provide water to additional homes.

       Comment 16: A commenter asked what would happen if the selected water system chose
       not to work with EPA to extend a line to the impacted area of the community and if the
       water system had a choice about whether or not to hook up additional residences.

       EPA response: EPA has not yet selected a water supplier for the remedy. EPA does not
       intend to force any private water supplier to add additional residences to their system at
       this Site, absent the agreement of that water supplier. Specifically, EPA intends to work
       with the legal owners or governing boards of any system during the RD phase to
       negotiate connecting the residences with contaminated potable wells. Design and
       construction costs related to the connections would be funded by EPA.

Site Investigation

       Comment 17: A commenter asked if the investigation was extended to further areas of the
       community and if in the investigation EPA saw the contaminant levels dropping?

       EPA response: Concentrations of the TCE contamination at the Site fluctuate seasonally
       but have been generally consistent over time. A more detailed analysis of concentration
       trends will be included as part of the OU2 ROD. Data collected as part of the first phase
       of the site-wide remedial investigation, documented in the Data Evaluation Summary
       Report (DESR), has preliminarily shown limited potential for measureable improvement
       in the aquifer within a reasonable time frame. This information informed EPA during
       selection of the alternative water supply option; it appears that this option is the most
       protective of human health and the environment.

       Comment 18: A commenter asked if a map could be made available to show the extent of
       the delineation so far. It was also asked if testing for NAPL had been conducted in the
       bedrock.

       EPA response: Figure 3 of the ROD shows the existing monitoring wells throughout the
       Site. More information on contaminated groundwater delineation can also be found in the
       DESR, which is a part of the Administrative Record. The delineation of site-wide
       groundwater contamination will be further investigated during the Remedial Investigation
       for OU2.

       Comment 19: A commenter asked if the OU that is planned to address the site-wide
       contaminated groundwater would potentially remediate the residential wells (before the
       waterline would be put in).

                                                6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       EPA response: Please refer to EPA's response to Comment 17. The DESR, has
       preliminarily shown limited potential for measureable improvement in the aquifer within
       a reasonable time frame. For this reason, EPA has chosen the preferred remedy which
       will provide a permanent solution that is protective of human health and the environment.

Part 2: Other Written and Verbal Comments Received During the Public Comment Period

Written comments were received from various people and organizations during the public
comment period. They are included below, followed by EPA's responses. Responses are divided
into sections, as needed, for clarity.

The following written comments were received via email:

Commenter 1 asked:
1a: When you make any changes to the permanent alternate water supplier’s system will you be
using EPA standards or NJDEP standards? For instance, maximum contaminant levels can be
different between the EPA and NJDEP. Water systems must comply with NJDEP standards and
regulations in NJ. The EPA stated they would pay to have a permanent alternate water supply
provided to these 19 homes. Will the EPA be paying for everything that is necessary to meet
NJDEP standards?

       EPA Response 1a: As part of the selected remedy EPA would perform any upgrades
       necessary to ensure the water system is able to supply the impacted residents.
       Furthermore, EPA will meet the more stringent standard, in this case, the NJDEP
       standard of 1 part per billion. The water system supplying the drinking water must also
       show, through quarterly testing, as required under the Safe Drinking Water Act, that
       contaminant concentrations are below current state and federal standards. In addition, the
       water being supplied must also meet the standards for all compounds that are regulated,
       not just Site-related contaminants. This ensures that all water supplied to residents meets
       all current state and federal standards. See also Comment 11 above.

1b: Will you be contacting the 19 homes in order to determine if they are willing to connect to an
alternate permanent water supply before you proceed with the design phase? How can you plan
to build a water system before finding out how many people intend to connect to it? Are you
going to proceed even if only a few homes decide to connect? Are you contacting other
surrounding homes (beyond the 19 that are contaminated) in that area to determine their
willingness to connect? Will you require that written commitments be provided in order to
connect to the system? If so will these commitments be required of both the 19 contaminated
homes as well as any surrounding homes wishing/needing to connect? Doesn't the design of the
water system modifications depend on how many homes intend to connect to the system?

       EPA Response 1b: EPA will be speaking with individuals impacted by this remedy as
       the project moves ahead to try to address any individual concerns they may have. It is
       EPA’s understanding that the community is generally interested in connecting to an
       alternate water supply because of the permanent access to potable water it would provide.

                                                7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       EPA does not intend to require that property owners hook up to the water supply when it
       is offered.

1c: How do you expect the public to intelligently comment on your choice of a "permanent
alternate water supplier" when you do not name the water company you intend to use? There is a
significant difference in the cost of the water between the many local water systems under
consideration. Some have meters while others do not. Others are run by a municipality while
others are run by a volunteer homeowner association board. Some systems are newer while
others are older and will require costly capital improvements. How are the present users of the
nearby water systems able to comment if they do not know they are being considered as the
alternate water source and may have to incur the burden of future maintenance for these 19
homes which may raise their rates and negatively impact the quality and supply/pressure of their
water? One water system is considering selling their system and the sale price may be impacted
by the fact that the EPA may be willing to pay for capital improvements to supply these 19 homes
which if true would allow the water company to increase the sale price of their water system.

       EPA Response 1c: As stated elsewhere in the responses, EPA will apprise the township
       and community stakeholders of project milestones during CAG meetings and via
       telephone, email, and community updates. See specifically EPA Response to Comment
       16 regarding choice of water supplier. In addition, EPA expects to continue to have
       meaningful public input throughout the implementation of the remedy. Finally, EPA is
       not involved in private sales of water systems and therefore is unable to comment on the
       question referring to the price of the water system.

1d: Have you determined what the effect of decommissioning the 19 private wells might cause on
the flow of contaminated TCE water within the aquifer? Could this cause other wells to become
contaminated as those 19 wells will no longer be pulling water from the aquifer and cause the
flow of ground water to change?

       EPA Response 1d: Data from the DESR shows that the plume is roughly at steady state,
       thus, EPA does not expect the plume to spread significantly beyond its current extent.
       However, there is variability on the local level, and for this reason, it is impossible to
       accurately make predictions about future local impacts. Thus it does not appear, at this
       time, that decommissioning the wells would have a significant effect on TCE within the
       aquifer.

1e: Did the East Brookwood Estates Property Owners Association board state that they are
willing to work with the EPA to supply these 19 contaminated homes with water?

       EPA Response 1e: EPA was notified through email and through verbal discussions that
       EBEPOA would be interested in working with EPA to supply the impacted residents.

Commenter 2:

2a: Commenter two began by stating that he/she has been a CAG member since the Mansfield
Trail Dump site was added to the EPA Superfund National Priorities List. He/she added:

                                               8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

“My primary objective was to represent the members of the East Brookwood Estates Property
Owners Association of which I have been a member since 1964. I was Vice President of
EBEPOA for the majority of my involvement on the CAG. I cannot carry out my role as a CAG
member to promote community awareness regarding the Site without cooperation from the EPA.
You, Pat and Diego are those sources.”

       EPA Response 2a: EPA has been actively involved in keeping the community up to date
       through regular CAG meetings. CAG meetings have been held quarterly since the
       CAG’s formation in 2010 and have been well attended by CAG members and other
       interested parties. EPA will continue to hold CAG meetings in the future and they are
       always open to all members of the public.

2b: The press release does not reveal the FACT that the EBEPOA is named in the FFS and is a
permanent alternate water supply being considered in the proposal plan according to the EPA
info in the link. In my opinion the uncertain statements are the EPA’s unwillingness to provide a
factual proposal as to naming a designated water supply. The public cannot realistically
comment or ask meaningful questions about the proposed plan if you don’t name the water
supply.

       EPA Response 2b: The EBEPOA was used in the FFS for costing purposes only. EPA
       has not chosen the EBEPOA or any other water system as such an action would be
       premature before EPA issued a Proposed Plan and received and considered input from
       the public. Now that a ROD has been issued which selects an extended water line as a
       permanent solution for the residences with contaminated wells, EPA will contact and
       select an appropriate water system. EPA believes that the public had ample opportunity
       to consider the fact that EPA used EBEPOA for costing purposes in the FFS
       notwithstanding that the press release did not specifically name EBEPOA. All facts
       relevant to EPA’s selection of a remedy were contained in the FFS. In addition, the issue
       of the EBEPOA being used for costing purposes was extensively discussed during CAG
       meetings and at the Public meeting. See EPA Response to 2a.

2c: “EBEPOA is preparing to sell our water association, if the sale occurs, we will not be voting
since we will no longer be the owners. Suez is offering a price for our association based on the
amount of expenditures they project are needed for capital improvements. These expenditures
would be effected [sic] if the EPA provides the financing for these capital improvements. This
EPA proposal could affect the selling price that we are negotiating with Suez and the amount
that EBEPOA members may be receiving as a distribution of funds after all expenses of the
dissolution are paid.”

       EPA Response 2c: In implementing the remedy selected in the ROD, EPA will be
       evaluating and discussing extending the water line to the residences with contaminated
       wells with the owners of all appropriate water systems. EPA will contact the legal
       owners of each of these water systems at that time. In discussions with EBEPOA, EPA
       will hold discussions with whoever is the legal owner of that system at that time. In



                                                9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       addition, EPA believes that having issued the decision in the ROD allows discussions
       with any appropriate water system to be made with more certainty.

2d: “In my opinion any viable water system being considered should have been named in the
press release so consumers in those systems were aware this could impact them and they had an
opportunity to comment at the meeting or within the comment period. I feel that our water
company’s name is being withheld until we sell, since our board is only interested if we sell. If
we vote to sell, the EPA will announce that SUEZ water is the permanent alternate water supply
for the proposed plan.”

       EPA Response 2d: See EPA Response 2b and 2c above. EPA intends to hold any
       discussions with the legal owners of water system at the time that the remedy is being
       implemented. EPA does not believe that the use of EBEPOA for costing purposes has
       ever been withheld. In fact, that use was discussed extensively at the CAG meeting held
       on February 23rd, 2017 and in the notification of the FFS release which was publicly
       released and emailed to members on February 21st, 2017.

2e: “If you stated in your press release during the comment period, that the water supply was
EBEPOA the members would have had the opportunity to react and weigh in with a vote. Our
board has chosen to control the options by not sharing their game plan and not allowing the
members to participate in this decision.”

       EPA Response 2e: EPA has been fully transparent with regard to use of the EBEPOA
       for costing purposes. See Responses to 2b, 2c and 2d above. Any issues with regards to
       the Board of the EBEPOA should be addressed to that entity.

2f: Myself, as well as, our board and you and Diego have no idea how this will play out for us in
the future. For most of us in the EBEPOA our homes are our biggest investment in my opinion
your lack of transparency along with our under represented board has put our future health and
water supply in jeopardy. I believe given the opportunity many of our members would vote NO if
they thought that our water supply would be connected with the stigma of the TCE contaminated
homes.

       EPA Response 2f: See Responses to comments 16 and 2c, 2d and 2e above. EPA does
       not intend to force any water system to connect. Any issues with regard to the
       governance of the EBEPOA should be addressed to that entity, as EPA has no authority
       over a private home owners’ association.

2g: I also believe that the only reason the EPA would reconsider the two other water companies
that initially said no to the proposed plan, would be if EBEPOA doesn’t sell to Suez. How will
the EPA proceed if the 19 TCE contaminated homeowners split their decision regarding
connecting into a waterline? Will you proceed with the proposed plan with less than a majority
number of the TCE homes agreeing to connect?

       EPA Response 2g: Although the Superfund process takes into account public comments
       prior to issuing a ROD, EPA decisions are made based on protection of human health and

                                               10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       the environment, among other factors, as determined by data collected by EPA. In issuing
       this ROD, EPA is making the decision to construct and connect eligible properties to a
       water line.

       For a summary of EPA’s Superfund process see the following EPA publications
       “Superfund Cleanup Process” and “This is Superfund”:
       https://semspub.epa.gov/work/HQ/175197.pdf
       https://www.epa.gov/superfund/superfund-cleanup-process.

2h: I spoke with George Zachos, EPA Public Liaison for Region 2, who was unaware of a
written protocol for naming the water supply in the design phase of the proposed plan.
Although he was unfamiliar with the Site and the project managers he contacted Anne. Mr.
Zachos said that a water supply cannot be named until a contract is signed. I never heard Anne
or Diego state that was the case. Please provide me with where this info is available for the
public to review.

       EPA Response 2h: As stated in the Proposed Plan and at the public meeting held on June
       27th, 2017, no water supply has been selected for the Mansfield Trail Dump Site. The
       Proposed Plan identifies potential water purveyors. As no water supply has been chosen,
       no contract or other legal agreement has been signed or executed. For a fuller
       understanding of the Superfund process, please see the links in EPA Response 2g, above.

Commenter 3:

3a: As a member of the East Brookwood Estates Property Owners Association, I feel it’s
premature to identify our water supply as the answer to the problem affecting the 18 affected
homes above us that have contaminated water. Our water company members have not voted to
accept this solution. In fact, when I spoke to our Water Association President, Mr. Jim McCole,
he advised me that he never said to the EPA that he was in favor of this alternative.

       Please see EPA Responses 1e and 2h above.

3b: We currently have a contamination problem of our own as you well know. We currently
cannot accept responsibility for future problems that may arise associated with the
contamination of the 18 homes in question. If we are purchased by Suez in the near future, they
may be open to this solution because they have the resources needed to address future problems
– we do not.

At present, your choice of EBEPOA as your answer to getting rid of your responsibility in
dealing with the POET systems in the 18 Homes affected by landfill contamination is definitely
not acceptable to our members.

We are aware that the other water companies you have contacted have said they are not
interested. We also are not interested.




                                               11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       EPA Response 3b: Please see EPA Response Comments 2b, 2c, 2d and 16, above. In
       addition, as part of the remedy EPA will include necessary upgrades that would be
       needed to assure the water system is able to supply the impacted residents.

Commenter 4:

I think we were taken back by the announcement prior to a CAG meeting to discuss the decision
of the EPA. Many of us were under the impression that we would meet prior to public
announcement or at least an email with a little more substance other than a decision was made
and that you were going public.

I have a number of questions.

4a: Who is the water company?

       EPA Response 4a: No water company has been selected as an alternate supply. EPA
       will be in communication with the community throughout RD of the project, which is
       expected to take several years. EPA will have formal discussions with necessary water
       system stakeholders throughout the RD phase. See Responses 2c and 2d.

4b: Timeframe of installation?

         EPA Response 4b: Once the ROD is final, the remedial process progresses in phases.
         First, the RD phase will begin, during which specifications and plans for the selected
         remedy are developed. A RA phase is initiated after the design is completed, and is the
         stage where construction activity occurs. EPA cannot guarantee that funds will be
         available when needed for construction, however, there is a process for securing funds.
         The process of RD is expected to take several years. Construction of EPA’s preferred
         Alternative is estimated to take 8 months.

4c: If we go with the water company, will the poet systems be removed by the state?

       EPA Response 4c: It is EPA’s understanding that the NJDEP would remove the POETS
       after a property is connected to the alternate water supply, and that this work would be
       covered by the state Spill Fund. For confirmation of NJDEP’s intentions, please contact
       NJDEP.

4d: If the homeowner decides not to go with the water company, will the state continue to
maintain the POET system?

       EPA Response 4d: It is EPA’s understanding that after the waterline is installed and
       connections are offered to the impacted properties, the NJDEP will not be maintaining
       the existing POETS. Thus, homeowners that choose not to hook up to the alternate water
       supply will be responsible for maintaining their own POETS. For confirmation of
       NJDEP’s intentions, please contact NJDEP.



                                               12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

4e: If the homeowner decides not go to with the water company but 5 - 10 years later decides to
hook up, what is the cost from the street to the home?

         EPA Response 4e: The cost estimate completed by EPA for the FFS estimated the
         typical connection cost to be approximately twenty thousand dollars. This estimate
         includes the abandonment of the private well and removal of the POETS. It is important
         to note that the cost to EPA may not be comparable to the cost to a private party for the
         same or similar work. In addition, EPA is unable to estimate the exact cost of
         connection in 5 to 10 years.

4f: Our homes are large -- will there be enough water supply to accommodate our usage?

         EPA Response 4f: EPA will include necessary upgrades to the selected system as part
         of the RA. The supply needs and the upgrades required to meet these needs will be
         determined as a part of the RD phase.




                                               13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Attachment A
Proposed Plan

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                Program                                                ron                        Agency


                        Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund
                                      Byram Township, New Jersey


  Proposed Plan                                                                            June 2017


EPA ANNOUNCES PROPOSED PLAN                                  MARK YOUR CALENDARS
This Proposed Plan identifies the Preferred                  Public Comment Period
Alternative to address contaminated residential              June 13, 2017 to July 13, 2017.
potable wells at the Mansfield Trail Dump                    EPA will accept written comments on the
Superfund Site (Site) located in Byram Township,             Proposed Plan during the public comment period.
Sussex County, New Jersey. This action for
impacted potable wells is referred to as Operable            Public Meeting
Unit 1 (OU1). An investigation of contaminated               June 27, 2017 at 7:00 P.M.
groundwater at the Site is underway as part of               EPA will hold a public meeting to explain the
OU2.                                                         Proposed Plan and all of the alternatives
                                                             presented in the Focused Feasibility Study. Oral
The Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA)                  and written comments will also be accepted at the
Preferred Alternative to address the contaminated            meeting. The meeting will be held at the Byram
potable wells at residential properties at the Site is       Township Municipal Building at 10 Mansfield
Alternative 3, which includes the provision of               Drive, Stanhope, New Jersey.
potable water to impacted properties through
construction of a water line, service connections,           For more information, see the Administrative
and abandonment of private potable wells.                    Record at the following locations:
This Proposed Plan includes a summary of all                 EPA Records Center, Region 2
cleanup alternatives evaluated for OU1 at the Site.          290 Broadway, 18th Floor
This document is issued by EPA, the lead agency              New York, New York 10007-1866
for the Site, in consultation with the New Jersey            (212) 637-4308
Department of Environmental Protection                       Hours: Monday-Friday – 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
(NJDEP), the support agency. EPA, in
consultation with NJDEP, will select a final                 EPA’s website for the Mansfield Trail Dump
remedy for the contaminated potable water at the             site:
Site after reviewing and considering all                     https://www.epa.gov/superfund/mansfield-trail
information submitted during a 30-day public
comment period. EPA, in consultation with
NJDEP, may modify the Preferred Alternative or               Sussex County Library Louise Childs Branch
select another response action presented in this             21 Sparta Road
Proposed Plan based on new information or                    Stanhope, New Jersey 07874
public comments. Therefore, the public is                    (973) 770-1000
encouraged to review and comment on all the                  Please refer to website for hours:
alternatives presented in this Proposed Plan.                http://sussexcountylibrary.org
EPA is issuing this Proposed Plan as part of its
public participation responsibilities under Section

                                                         1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

117(a) of the Comprehensive Environmental               and additional POETS were installed. Sampling
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act               of the residential wells in the Brookwood and
(CERCLA or Superfund). This Proposed Plan               Ross Roads neighborhood conducted by NJDEP
summarizes information that can be found in             in March 2006 indicated the presence of TCE
greater detail in the OU1 Focused Feasibility           concentrations that ranged from 3.9 to 70
Study (FFS) report, Data Evaluation Summary             micrograms per liter (µg/L). Currently, 18 homes
Report (DESR) and other documents contained in          are equipped with POETS through NJDEP or by
the Administrative Record file for this Site.           homeowners to remove the contamination, and
                                                        sampling continues to protect area residents’
SITE DESCRIPTION                                        health.

The Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site                 In addition, from 2006 to 2008, NJDEP collected
consists of former waste disposal trenches in a         indoor air and sub-slab soil gas samples from
wooded area and groundwater contamination in            homes throughout the affected neighborhood.
the area. It is suspected that the Site was used as a   NJDEP installed vapor intrusion mitigation
dump for septic wastes from the late 1950s              systems or modified existing radon mitigation
through at least the early 1970s. When discovered       systems in five of the affected homes to prevent
in the wooded area, five discrete areas of concern      the migration of harmful vapors from entering the
(AOCs) were designated as Dump Areas A, B, C,           homes.
D, and E. The former dump sites are located on
wooded, undeveloped properties in Byram                 Source Area
Township, Sussex County in northwestern New
Jersey.                                                 NJDEP first identified the former waste disposal
                                                        trenches at the Site in 2009 during an effort to
The Site was added to the National Priorities List      determine the source of the TCE contamination
(NPL) in March 2011 and consists of two OUs             detected in the nearby residential wells along
covering long-term remedial work.                       Brookwood and Ross Roads. Subsequent
                                                        reconnaissance efforts conducted by NJDEP,
OU1 includes 18 properties downgradient of the          EPA, and contractors in December 2009 and May
former dump areas where private drinking well           2010 indicated disposal trenches that were
water is known to be impacted by the Site’s             designated Dump Areas A, B, C, D and E. The
contaminated groundwater plume.                         Dump Areas consisted of contaminated soil and
                                                        sludge-like-waste from unknown origins.
OU2 includes shallow and deep groundwater               Sampling done by NJDEP in 2009 showed
contamination. Any residual soil contamination          elevated concentrations of TCE, 1,2-
and vapor intrusion also will be addressed during       dichloroethylene (1,2-DCE), and vinyl chloride in
the ongoing investigation for OU2.                      groundwater. Soil samples in the dump areas
                                                        indicated the presence of TCE, cis1,2-
SITE HISTORY                                            dichloroethylene (cis-1,2-DCE), benzene,
                                                        ethylbenzene, toluene, and xylene (BTEX)
Residential Area                                        compounds, as well as various chlorinated
                                                        benzene compounds. EPA collected soil and
In May 2005, the Sussex County Department of            sludge-like-waste, groundwater (on-site
Health and Human Services and NJDEP became              monitoring wells), and residential well samples
aware of trichloroethylene (TCE) contamination          from February to May 2010. EPA also installed a
in residential wells serving homes on Brookwood         background monitoring well (MW-3) south of
and Ross Roads, and notified residents in the           NJDEP’s monitoring wells (MW-1 and MW-2).
neighborhood of the contamination. Point-of             Analytical results documented the presence of
Entry-Treatment Systems (POETS) were installed          TCE and other volatile organic compounds
on impacted residential properties to provide safe      (VOCs) above background conditions in these
drinking water primarily by NJDEP. By June              on-site wells. The TCE groundwater plume was
2005, 13 residential wells were known to be             found to begin at the former source areas and
contaminated with TCE at concentrations in              extends downgradient towards the Brookwood
excess of New Jersey drinking water standards           and Ross Road residential area.
                                                        2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

During May and June 2010, EPA collected soil,        SITE CHARACTERISTICS
groundwater, and composite waste samples from
test borings advanced throughout the Site, using     Setting/ Geology/ Hydrology
Geoprobe™ direct-push technology. Although
former Dump Area C was observed to be littered       The Site is bordered to the east by a steep, narrow
with tires and miscellaneous trash, and was          valley. An abandoned railroad bed and a
considered an additional AOC, no evidence was        waterway, Cowboy Creek, that flows north are
found of the same type and method of waste           located on the valley floor. Cowboy Creek flows
deposition as the other dump areas (i.e.,            to Lubbers Run and the Musconetcong River.
excavated trenches and sludge-like-waste             Both Lubbers Run and the Musconetcong River
material).                                           are used for recreation, including fishing, boating,
                                                     and hiking. Information obtained from the New
Analytical results of soil and waste samples         Jersey Division of Fish and Wildlife indicates
collected during the waste-source-delineation        that portions of the Musconetcong River are
phase indicated the presence of VOCs, such as        fished for human consumption. Segments of the
TCE, 1,2-DCE, and various chlorinated benzene        Musconetcong River downstream of the Site are
compounds throughout the site. Polychlorinated       federally designated as a Wild and Scenic River.
biphenyls (PCBs) were detected in composite          Water samples taken from the unnamed stream
samples collected from the former Dump Area A        did not indicate any contamination.
lower trench, Dump Area B, and Dump Area D,
trenches 1 and 2. Contaminants were not              Based on the topography and the detections of
detected in the former Dump Area D, Trench 4.        VOCs in the residential wells, it is likely that
In March 2011, based on the impacted on-site and     shallow groundwater flows beneath Former
residential areas outlined above, the Site was       Dump Area A, which lies on the west side of the
added to the NPL.                                    ridge, is to the west-northwest toward the
                                                     Brookwood and Ross Roads neighborhood. The
From February 21 to May 30, 2012, EPA’s              ridge forms a local groundwater divide and
Region 2 Removal Action Branch completed             sources to the east (i.e., former Dump Areas B,
excavation to remove soil contamination from         D, and E) overlie a separate surficial aquifer.
Dump Areas A, B, C, D and E. Approximately
11,170 tons of non-hazardous soil and debris and     As a part of the ongoing OU2 remedial
383 tons of hazardous soil were removed from         investigation, 24 monitoring wells were sampled
the Site and transported to approved off-site        in the shallow and deep groundwater aquifer
disposal facilities.                                 between March 2014 and December 2015.
                                                     Sampling during this time period showed that
The dump areas were excavated to bedrock and         TCE levels exceeded the New Jersey
re-graded and restored to match the former           Groundwater Quality Standards (NJ GWQS) in
topography.                                          six out of 13 shallow groundwater samples and
                                                     62 out of 94 deep groundwater
Additional Investigation                             samples. Concentrations of TCE ranged between
                                                     0.11 ug/L and 320 ug/L. Installation of
From August 2013 to December 2015, EPA               additional groundwater monitoring wells and
performed remedial investigation activities at the   continued sampling is planned to further
Site. EPA collected environmental data,              delineate the extent of groundwater
including overburden soil samples, subsurface        contamination.
soil samples, rock core samples, groundwater
samples, and performed site reconnaissance           Residential Groundwater Sampling
activities. Samples were taken from both the
source area and the downgradient residential         Based on sampling results conducted by local
neighborhood.                                        residents and NJDEP, 18 residential wells in the
                                                     site area were found to contain TCE
                                                     concentrations above the NJ GWQS of 1 µg/L.
                                                     When contamination was discovered, NJDEP
                                                     took protective actions including confirmation
                                                     3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         WHAT IS RISK AND HOW IS IT CALCULATED?
sampling, and the installation and maintenance of
POETS. Eighteen POETS have been installed                A Superfund baseline human health risk assessment is an
since 2005 at properties where TCE                       analysis of the potential adverse health effects caused by
contamination was confirmed above the NJ                 hazardous substance releases from a site in the absence of any
GWQS.                                                    actions to control or mitigate these under current- and future-
                                                         land uses. A four-step process is utilized for assessing site-
                                                         related human health risks for reasonable maximum exposure
In April 2014, EPA collected water samples from          scenarios.
residential wells equipped with POETS, plus an
additional eight wells. This sampling was                Hazard Identification: In this step, the chemicals of potential
                                                         concern (COPCs) at the site in various media (i.e., soil,
conducted as a part of the remedial investigation.       groundwater, surface water, and air) are identified based on
Samples were taken from residential wells prior          such factors as toxicity, frequency of occurrence, and fate and
to treatment. NJDEP continues to monitor and             transport of the contaminants in the environment,
maintain eligible POETS at impacted residences           concentrations of the contaminants in specific media,
under the state Spill Compensation Fund.                 mobility, persistence, and bioaccumulation.

                                                         Exposure Assessment: In this step, the different exposure
SCOPE AND ROLE OF THE ACTION                             pathways through which people might be exposed to the
                                                         contaminants identified in the previous step are evaluated.
As with many Superfund sites, the contamination          Examples of exposure pathways include incidental ingestion
                                                         of and dermal contact with contaminated soil and ingestion of
at the Site is complex. In order to manage the
                                                         and dermal contact with contaminated groundwater. Factors
cleanup of the Site more effectively, EPA has            relating to the exposure assessment include, but are not
organized the work into two phases of long-term          limited to, the concentrations in specific media that people
cleanup called OUs, under the authority of               might be exposed to and the frequency and duration of that
CERCLA. This Proposed Plan addresses OU1,                exposure. Using these factors, a “reasonable maximum
                                                         exposure” scenario, which portrays the highest level of human
which addresses providing potable water to               exposure that could reasonably be expected to occur, is
impacted residents through connection to a water         calculated.
supply. The OU2 remedy will address any
residual soil contamination, vapor intrusion, and        Toxicity Assessment: In this step, the types of adverse health
                                                         effects associated with chemical exposures, and the
the contaminated groundwater. A Remedial
                                                         relationship between magnitude of exposure and severity of
Investigation is underway for the OU2 portion of         adverse effects are determined. Potential health effects are
the Site.                                                chemical-specific and may include the risk of developing
                                                         cancer over a lifetime or other noncancer health hazards, such
HUMAN HEALTH RISK ASSESSMENT                             as changes in the normal functions of organs within the body
                                                         (e.g., changes in the effectiveness of the immune system).
                                                         Some chemicals are capable of causing both cancer and
EPA conducted a four-step baseline human health          noncancer health hazards.
risk assessment (HHRA) as part of OU1 to assess
site-related cancer risks and non-cancer health          Risk Characterization: This step summarizes and combines
hazards in the absence of any remedial action.           outputs of the exposure and toxicity assessments to provide a
                                                         quantitative assessment of site risks for all COPCs. Exposures
The four-step process is comprised of: Hazard            are evaluated based on the potential risk of developing cancer
Identification, Exposure Assessment, Toxicity            and the potential for noncancer health hazards. The likelihood
Assessment, and Risk Characterization (see               of an individual developing cancer is expressed as a
adjoining box “What is Risk and How is it                probability. For example, a 10-4 cancer risk means a “one in
                                                         ten thousand excess cancer risk;” or one additional cancer may
Calculated”).                                            be seen in a population of 10,000 people as a result of
                                                         exposure to site contaminants under the conditions identified
The HHRA began with selecting chemicals of               in the Exposure Assessment. Current Superfund regulations
potential concern (COPCs) in groundwater that            for exposures identify the range for determining whether
could potentially cause adverse health effects in        remedial action is necessary as an individual excess lifetime
                                                         cancer risk of 10-4 to 10-6, corresponding to a one in ten
exposed populations. Groundwater onsite is being         thousand to a one in a million excess cancer risk. For
used for drinking water purposes. Although               noncancer health effects, a “hazard index” (HI) is calculated.
POETS have been installed within impacted                The key concept for a noncancer HI is that a “threshold”
homes, if additional wells become contaminated           (measured as an HI of less than or equal to 1) exists below
                                                         which noncancer health hazards are not expected to occur. The
or the POETS are not maintained, exposure to             goal of protection is 10-6 for cancer risk and an HI of 1 for a
contaminated groundwater could occur.                    noncancer health hazard. Chemicals that exceed a 10-4 cancer
Therefore, the current and future pathways and           risk or an HI of 1 are typically those that will require remedial
populations evaluated in the HHRA included               action at the site.
                                                     4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

adult and child residents potentially being           (one-in-one thousand). Although the adjusted risk
exposed to groundwater via ingestion, dermal          still exceeds EPA thresholds, the outlier test
contact, and inhalation of chemical contaminants      indicated TCE and VC are the primary
while showering/bathing.                              contributors of site-related risk. Exposure to TCE
                                                      and VC individually accounted for risks of 5x10-4
In this assessment, exposure point concentrations     and 4x10-3, respectively. In addition, cancer risk
were estimated using either the maximum               due to chromium may be overestimated because
detected concentration of a contaminant or the        it was assumed that all of the chromium present is
95% upper-confidence limit (UCL) of the average       in the more toxic hexavalent form. This is
concentration. Chronic daily intakes were             conservative since chromium in the environment
calculated based on the reasonable maximum            is generally dominated by the less toxic, trivalent
exposure (RME), which is the highest exposure         form. Further discussion of the outlier test can be
reasonably anticipated to occur at the Site. The      found in the baseline human health risk
RME is intended to estimate a conservative            assessment.
exposure scenario that is still within the range of
possible exposures. A more detailed discussion        Summary of Human Health Risks
of the exposure pathways can be found in the
baseline risk human health risk assessment.           Residential exposure to contaminated
                                                      groundwater, in the absence of any current or
Summary of Risks to Residential Receptors             ongoing remedial action, yields Site risks and
                                                      hazards that exceed EPA’s acceptable cancer risk
Cancer risks and noncancer health hazards from        range (1x10-4 to 1x10-6) and noncancer hazard
exposure to contaminated groundwater were             threshold (HI of 1). It is EPA’s current judgement
evaluated for adult and child residents. The          that the Preferred Alternative identified in this
estimated excess lifetime cancer risk estimate is     Proposed Plan, or one of the other active
1x10-2 (one-in-one hundred), primarily driven by      measures considered in the Proposed Plan, is
chromium, VC, and TCE. The calculated hazard          necessary to protect public health or welfare or
index (HI) is 110 for an adult and 106 for a child.   the environment from actual or threatened
Noncancer hazards are driven by TCE and               releases of hazardous substances into the
chromium, and to a lesser extent by nickel,           environment.
cobalt, and cis-1,2-DCE. For these receptors,
exposure to site-related contaminants in              REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES
groundwater results in an excess lifetime cancer
risk that exceeds EPA’s target risk range of 1x10-    Remedial Action Objectives (RAOs) are specific
4
  (one-in-ten thousand) to 1x10-6 (one-in-one         goals to protect human health and the
million) and a noncancer HI above the acceptable      environment. These objectives are based on
level of 1.                                           available information and standards, such as
                                                      applicable or relevant and appropriate
The chromium and nickel maximum values used           requirements (ARARs), to-be-considered (TBC)
for exposure point concentrations in the HHRA         guidance, and site-specific risk-based levels.
were anomalously higher (several orders of
magnitude) compared to other wells onsite and         The primary objective of any remedial strategy is
results from previous sampling events. A              overall protectiveness. The RAO in the FFS has
statistical outlier test was performed to determine   been developed to focus on preventing exposure
whether these concentrations can be considered        to contaminated potable water. The RAO for the
representative of site exposure based on data         Mansfield Trail Dump OU1 is:
collected from other monitoring wells within the
groundwater plume. The outlier testing concluded          •   Prevent or minimize current and future
that both chromium and nickel sampling results                human exposures from ingestion or,
contained outliers from the same sample multi-                inhalation or, dermal contact with
level system (MLS-3) location. When these                     contaminants in potable water
outliers were replaced with the next highest                  attributable to contaminated groundwater
concentration detected from that location, the                at the Site.
total risk from all carcinogens decreased to 5x10-3
                                                      5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL                                    actions would be implemented as part of the No
ALTERNATIVES                                           Action Alternative. Furthermore, this alternative
                                                       would not involve any monitoring of groundwater
CERCLA, Section 121(b)(1), 42 U.S.C. Section           or institutional controls. Although there are
9621(b)(1), mandates that remedial actions must        already existing POETS and vapor intrusion
be protective of human health and the                  mitigation systems within the impacted area, it is
environment, cost-effective, comply with               assumed for the No Action Alternative that no
ARARs, and utilize permanent solutions and             additional remedial measures would be taken, and
alternative treatment technologies and resource        no monitoring would be conducted.
recovery alternatives to the maximum extent
practicable. Section 121(b)(1) also establishes a      Capital Cost:                       $0
preference for remedial actions which employ, as       Annual O&M Cost:                    $0
a principal element, treatment to permanently and      Present-Worth Cost                  $0
significantly reduce the volume, toxicity, or          Duration Time:                      None
mobility of the hazardous substances, pollutants,
and contaminants at a site. CERCLA, Section            Alternative 2 – Treatment via POETS
121(d), 42 U.S.C. Section 9621(d) further
specifies that a remedial action must attain a level   Alternative 2 relies on the continued operation of
or standard of control of the hazardous                existing POETS. The 18 existing POETS would
substances, pollutants, and contaminants, which        be assessed and necessary upgrades would be
at least attains ARARs under federal and state         evaluated. The cost estimate includes upgrades to
laws, unless a waiver can be justified pursuant to     five of the systems. All 18 systems would then
CERCLA Section 121(d)(4), 42 U.S.C. Section            need to be operated, monitored, and maintained
9621(d)(4).                                            in accordance with current practices.

The objective of the FFS for the OU1 Study Area        Previous investigations do not support the
was to identify and evaluate remedial action           imminent spread of groundwater contamination
alternatives to meet the RAOs. A total of four         beyond the area that has been impacted, but
alternatives were initially developed and screened     monitoring of drinking water wells in the vicinity
in the FFS for overall implementability,               would be conducted to assure that they meet
effectiveness, and cost and three were carried         drinking water standards. POETS would need to
over for further evaluation.                           be installed, operated, monitored, and maintained
                                                       if homes were to become impacted.
Three alternatives were retained for a detailed
evaluation against the seven National                  Capital Cost:                       $381,872
Contingency Plan (NCP) evaluation criteria. The        Annual O&M Cost (Year 1 to 5):      $219,612
sections below present a summary of the                Annual O&M Cost (Year 6 to 30):     $231,844
alternatives that were retained and evaluated. The     Present-Worth Cost:                 $3,209,000
Present-Worth Costs are based on a 30-year             OM&M of POET Systems:               30 years
timeframe in accordance with EPA guidance.             Time to Install POETS:              5 weeks

The time frames presented below for construction       Alternative 3 – Connection to an Existing Water
do not include the time for pre-design                 Supply System.
investigations, remedial design, or contract
procurements.                                          Alternative 3 includes the provision of potable
                                                       water to impacted properties through construction
Detailed descriptions of the remedial alternatives     of a water line and abandonment of private
for the OU1 can be found in the FFS report.            potable wells. Service connections to each
                                                       impacted house from an existing water supply
Alternative 1 – No Action                              system in the area would be made in accordance
                                                       with Byram Township, Sussex County, and New
The No Action Alternative was evaluated, as            Jersey regulations.
required by the NCP, and provides a baseline for
comparison with other alternatives. No remedial
                                                       6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

For cost estimation purposes, the closest privately   The No Action Alternative (Alternative 1) is not
owned water supplier, East Brookwood Estate           considered protective of human health and the
Property Owners Association (EBEPOA), was             environment, because it does not prevent the
used as the water supply system. In order to add      current and future use of contaminated
the impacted area to the EBEPOA, upgrades to          groundwater which presents an unacceptable
the existing system and consent of the owners of      human health risk. It also does not include any
the EBEPOA would be necessary. The final water        long-term groundwater monitoring to assess or
system configuration would be determined during       address potential short or long term exposure to
design should this alternative be selected.           groundwater by area residents. Because
                                                      Alternative 1 (No Action) is not protective of
During the design and construction phases of the      human health and the environment, it was
water main, eligible POETS would continue to be       eliminated from consideration under the
operated and maintained by NJDEP, until               remaining evaluation criteria.
individual residences are switched over to the
alternate water supply. EPA would periodically        Alternative 2 would be protective of human
monitor residential wells in the vicinity of the      health because contaminated groundwater would
impacted area that are currently not impacted         continue to be treated prior to use by residents
above the cleanup goal for TCE. If these wells        within the impacted area. This alternative relies
were to become impacted above that criteria,          on consistent maintenance of individual systems
POETS would need to be installed at these             in order to ensure effectiveness of the treatment.
locations until the remedy is implemented and an
alternate potable water source is available.          Alternative 3 would be protective of human
                                                      health in the impacted area by providing potable
After the remedy is in place, homes in the            water through construction of a water line and
vicinity of the impacted area would continue to       abandonment of private potable wells. Other
be monitored. If any of these monitored homes         homes in the vicinity of the impacted area would
were to become impacted, connection to the            be monitored, as a safeguard, and offered
water line would be made available. The capacity      connection to the system if necessary.
of the water supply system would then be
reassessed.                                           Compliance with ARARs

Capital Cost:                        $8,333,160       Actions taken at any Superfund site must meet all
Annual O&M Cost (year 1):            $77,278          applicable or relevant and appropriate
Annual O&M Cost (year 1 to 30):      $27,016          requirements under federal and state laws or
Present-Worth Cost:                  $8,746,000       provide grounds for invoking a waiver of those
                                                      requirements.
Time to Complete Construction:       8 months
                                                      Alternatives 2 and 3 would assure that potable
EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES                            water would meet NJ GWQS in the short term.
                                                      However, Alternative 3 is the alternative that best
Nine criteria are used to evaluate the different      meets this criterion as it provides for residences
remediation alternatives individually and against     to be connected to an alternate water supply,
each other in order to select a remedy. This          ensuring that potable water meets all applicable
section of the Proposed Plan profiles the relative    standards due to state and federal regulations.
performance of each alternative against the nine      Alternative 2 would provide for potable wells to
criteria, noting how it compares to the other         meet NJ GWQS through the use of POETS.
options under consideration. The nine evaluation      POETS require diligent operations and
criteria are discussed below. A detailed analysis     maintenance to assure that they continue to
of each alternative can be found in the FFS.          properly address groundwater contamination in
                                                      each residence over time in order to provide safe
Overall Protection of Human Health and the            potable water. All of the alternatives would
Environment                                           comply with location- and action-specific
                                                      ARARs such as the Freshwater Wetlands
                                                      Protection Act, and the Federal Clean Water Act.
                                                      7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence                Implementability

Alternative 3 would be effective and permanent        Under Alternative 2 it is expected that not all
because this alternative relies on permanent          homes would need upgrades to their existing
infrastructure to convey water from a reliable        systems. The limited site work would be easily
source of potable water. In addition, it meets this   implemented.
criterion the best, as it is most effective in the
long term. Alternative 2 would require                Alternative 3 would be implementable using
significantly more maintenance to remain              conventional construction methods and readily
reliable, such as confirmation sampling and           available materials. Due to construction required
carbon replacement in order for POETS to remain       on roads, disruptions to local traffic would be
protective, and is not considered as permanent as     likely. Right-of-way access and coordination with
Alternative 3.                                        local government would be needed as well.
                                                      Depending on the chosen water system, distance
Reduction in Toxicity, Mobility or Volume             from the impacted properties and capacity of the
(TMV) through Treatment                               system might affect implementability.

Alternatives 2 and 3 would reduce the TMV of          Cost
the contaminants by preventing the exposure of
the residents to the contaminants. The POETS          The estimated present worth of Alternative 2 is
would control exposure to contaminant                 $3,209,000. This cost includes an estimated
concentrations above NJ GWQS by treatment at          number of upgrades to existing systems as well as
the point of use. Connection to a water system        the installation of an estimated number of new
would provide an alternate supply of potable          systems in the vicinity of the impacted properties.
water, therefore eliminating exposure to the          Also included in this cost is residential water
contaminants.                                         sampling to ensure POETS were operating
                                                      properly. This alternative assumes O&M on the
Short-Term Effectiveness                              POETs and monitoring over a 30-year time
                                                      period.
The necessity to construct parts of the remedies
on the property of land owners, in roadways and       The present worth of the estimated cost for
right-of-ways for both Alternative 2 and 3 would      Alternative 3 is $8,746,000. This estimate
result in some short-term adverse effects to the      includes construction of the proposed water line
surrounding community. Alternative 2 would            as well as O&M of the alternate supply system
require limited site work and, therefore, resulting   for one year. O&M costs for the monitoring
in minimal short-term impacts to the community        program are estimated over a 30-year time period.
and workers.
                                                      For costing purposes, each alternative has an
Construction of Alternative 3 would result in the     estimated duration of 30 years although, as
most significant short-term effects in the            discussed above, it is unknown what the period of
community, with the installation of a water line.     time will be that contaminants remain above
These effects would be limited to the construction    ARARs. The OU2 investigation and remedy will
work in the neighborhood and on private property      examine estimated duration of contaminants
for connections. However, EPA would work              above ARARs in the aquifer.
with the community to alleviate concerns. In
addition, standard health and safety practices        State/Support Agency Acceptance
would be used to mitigate any impacts on
workers. There would be no adverse                    The State of New Jersey supports EPA’s preferred
environmental impacts to habitats or vegetation       remedy as presented in this Proposed Plan.
as implementation would only affect previously
developed areas such as roads and private             Community Acceptance
properties.
                                                      Community acceptance of the preferred
                                                      alternatives will be evaluated after the public
                                                      8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

comment period ends and will be described in the       protective of human health and the environment,
Record of Decision, the document that formalizes       and will comply with ARARs to the extent
the selection of the remedy for the Site.              practicable.

PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE                                  Consistent with EPA Region 2’s Clean and Green
                                                       policy, EPA will evaluate the use of sustainable
The preferred alternative for potable water is         technologies and practices with respect to any
Alternative 3, which includes the provision of         remedial alternative selected for the Site.
potable water to impacted properties through the
construction of a water line, service connections,     COMUNITY PARTICIPATION
and abandonment of private potable wells,
hereafter referred to as the Preferred Alternative.    EPA encourages the public to gain a more
The preference for Alternative 3 is based upon         comprehensive understanding of the Site and the
two factors: (1) the limited potential for treatment   Superfund activities that have been conducted
or containment of groundwater contamination to         there. The dates for the public comment period,
result in a measureable improvement in                 the date, location and time of the public meeting,
groundwater quality anywhere in the aquifer            and the locations of the Administrative Record
within a reasonable time period; and (2) the           files, are provided on the front page of this
reliability and permanence of an alternate water       Proposed Plan. Written comments on the
supply as compared to individual treatment             Proposed Plan should be addressed to the
systems.                                               Remedial Project Manager, Anne Rosenblatt, at
                                                       the address provided. EPA Region 2 has
EPA believes an alternate water supply would           designated a public liaison as a point-of-contact
effectively mitigate exposure to contaminated          for the community concerns and questions about
drinking water. The installation of an alternate       the federal Superfund program in New York, New
water supply in the area affected by the               Jersey, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
contaminated groundwater would eliminate risks         To support this effort, the Agency has established
to residents from consumption of, inhalation of,       a 24-hour, toll-free number that the public can call
and dermal contact with contaminated drinking          to request information.
water. EPA expects this to be the final potable
water remedy for the Site.

POETS would need to be operated and
maintained, until individual residences are
switched over to the alternate water supply. EPA
will periodically monitor residential potable wells
in the vicinity of the impacted area that are
currently not impacted above the cleanup goal for
TCE. If these wells become impacted above that
criteria, POETS would be installed and
maintained at these locations until the remedy is
implemented and an alternate potable water
source is available. Properties connected to the
alternate water supply would be responsible for
payment of water bills once the connections are
complete.

Alternative 3 is believed to provide the most
protective remedy for impacted residents. The
Preferred Alternative is believed to provide the
best balance of trade-offs among the alternatives
with respect to the evaluation criteria. Based on
the information available at this time, EPA
believes the Preferred Alternative will be
                                                       9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

For further information on Mansfield Trail
Dump Superfund site, please contact:

Anne Rosenblatt
Remedial Project Manager
(212) 637-4347
rosenblatt.anne@epa.gov

Patricia Seppi
Community Relations Coordinator
(212) 637-3639
seppi.patricia@epa.gov

Written comments on this Proposed Plan
should be addressed to Ms. Rosenblatt.

U.S. EPA Region 2
290 Broadway 19th Floor
New York, New York 10007-1866

The public liaison for EPA Region 2 is:
George H. Zachos Regional Public Liaison
Toll-free (888) 283-7626, or (732) 321-6621

U.S. EPA Region 2
2890 Woodbridge Avenue, MS-211
Edison, New Jersey 08837-3679




                                              10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Site Map




       11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Attachment B
     Public Notice




13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

New Jersey Herald | njherald.com                                                                                                                                              STATE                                                                                                             Tuesday, June 13, 2017 | A3



Ferries could be next wave for NYC commuters
   HOBOKEN (AP) — The                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ple on its lines from Hoboken
easiest way to commute into                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      to lower Manhattan during
New York City exchanges                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the summer’s rail disruption,
asphalt and steel rails for a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    company Chairman Armand
whiff of salt water and a soar-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pohan told lawmakers last
ing view of the Manhattan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        month. Tens of thousands
skyline, all in less time than                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   more could be accommodat-
it takes to finish a cup of joe.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ed in the future if the compa-
   It’s also the most under-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ny adds boats and builds
used, primarily due to logis-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    another terminal, company
tics and cost. That could                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        founder Arthur Imperatore
change, though, beginning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        said.
this summer when ferries                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            But New York Waterway
will act as a safety valve for                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ferry service costs three or
New Jersey rail commuters                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        more times the PATH trains
because of disruptions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           operated by the Port
caused by major repair work                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Authority of New York and
at New York’s Penn Station.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      New Jersey, while New
   In the long term, while the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jersey transit offers com-
New York region’s tunnels,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       muter rail service directly
bridges and railways burst at                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    into New York from points
the seams with no relief in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      throughout New Jersey with
sight for a decade at best,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      discounts for monthly passes.
ferries may be the final fron-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      For some, the reliability is
tier for commuters sick of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       worth the extra cost.
clogged roads and a notori-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         “This is more predictable;
ously unreliable and aging                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       it’s every 15 minutes, and you
rail system.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     don’t have service disruptions
   On the New Jersey side,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       like PATH has,” said Joe
where a new governor will                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Raconiello, who commutes
succeed outgoing Republican                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      from northern New Jersey via
Chris Christie in January,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NJ Transit into Hoboken and
change may be in the winds.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      then boards a ferry. “It’s also
   “Should the state, particu-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   more relaxing, and you
larly a new administration,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      always get a seat.”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AP Photo/Mark Lennihan, File
take a fresh look at how we                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dave Berge, a resident of
deal with expanding demand                                  A commuter ferry crosses the Hudson River to New York City in April, as seen from Hoboken. Though more expensive than                                                                                                                New York’s Rockland County,
to get across the Hudson?”                                  rail, the ferries may provide relief for commuters while repair work is going on at Penn Station.                                                                                                                                    on New Jersey’s northern
said state Sen. Robert                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           border, straddles both trans-
Gordon, vice-chair of a state                                expanded for commuters                                       over six years subsidizing                                   to drastically cut back ser-                                 Only about 2 percent of the                  portation modes. He takes
transportation committee.                                    inside New York City. Last                                   fares to keep them the same                                  vice, leaving angry commut-                                more than 1.4 million people                   the ferry from Hoboken in
“Maybe this is the time to                                   month, Mayor Bill de Blasio                                  as a subway ride could be dif-                               ers accustomed to regular                                  who commute into                               the morning but the train at
think about a whole new                                      launched service that will                                   ficult to sustain.                                           15- to 30-minute delays facing                             Manhattan on weekdays take                     night.
approach to ferries.”                                        eventually offer six routes                                     This spring, two derail-                                  double or triple that.                                     ferries, according to a 2015                      “This is peace of mind,”
   Ferry service — historical-                               between Manhattan and the                                    ments at Penn Station, both                                     Meanwhile, not far from                                 study by the New York                          Berge said, gesturing on a
ly the main mode of transpor-                                other boroughs.                                              at very low speed and neither                                where thousands of cars                                    Metropolitan Transportation                    recent Friday toward the glit-
tation for commuters to                                        City transportation officials                              involving serious injuries,                                  jockey to fit into three lanes                             Council that was funded by                     tering skyline from the rear
Manhattan island, now con-                                   say the new ferry fleet will                                 sent delays rippling up and                                  of the Lincoln Tunnel each                                 the U.S. Department of                         deck of a New York
nected to other boroughs and                                 speed up travel time by as                                   down the corridor between                                    morning, ferries crisscross                                Transportation.                                Waterway. “It’s an indul-
suburbs by bridges and tun-                                  much as two-thirds, although                                 Boston and Washington. The                                   the Hudson with dozens of                                    New York Waterway can                        gence, but I don’t mind pay-
nels — has already been                                      plans to spend $180 million                                  second forced local rail lines                               empty seats.                                               carry about 9,000 more peo-                    ing more.”


Jersey City                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Briefs
                                                                                                                                                                                      Teacher suspended
suspends
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  published in the yearbook.                       He declined to speak with a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    The only reason a student’s                  reporter from The Record
              UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY                                                                                                                           after photos altered                                        image would be altered is if it                newspaper. But his father

four police     INVITES PUBLIC COMMENT ON THE PROPOSED PLAN
                FOR THE MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMPSUPERFUND SITE
                         BYRAM TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                            WALL (AP) — A New
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jersey school district has sus-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  was in violation of the district’s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  dress code, such as clothing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  referencing drugs, alcohol or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 told the newspaper his son
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 wasn’t aware of the tweets at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 the time.

after kicking
 TheU.S. EnvironmentalProtection Agency (EPA) announcestheopening of a30-day                                                                                                                         pended a teacher after year-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  violence, Dyer has said.                         Comey’s father says his
 comment period onthe preferred plan toaddress thegroundwater contaminatedwith                                                                                                                       book photos of two high
 tricholoroethene (TCE), a volatile organic compound at the Mansfield Trail Dump                                                                                                                                                                    The district also is probing                 son turned over “one of his
 Site in Byram Township, New Jersey. The preferred remedy and other alternatives                                                                                                                     school students were altered
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  why a Trump quote submit-                      own documents” to a friend,
                                                                                                                                                                       I II II
of bystander                                                                                                                                                                                         to~Iderremove            President Donald
 are identifiedin theProposedPlan.                                                                                                                                          • • • • • Americansage12
                                                                                                                                June Special                                                       and          experience
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ted by the freshman class                      which the elder Comey says
                                                                                                                              $1,000 OFF*                                      NE          IN      heanngloss severe enough
 The comment period begins on Tuesday, June 13, 2017and ends onThursday, July                                                                                              0                       toTrump’s
                                                                                                                                                                                                       hinder commurncat1onname on their cloth-
 13, 2017. As part of thepubliccomment period, EPA will hold apublic meetingon
 June27th at 7pm at theByram Municipal Buildingat 10 Mansfield Drive in Byram
     JERSEY
 Township,    NJ.        CITY (AP) —
                                                                                                                  apair ofpremium wirelesshearingaids                  FIVE                          ing.
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Wall Township School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  president wasn’t included
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  under her photo, while a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 isn’t leaking.
                                                                                                                             Now   until  6/30/17                                     . . . NEARLY                                                quote by President Franklin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Christie anti-opioid
Four
cers,
with
 Written 24
           Jersey
 TheProposed

                years’
          comments
 Thursday,been
                         City police
                 Planisavailable
           including and/m
 https://www.epa.gov/superfu
             July 13,suspended
                                  lieutenant
                                                offi-
                                   electronically   at thefollowingaddress:
                                      ansfi eld-trai 1
                      on theexperience,
                              Proposed Plan, postmarked no later than close of business
                      2017, may beemailed       to Rosenblatt.Anne@epa.gov or mailedto
                                                                                                                       *Offer cannotbe redeemed for cash.
                                                                                                          Good only towards purchaseof apair of premium hearing aids
                                                                                                                                                                                    50%
                                                                                                                                                               AP Photo/Seth Wenig of adults
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Superintendent Cheryl Dyer
                                                                                                                                                                                                     told News 12 New Jersey on
                                                                                                                                                                                                haveMonday
                                                                                                                                                                                                      hearing impairments the yearbook’s advis-
                                                                                                                                                                                                               age 75+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Delano Roosevelt appeared
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  under the senior class presi-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  dent’s photo.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 report coming soon
have                                         indefi-                                                                                                                                                 er      was         suspended while an                                                        MORRISTOWN (AP) —
 AnneRosenblatt, US
nitely
chase
            in the Rwake
 The Administrative
 informationand
which
 The SussexaCounty
                         EPA, 290Broadway,
                          ecord filesofarean
                     fiery crash in
               repositories:
                 video       showed
                                                 19thFloor, New
                                            available
                                             police
                                                                 Jersey City Public Safety Director James Shea, left, and
                                                                  York,
                                                autofor publicMayor
                                                                        NY  10007-1866.
                                                                  review at the following Fulop take questions The
                                                                             Steven
                                                                 news conference in Jersey CityHearing               on
                                                                                                                               fromOptical
                                                                                                                        GailMonday.
                                                                                                                              Gilpin
                                                                                                                            Aid Specialist,
                                                                                                                                            journalists &  Hearing
                                                                                                                                                    Susan Corforte
                                                                                                                                                                   during
                                                                                                                                                 Hearing Aid Specialist.
                                                                                                                                                                             '
                                                                                                                                                                            Center     a investigation is underway.
                                                                                                                                                                                JuanitaSegarra
                                                                                                                                                                              Hearing AidSpecialist.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Further details about the sus-
                                                                                                                                                                                      PAF03317pension and the investigation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Comey’s dad says son
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 New Jersey Gov. Chris
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Christie says a preliminary
                        Library  Louise Childs     Branch, 21 Sparta Road, Stanhope, NJ                                                                                                                                                                                                          report from a White House
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  laughs over leaking
                                                                                                                         PAF03442                  NJ 1181. PA F03597
 07874 or at the
kicking            US EPA Region2, Superfund          Records Center, 290 Broadway,
                                                                 swiftly     with 1discipline
                                                                                      9th         when Newton, NJ “We repeat          Oak Ridge, Nour  J callMatamoras,  for a PA j were
 Floor, NewYand ork, NYdragging
                           10007-1866. a                                                            (973) 383-3650                 (973)     697-4550 investiga-   (570) 491-5454 j (570) 421-2680
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Stroudsburg,   notPAdisclosed, and Dyer                                                    commission to combat opioid
 For more information, please contact Pat Seppi, EPA's Community Liaison, atFulop said.
bystander,            the     city’s     mayor                   appropriate,”                    46 HamptonHouse R   full
                                                                                                                       oad and           impartial
                                                                                                                                5746 Berkshire   Valley Road          120 Hulst Drive                did
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1036 Nnot          immediately respond
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 . 9th Street                        ALLENDALE (AP) — The                        addiction is expected in about
announced              Monday.
 646.369.0068 or seppi.pat@     epa.gov                          “We’re taking swift actions*Subject to credit          www.theopticalandhearingcenter.com
                                                                                                                      tion      into this incident,”
                                                                                                                           approval. Seestorefor details.                                            Monday
                                                                                                                                                                          ©2011s1ar1<ey All RightsReserved 4/1753325-11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to an email from The   father of former FBI Director                  three weeks.
     The June 4 video showed                                     within our ability to do so,                         Carmine Disbrow, president                                                     Associated Press seeking fur-                James Comey says his son                         Christie spoke to reporters
Miguel Feliz exiting his car                                     and residents should know                            of the Jersey City Police                                                      ther comment.                                laughs when the subject of                     Monday after an event on the
before being kicked by the                                       we want to have a balance                            Officers Benevolent                                                                   However, it remains                   leaking is brought up.                         drug crisis staged at
officers. The officers had                                       between resident concerns                            Association, said in an email. unclear who altered the year-                                                                   J. Brien Comey Sr. was                      Morristown Medical Center.
been chasing a different man                                     and policing concerns, and                           “Unfortunately Mayor Fulop                                                     book photos or why. A                        responding after President                       The Republican governor
whose car resembled one                                          we feel we have that balance                         continues to indicate that he                                                  spokesman for Jostens, the                   Donald Trump tweeted                           says the commission he’s
used in a shooting several                                       here.”                                               has no intention of allowing                                                   company that takes the pho-                  Sunday morning: “I believe                     leading is considering recom-
days earlier.                                                        Suspended were: Lt. Keith                        this to be the case.”                                                          tographs and prints the year-                the James Comey leaks will                     mending changes to medical
     Feliz, of West New York,                                    Ludwig and Officers M.D.                                 Feliz wasn’t the only person books for the district, did not                                                            be far more prevalent than                     privacy laws so parents could
several miles from Jersey                                        Khan, Erik Kosinski and                              injured in the chase. Suspect                                                  respond to requests for com-                 anyone ever thought possible.                  be notified if their children are
City, underwent surgery for                                      Francisco Rodriguez.                                 Leo Pinkston suffered a leg                                                    ment on Monday.                              Totally illegal? Very ‘coward-                 revived with naloxone after an
burns last week and remains                                          Public Safety Director                           injury after officers fired shots                                                     One student wore a sweater            ly!”’                                          opioid overdose. But he
hospitalized.                                                    James Shea said Ludwig, a                            at his moving vehicle.                                                         vest with Trump’s name on it.                   James Comey was in his                      declined to provide more
     All four officers are sus-                                  24-year veteran of the force,                            Shea said at least 20 offi-                                                Another student wore a                       New Jersey hometown of                         details.
pended indefinitely without                                      has an “excellent” record,                           cers were involved in some                                                     T-shirt emblazoned with the                  Allendale with his father on                     Christie, who is term-limit-
pay, Mayor Steven Fulop said                                     and that the three officers,                         aspect of the response to the words “Trump Make America                                                                     Sunday, days after testifying                  ed, is heading a White House
Monday. He deferred ques-                                        one of whom has been on the                          high-speed chase, which last- Great Again.” But neither fea-                                                                before a Senate panel on his                   commission that’s studying
tions about a criminal probe                                     force for a year, “are average                       ed for several miles. Several                                                  ture appeared in the photos                  meetings with Trump.                           the national opioid problem.
into the incident to the                                         police officers.” He didn’t say                      protocols were violated, he
Hudson County prosecutor’s                                       if any had had previous disci-                       said, including the length of
office, which is conducting                                      plinary violations.                                  the chase, the firing of shots
the investigation.                                                   Shea wouldn’t say if any of                      at a moving vehicle and the
     “We have a strong track                                     the suspended officers were                          placing of a car as a road-
record here of supporting our the ones seen on video kick-                                                            block without approval from a
police officers and acting                                       ing Feliz.                                           supervisor.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      Attachment C
Public Meeting Transcripts

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Page 1
1
2     UNITED STATES
      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
3     - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
4     RE:
5     MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SUPERFUND SITE,
6     BYRAM TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY
7       - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
8                                               June 27, 2017
                                                7:00 P.M.
9
                                                10 Mansfield Drive
10                                              Byram Township, New Jersey
11
12    A P P E A R A N C E S:
13    DIEGO GARCIA,           Project Manager
14    MARK HERZBERG, Community Relations Coordinator
15    GREGORY BAKEMAN, Geologist/DEP
16    ELIZABETH LABLANC, Site Attorney/EPA
17    KATHERINE MISHKIN, Hydro-Geologist
18    ANNE ROSENBLATT, Remedial Project Manager
19    PATRICIA SEPPI, Community Involvement Coordinator/EPA
20    ABBY STATES, Risk Assessor for Site
21
22
23
24
25


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Page 2
1                                       Proceedings
2                                      MS. SEPPI:         Thank you for
3                         coming.       We appreciate the fact that
4                         you're here on time.               The reason that
5                         we are here tonight, as you know, is
6                         to talk about EPA's preferred remedy
7                         for our proposed plan.                Before we get
8                         into that Anne has a short
9                         presentation, which is good.                    What we
10                        would like to do, is, have an
11                        introduction first.
12                                     So, I'm Pat Seppi.              I'm from
13                        the EPA.        I'm the community liaison.
14                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            Anne
15                        Rosenblatt.          The RPM for the site,
16                        remedial project manager.
17                                     MR. GARCIA:         Diego Garcia,
18                        project manager for the site as well.
19                                     MS. MISHKIN:          Katherine
20                        Mishkin, hydro-geologist for the site.
21                                     MS. STATES:         Abbey States,
22                        risk assessor for the site.
23                                     MS. LABLANC:          Elizabeth
24                        Lablanc, site attorney from EPA.
25                                     MS. SEPPI:         And we have --


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Page 3
1                                       Proceedings
2                         where is Mark?           Oh, there he is.
3                                      MR. HERZBERG:           Mark Herzberg,
4                         NJDEP past-counterpart on the state
5                         level, community relations.
6                                      MS. SEPPI:         Greg.
7                                      MR. BAKEMAN:          Greg Bakeman,
8                         NJDEP geologist.
9                                      MS. SEPPI:         So, this is pretty
10                        much our team.           We all work together
11                        and we have been for awhile on this
12                        site.      Now, this is a little bit more
13                        of a formal meeting.               Not our usual
14                        type of community advisory meetings.
15                        You'll notice we have, Gina, our
16                        stenographer here, and she's going to
17                        be coming up with the transcript of
18                        this whole meeting, and it's important
19                        that, you know, she hear your comments
20                        so she can get them down.                  So, we just
21                        ask, when we get to the question
22                        portion, if you remember just to state
23                        your name and spell it for Gina so she
24                        doesn't have to stop everything and go
25                        back and ask for it again.                   So, that


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Page 4
1                                       Proceedings
2                         will happen at the question and answer
3                         part.      Again, if you haven't signed
4                         in, I would appreciate it if you would
5                         do that, and that's the reason, as I
6                         said, we are here tonight, to talk
7                         about the proposed plan.
8                                      So, we fast-tracked and put
9                         people on the CAG meetings focus
10                        feasibility study.              So, I know it
11                        probably seems to everybody like this
12                        is taking so long, but in the EPA
13                        world, I have to say, this has gone
14                        pretty quickly, you know, to get to
15                        the point where we are now.                   So, we're
16                        going to talk about EPA's preferred
17                        remedy.
18                                     Has everyone had a chance to
19                        take a look at the proposed plan on
20                        our web page?           If not, you know, we
21                        have the address up here that we can
22                        give you, take a look at it, but it's
23                        important that you have a chance to
24                        look at it.          It's a somewhat technical
25                        document, but it will give you a lot


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Page 5
1                                       Proceedings
2                         of good background information.
3                                      Now, part of this is a 30-day
4                         comment period, which started on June
5                         13th.      So, we try to do this meeting
6                         kind of in the middle of that to give
7                         you a chance to look at the proposed
8                         plan, and the comment period will end
9                         on July 13th.           So, if you leave here
10                        tonight, you think of some other
11                        comments, you can send them in by
12                        email or by regular mail, and she will
13                        also have her information up there.
14                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            I put out
15                        cards over there.
16                                     MS. SEPPI:         Okay.      So, the
17                        format, again, it's a little bit
18                        different than some of our other
19                        meetings.        You know, we had the
20                        introduction, and the explanation of
21                        why we're here, then we have a
22                        presentation, and then we open the
23                        floor up for any questions or comments
24                        that you may have.              And, again, Gina
25                        will be taking all of those.


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Page 6
1                                       Proceedings
2                                      After this, after this
3                         proposed plan comes our legally
4                         binding document, which is called a
5                         'Record of Decision,' and all the
6                         comments that we hear tonight will be
7                         included as an additional document in
8                         that 'Record of Decision.' So, you'll
9                         be able to go back and see your
10                        comments and what our responses are.
11                                     So, this is the part I always
12                        hate to do, I'd ask you, if possible,
13                        could you hold your questions until
14                        the end, only because so many times
15                        somebody will ask a question, and it's
16                        a good question, but maybe, you know,
17                        two slides down the road it gets
18                        answered.        So, we would appreciate it
19                        if you could do that, and then the
20                        rest of the evening will be your's for
21                        us to answer your questions.                    So,
22                        Anne, I'm going to turn it over to
23                        you.
24                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            Okay.      So, I
25                        just put up the agenda slide to give


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Page 7
1                                       Proceedings
2                         you a little preview about what we're
3                         going to talk about tonight.                    The next
4                         slide kind of goes over what Pat just
5                         talked about, which talks about the
6                         comment period, which extends until
7                         July 13th, and kind of how we respond
8                         to those, and put them into the
9                         records.
10                                     So, again, Pat talked a little
11                        bit about the Superfund process and
12                        how we go through the different steps.
13                        First, after a site is discovered it
14                        gets preliminary assessment and site
15                        inspection.          After that a site is
16                        ranked and listed on the National
17                        Priorities List, or NPL.                 Next comes a
18                        remedial investigation and feasibility
19                        study phase.          The proposed plan,
20                        'Record of Decision' is right now, and
21                        then remedial design, and remedial
22                        action and then construction happens,
23                        and then construction completion and
24                        O&M.     So, right now the proposed plan
25                        phase ends in September, then the


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Page 8
1                                       Proceedings
2                         'Record of Decision.'
3                            So, just a little background on the
4     site.       In May of 2005, DEP and Sussex County
5     became aware of contamination in the residential
6     drinking water, and at that time 18 homes were
7     found to have elevated concentrations of a
8     contaminant called trichloroethylene or TCE, and
9     also at that time DEP installed POETS, or point of
10    entry treatment systems, to the homes.
11                           Between 2006 and 2008 vapor
12    intrusion sampling was performed by the DEP at
13    homes and nearby schools, and in 2009 DEP located
14    the sledge-like-waste in their disposal trenches
15    along the Mansfield Bike Trail.
16                           At this point EPA was handed this
17    site, and in March of 2011 the site was added to
18    the National Priorities List, or the NPL, and
19    between February and May of 2012 a removal was
20    completed to get rid of the source area
21    contamination that was in the trenches along the
22    bike path.
23                           In 2012 VI sampling was performed by
24    EPA, and then in September of 2013 a more formal
25    remedial investigation began.


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Page 9
1                                       Proceedings
2                            All information from the remedial
3     investigation was then summed up in the DESR or
4     Data Evaluation Summary Report, and that came out
5     in May of 2016, and that document, along with the
6     feasibility study, which came out this year, are
7     both available online at the website that was up
8     earlier, and I'll put it up again later.
9                            So, to give you some geographic
10    information on this site, you can see in the red
11    lines there that's the general area where the
12    trenches were, and you can see a better picture of
13    them on the bottom right-hand corner, but also you
14    can see 206 on the left-hand side of the map is to
15    give you some perspective of where this is, and
16    the residences that are closest to the trench area
17    on the site boundaries.
18                           So, EPA kind of went about this site
19    by first doing the source area removal, which is
20    what's normally done in this type of cleanup, and
21    next we moved to the investigation phase, where we
22    found as much information as we could, and next we
23    looked at the site and broke it up into three
24    different areas, which would be the vapor
25    intrusion, the site wide contamination, and the


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 10
1                                       Proceedings
2     groundwater and the residential contamination.
3                            This is just a cross-section to give
4     you a view of the geological setting, and you can
5     see that it's a complex site because of the
6     fractured bedrock, and the fact that the trenches
7     were on the top of the ridge, and, so, the
8     contamination enters the groundwater through the
9     fractures on top of the ridge and kind of goes
10    through the fractures in the groundwater and
11    continues towards the residential area.                           This is
12    kind of just a way to sum up the issues.
13                           Right now impacted residences have
14    POET systems on them, and impacted residences with
15    vapor intrusion issues have mitigation systems.
16                           So, EPA broke up the site into two
17    operable units, and normally the sites are broken
18    up into operable units based on either geographic
19    regions or specific site problems so we can
20    address them one at a time.
21                           And in this case Operable Unit 1,
22    which the FFS is on, is the contaminated
23    residential drinking water.
24                           So, the first step in moving towards
25    a remedy is to do a risk assessment, and in this


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 11
1                                       Proceedings
2     case, because it's a human health issue with the
3     residential drinking water, we did a human health
4     risk assessment, and in that risk assessment we
5     found elevated levels of contaminants in the
6     drinking water that were above federal and state
7     standards.          The human health assessment pretty
8     much states that the contamination in the
9     groundwater poses an unacceptable risk to current
10    uses.
11                           And, again, the POETS are mitigating
12    the current risk through treatment.
13                           The ecological risks at the site are
14    being pushed to OU2, where a more formal
15    ecological risk assessment will be performed as
16    part of the RFS, or the site-wide groundwater
17    contamination.
18                           Okay.      So, the remedial action
19    objective is a specific clean-up goal put together
20    for each site, and it ensures the protection of
21    human health and the environment, and it's kind of
22    a wordy statement, but it goes through our general
23    goals for the site, and it's put in the proposed
24    plan as well as the 'Record of Decision.'
25                           So, to summarize the three


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 12
1                                       Proceedings
2     alternatives that were brought through from the
3     FFS to the proposed plan, the first one is the No
4     Action, which is a baseline alternative that is
5     put into every Superfund alternative list, and
6     it's just there because it's always there, and it
7     always gets ruled out in the different criteria we
8     use to look at the different alternatives.
9                            And, so, the second alternative is
10    the removal of contaminants via treatment, which
11    would be the continuation of the POETS and
12    maintenance of those for impacted residents, and
13    also included in Alternative 2 would be the
14    monitoring of private wells in the nearby area.
15                           Alternative 3 is the connection to
16    an existing water supply, and that would include
17    installation at the water main and connections to
18    impacted residents.               Also included in this are
19    upgrades to the existing system, as well as the
20    monitoring of nearby homes, which is also in
21    Alternative 2.
22                           So, for Alternative 2, the
23    advantages would be that it's less costly, it
24    would be implemented almost immediately, because
25    the POETS are already existing for existing homes,


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 13
1                                       Proceedings
2     and in the disadvantages there is long-term O&M
3     costs, and it's not considered a permanent option.
4                            Alternative 3 is the water supply
5     connection.          Advantages being that it's a
6     permanent source of safe drinking water and it's
7     considered more reliable and permanent than the
8     POETS.       The disadvantage would be the upfront
9     construction costs and the disruption to the
10    neighborhood and the areas.
11                           Next I just want to look at the nine
12    criteria that EPA uses to go through the different
13    alternatives and kind of our thought process in
14    deciding which alternative is the best.
15                           So, the first two are just EPA
16    standards.          No remedy would be chosen if they
17    didn't meet both of these, and the first one is
18    overall protection of human health and the
19    environment, and the second one is compliance of
20    federal and state regulations and guidances.
21                           The next five are balancing
22    criteria.         They go over the effectiveness and the
23    different lengths of time as well as costs and
24    implement-ability.
25                           And then the last two are state


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 14
1                                       Proceedings
2     acceptance and community acceptance.                         The first of
3     which we already have; the state has already
4     agreed to our proposed remedy.
5                            For the additional FFS
6     considerations, we found out the fact that the
7     POET installations would be maintenance and annual
8     carbon change-outs, and for the water supply
9     connection we included in the proposed plan and
10    the FFS an estimate of the water main and
11    connections that would be needed as well as
12    upgrades to the system, and both of these options
13    are included in the monitoring of nearby
14    residents.
15                           So, if you read the proposed plan,
16    you know that the preferred alternative is the
17    alternate water supply connection.                        Main
18    considerations for this was that it's considered a
19    long-term remedy, it's reliable, and it's a better
20    choice, according to EPA, versus the POETS, and
21    then the proposed plan uses the East Brookwood
22    Estates water supply for cost estimation purposes.
23                           So, next steps would be to evaluate
24    the public comments after the comment period ends
25    on July 13th, we will then respond to all comments


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 15
1                                       Proceedings
2     that come in, and we will put them in a
3     responsiveness summary, which is just a response
4     to each of the comments that come in, into the
5     'Record of Decision.'.
6                            After that we go into remedial
7     design phase, where we design the whole remedy,
8     and then after the design phase we have to go for
9     funding, and once we get the funding we can move
10    into the construction phase and implementation of
11    the remedy.
12                           Concurrently we're working on the
13    RFS, which is going to address the vapor intrusive
14    and the site-wide groundwater contamination.
15                           That's all I have.
16                                     MS. SEPPI:         Very good.         Thank
17                        you.     So, just a show of hands.                   A lot
18                        of people have questions.                  I want to
19                        make sure we have plenty of time.
20                                     Just to remind you, if you
21                        would, just state your name and spell
22                        it each time you have a question, for
23                        Gina, so that she doesn't have to
24                        interrupt and ask you.                Why don't you
25                        come up here.


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 16
1                                       Proceedings
2                                      MR. ROMBERLE:           My name is
3                         Marcus Romberle, R-O-M-B-E-R-L-E.                       I
4                         have questions about the alternatives.
5                         First off, if we stay with the POETS,
6                         what about the houses that they're not
7                         on the program anymore, like mine.
8                         Are we going back?              So, that means
9                         you're going to maintain our systems?
10                        Because right now we pay out of our
11                        pocket for my house.
12                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            So, the
13                        proposed plan is to put in the
14                        waterline.         So, you would be then
15                        hooked up to the waterline.
16                                     MR. ROMBERLE:           No, I mean if
17                        we stay with the second alternative.
18                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            We have
19                        already chosen the third alternative.
20                        So, we already have chosen that remedy
21                        to go with the waterline.                  So, you
22                        would get hooked up to that.
23                                     MR. ROMBERLE:           Okay.      Now, the
24                        third alternative, are we hooking up
25                        before the filters or after the filter


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 17
1                                       Proceedings
2                         system?
3                                      MS. ROSENBLATT:            So, it will
4                         be hooked into a public or private
5                         system where that water is coming from
6                         another area.           So, it wouldn't be
7                         attached to your well at all.
8                                      MR. ROMBERLE:           Okay.      I'm
9                         happy.       Thank you.
10                                     MS. SEPPI:         Next question.
11                                     MR. DOLTE:         Joe Dolte,
12                        D-O-L-T-E.         So, you've selected three?
13                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes.
14                                     MR. DOLTE:         There's an 8.9
15                        million dollar cost for three, and has
16                        that funding already been approved?
17                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            No.
18                                     MR. DOLTE:         So then
19                        alternative two can't be eliminated
20                        since you don't have funding for
21                        three, is that correct?
22                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            So, the way
23                        that the funding works is that we
24                        would have already chosen the remedy
25                        at that point, and correct me if I'm


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 18
1                                       Proceedings
2                         wrong, but the cost of the remedy is
3                         not always going to be the biggest
4                         factor in deciding whether or not we
5                         get funding.          It's going to be the
6                         granting of the remedy of the issue at
7                         the site.        So, there's a whole process
8                         in which we go to the priority panel,
9                         which is within headquarters, and we
10                        have to layout the -- there is a lot
11                        of information given to them.                     It's
12                        not really based on the cost of the
13                        remedy.
14                                     MS. SEPPI:         Another thing you
15                        need to know too, is that we can't get
16                        the money, the 8.9 million now.                      There
17                        is a process that goes along with the
18                        funding, and until we have the design
19                        and we can go to this priority panel
20                        and say, this is what we want to do,
21                        and this is how much it costs, you
22                        know, it's not like upfront money.
23                                     MR. DOLTE:         I understand that
24                        but that's why I'm questioning
25                        whether, even though you say you've


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 19
1                                       Proceedings
2                         selected the plan, that option two is
3                         still not on the table.
4                                      MR. GARCIA:         Let me say this,
5                         Joe, even for Alternative 2, that also
6                         involves getting funding.                  We would
7                         still have to do the design, and then
8                         go to the priority panel and present
9                         our design and request the money.                       So,
10                        either process, either alternative
11                        still involves requesting funding.
12                                     MR. DOLTE:         Maybe the question
13                        should be different then.                  What is the
14                        likelihood of getting funding for one
15                        of the projects?
16                                     MR. GARCIA:         Well, certainly
17                        we know a typical design, like
18                        something like Alternative 3, which is
19                        essentially a waterline, takes about
20                        eighteen months, that's usually around
21                        the time frame.            At that point that's
22                        when we would present it, you know,
23                        and it's two years away.                 We're not
24                        really sure where we would be at that
25                        point, you know, we have funded other


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 20
1                                       Proceedings
2                         projects this year, and will continue
3                         to fund projects as we go forward.
4                         So, it's difficult for us to say at
5                         this point right now what will happen
6                         in two years, but at this point, right
7                         now we feel confident, but it's hard
8                         to say.       We'll certainly be considered
9                         for funding.
10                                     MR. DOLTE:         So, let's say in
11                        two years from now funding isn't
12                        available or whatever, we would
13                        continue with the current system until
14                        such funding is available?
15                                     MR. GARCIA:         Yes, you would.
16                                     MR. DOLTE:         And that POET
17                        system would continue to be funded by
18                        the state or would it switch over to
19                        the federal government?                 I know that
20                        was one of the points as well.
21                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            The state
22                        will continue to fund it.
23                                     MR. GARCIA:         We've had
24                        discussions with the state and they
25                        will continue to maintain those


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 21
1                                       Proceedings
2                         systems until the water system is
3                         done.
4                                      MR. DOLTE:         That's a pretty
5                         long time for, let's say for those
6                         people who, in his case, he bought the
7                         home after the fact, he's off the
8                         system because that was a later ruling
9                         that was made, you know, there are
10                        several houses that are in that
11                        situation.         I'm speaking on their
12                        behalf because I'm up here.
13                                     MS. SEPPI:         The state is not
14                        going to pick up homes that are not
15                        part of the system now.
16                                     MR. DOLTE:         Okay.      Thank you.
17                                     MS. SEPPI:         Thank you, Joe.
18                        Next question.
19                                     MS. GRIFF:         Donna Griff,
20                        G-R-I-F-F.         So, piggybacking off that
21                        question, we have a remedy that's
22                        going to take two years for you to
23                        engineer and find out, you know, what
24                        you're going to do next.                 Then you
25                        gotta get the funding.                Then you gotta


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 22
1                                       Proceedings
2                         build it.        So, it could be five, six
3                         years before we have public water to
4                         our house, right?
5                                      MR. GARCIA:         Possibly.
6                                      MS. GRIFF:         I didn't plan on
7                         living in my house that long.                     If I
8                         sell tomorrow, the person who buys the
9                         house, falls off the system and has to
10                        pay for their own system while you all
11                        wait and do all your engineering and
12                        everything to get the permanent
13                        solution in place?
14                                     MS. SEPPI:         Bottom line, yes.
15                                     MS. GRIFF:         Is there any way
16                        to petition the government?                   Because
17                        you already have a solution in place
18                        that works.          Why can't the
19                        government -- EPA pick that up?                      You
20                        have a solution, and then while you're
21                        waiting to put the permanent solution
22                        in -- I mean what can we do for the
23                        residents to make that happen?
24                        Because it's really sad what has
25                        happened to him.             It's really sad


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 23
1                                       Proceedings
2                         what's going to happen to the next
3                         owner of my house if I sell in the
4                         next couple of years.                There are
5                         people in the neighborhood that can't
6                         sell their homes because of the
7                         situation, and we have people who are
8                         going to be moving shortly or want to
9                         move, and can't, because their house
10                        is worth nothing.             So, I mean is there
11                        any way, we, as residents, who are
12                        affected, can make it so that there is
13                        this solution right now to pay for the
14                        public system to keep them up?
15                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            Certainly
16                        you're making a statement now, which
17                        will go into the responsiveness
18                        summary.        It's a good start.
19                                     MS. GRIFF:         It's just sad that
20                        we have a solution to fix everybody
21                        and we can't make everybody whole.
22                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes.
23                                     MS. GRIFF:         And then my next
24                        question would be:              I've heard, since
25                        we talked about the eighteen homes,


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 24
1                                       Proceedings
2                         I've heard recently that other homes
3                         have been tested that might have
4                         contamination.           Are there any new
5                         homes that are affected?                 Because we
6                         heard that in our neighborhood that
7                         there were.
8                                      MS. ROSENBLATT:            There was one
9                         home that recently was found to have
10                        contamination, and that was just
11                        because they originally had not been
12                        tested when we initially went out and
13                        did the residential sampling.                     We had
14                        a method in our continuation of
15                        testing and so --
16                                     MS. GRIFF:         How many homes are
17                        affected?
18                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            Just one
19                        extra.
20                                     MS. GRIFF:         So, it's nineteen?
21                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            It is
22                        nineteen.
23                                     MS. GRIFF:         And are you
24                        waiting for results?               Is there anyone
25                        else waiting for results?


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 25
1                                       Proceedings
2                                      MS. ROSENBLATT:            No.
3                                      MS. GRIFF:         Okay.
4                                      MR. GARCIA:         And that's
5                         another comment that we should make,
6                         if anyone, you know, wants to -- is
7                         interested in having their home
8                         tested, please let us know.
9                                      MS. GRIFF:         Would it be at
10                        their cost or the state's cost?
11                                     MR. GARCIA:         Well, we would
12                        certainly have to see where the house
13                        is located.          If it's within an area
14                        that we think warrants it --
15                                     MS. SEPPI:         We're not going to
16                        go a half a mile away.
17                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            And another
18                        thing to say, is that during design
19                        there would definitely be a more wide
20                        spread testing, and any homes that
21                        were found to be impacted would be
22                        included in the remedy, not just the
23                        eighteen, and that's stated in the
24                        proposal.
25                                     MS. GRIFF:         I have one last


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 26
1                                       Proceedings
2                         question.        You talked about using East
3                         Brookwood water as your solution,
4                         right?       They have their own well
5                         problems, correct?
6                                      MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes.
7                                      MS. GRIFF:         So, you're saying
8                         you're just using that for cost
9                         purposes, but are there other water
10                        system alternatives?
11                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes, there
12                        are.     There are public and private
13                        systems that are considered and will
14                        be continued to be considered.
15                                     MS. GRIFF:         Because I hesitate
16                        to join into a water system that
17                        already has contaminated water, not
18                        just TCE, but another contamination.
19                        Here we are with a water company
20                        that's run by volunteers, or whatever,
21                        so, we are going from contamination of
22                        one kind to contamination of another
23                        kind.      So, I'm hoping the state or the
24                        EPA would --
25                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            Upgrades will


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 27
1                                       Proceedings
2                         be done to any system that would be
3                         connected.
4                                      MR. GARCIA:         We certainly
5                         would ensure that whatever water
6                         you're getting is safe.
7                                      MS. GRIFF:         And tested for the
8                         future?
9                                      MR. GARCIA:         Well, they would
10                        have to --
11                                     MS. GRIFF:         Once we're hooked
12                        up you say it's good, you leave, will
13                        you continue to monitor that?
14                                     MR. GARCIA:         They would have
15                        to abide by certain regulations and
16                        rules of New Jersey.               So, we would
17                        certainly monitor that.
18                                     MS. GRIFF:         And you'll
19                        continue for how long, to watch for
20                        the TCE to possibly move?
21                                     MR. GARCIA:         Well, the TCE is
22                        part of the -- the overall groundwater
23                        is part of the next phase of the work.
24                                     MS. GRIFF:         How long will that
25                        go on after the remedy?


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 108 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 28
1                                       Proceedings
2                                      MS. ROSENBLATT:            So, the OU2
3                         is happening right now.                 So, we were
4                         hoping to come up with a remedy by
5                         next year.
6                                      MR. GARCIA:         Hoping about this
7                         time next year.
8                                      MS. GRIFF:         And that would be
9                         the cleanup?
10                                     MR. GARCIA:         That would be the
11                        cleanup of the actual groundwater in
12                        the area.
13                                     MS. GRIFF:         Okay.      Thank you.
14
15                                     MS. MORAN:         Jeannie Moran,
16                        M-O-R-A-N.         When are you going to make
17                        public the water company that you
18                        chose so that people who are affected
19                        in that company, as well as the people
20                        that want to make the choice know what
21                        they're getting hooked into?
22                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            So, the water
23                        company would be decided on during the
24                        design phase, which we'll be, you
25                        know, looking into that.


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 109 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 29
1                                       Proceedings
2                                      MR. GARCIA:         Let me just say
3                         this, Jeannie, because we have a CAG,
4                         we're going to meet on a somewhat
5                         regular basis as we gather more
6                         information, as we talk to the
7                         different water companies in the area
8                         and we have a better understanding
9                         which would be best, we will share
10                        that information.             Certainly as we
11                        know more we'll let you guys know
12                        more.
13                                     MS. MORAN:         It's really hard
14                        for anybody to comment realistically
15                        without knowing what water company it
16                        is.     As Donna said, you know, we're
17                        planning on selling to SUEZ.                    She
18                        might feel really differently, and I'm
19                        not speaking for you, but you might
20                        feel differently about a big
21                        international water company and
22                        hooking in.          And I don't know, you
23                        know, versus, you know, us, the
24                        volunteers, in our association, I'm
25                        part of the Eastbrook Estates property


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 110 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 30
1                                       Proceedings
2                         owner's association since 1964, and
3                         I'm also on the CAG, and I have been
4                         since the beginning, and we did
5                         discuss the fact -- you're saying you
6                         have alternative companies, but we
7                         know two of them have rejected you.
8                         Can you comment as to whether those
9                         companies have, in deed -- that would
10                        be Stanhope Municipal and BMRPOA, were
11                        both approached and said "no."                     And I
12                        don't where else you would hook into
13                        that wouldn't be triple the amount of
14                        money that the 8. -- I think it was 7
15                        in the report, 7.9 or --
16                                     MR. GARCIA:         8.7.
17                                     MS. MORAN:         8.7.     So, can you
18                        comment about these companies that you
19                        say you're still approaching and
20                        researching, when we kind of know that
21                        these companies have been approached.
22                        I've spoken with them.
23                                     MR. GARCIA:         I'll be happy to
24                        address that.           So, the discussions we
25                        had initially with the water companies


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 111 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 31
1                                       Proceedings
2                         that you're referring to was kind of a
3                         big picture discussion.                 Once we
4                         complete this record, and once we get
5                         the 'Record of Decision' signed, when
6                         we go forward with this remedy, that's
7                         when we're going to sit down and
8                         really have the more formal
9                         discussions with them.                And at that
10                        point, like I said, during the
11                        community outreaches that we have, we
12                        will present, to the CAG, more
13                        information, in a formal matter, about
14                        what we know and what they told us.
15                        Those two particular companies, yes,
16                        they did tell us, verbally, that they
17                        were not interested.               But, again, it
18                        was in a very kind of large overview
19                        of what we were thinking about.                      We're
20                        hoping that we can approach them
21                        again, possibly, and then have a more
22                        thorough discussion about, you know,
23                        what we're thinking, what we can do,
24                        and what they can do.                Fortunately
25                        right now, because of the stage we're


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 112 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 32
1                                       Proceedings
2                         in right now, we don't have a means
3                         right now to really sit down and
4                         engineer something.              We only had an
5                         ability, at this point, right now, to
6                         have a general discussion about
7                         things.       So, that's why I think maybe
8                         there is a little confusion.                    I
9                         understand that, you know, there was
10                        some discussions with them, and we're
11                        not denying that, but once we get into
12                        the design is when we're really going
13                        to get into the meat of it.                   It's
14                        really when we'll start to talk about
15                        things in more detail and really get
16                        into what we plan to do.                 Like I said,
17                        we'll be happy to share that
18                        information as we understand it.
19                                     MS. MORAN:         But we are
20                        commenting now.
21                                     MR. GARCIA:         Right.       Sure.
22                        You're commenting on the record.
23                                     MS. MORAN:         But we're
24                        commenting on-the-blind because I
25                        think it's very important to know what


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 113 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 33
1                                       Proceedings
2                         water company it is for those people
3                         who might chose to say I want to stay
4                         with my POET.           I would rather, you
5                         know, go into the water company, and
6                         if we're not going to have another
7                         comment session, and this is our only
8                         time to do it, it seems like, you
9                         know, not very constructive for those
10                        people, especially who might want to
11                        hook into a company and they don't
12                        even know which one it is.                   I mean I
13                        don't know how you make a decision.                        I
14                        mean if I was in their position I
15                        wouldn't know what to do.                  I mean the
16                        POETS are a band-aid.                They aren't
17                        really an answer.
18                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            Well, we can
19                        ensure that the water system that the
20                        homes are hooked up will supply clean
21                        drinking water for them, and, so,
22                        we're not going to hook the people up
23                        to a water supply that wouldn't be up
24                        to standards and all of the water
25                        suppliers have to follow DEP/EPA


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 114 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 34
1                                       Proceedings
2                         guidelines.
3                                      MS. MORAN:         So, actually if
4                         they choose the Alternative 3, it's
5                         whatever waterline you choose, it's
6                         kind of, you know, at that point, you
7                         know, their impact is -- you're the
8                         ones making the decision, and they're
9                         impacted.
10                                     MS. SEPPI:         It's premature at
11                        this time.         We don't really have a
12                        definite water company that we're
13                        going to use.
14                                     MR. GARCIA:         And we have the
15                        CAG.     So, they will be part of the
16                        discussions.          We're not going away,
17                        you know, this is just the start.                       We
18                        think we have a good plan.                   We think
19                        that we have a permanent solution, and
20                        this is the way that we think is the
21                        best option.          Once we're done with
22                        this, is when we're really going to
23                        get into those discussions and talk
24                        about, you know, the options that we
25                        may or may not have.


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 115 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 35
1                                       Proceedings
2                                      MS. MORAN:         But the cost they
3                         used, using our system, and we're the
4                         closest, now we have a lot of things
5                         that you need to work on, that might
6                         not exist with Stanhope.                 But
7                         certainly the BMRPOA across the
8                         highway would be a huge amount of
9                         money to go underneath the road and
10                        everything.          I mean the cost might
11                        triple.
12                                     MR. GARCIA:         That's happened
13                        before.       It's not unusual for costs to
14                        increase.
15                                     MS. MORAN:         And I also have a
16                        question:        Suppose they use our water
17                        system, and a lot of people want to
18                        hook up, and then our firm capacity
19                        shows that we can't support it, and
20                        you need another well.                In our East
21                        Brookwood section we have no available
22                        land.      It would have to be probably up
23                        in the upper section, is that correct?
24                        I mean as far as I know.
25                                     MR. GARCIA:         Right.       We're not


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 116 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 36
1                                       Proceedings
2                         at that point right now.
3                                      MS. ROSENBLATT:            We can't
4                         answer those questions yet.
5                                      MR. GARCIA:         But I will say
6                         this, anything that needs to be done
7                         to ensure that the people who have to
8                         be hooked up are hooked up, would be
9                         borne by EPA.           So, if another well had
10                        to be put in, we will deal with that.
11                                     MS. MORAN:         And what would be
12                        the concerns if the well was up there
13                        and the contamination was up there,
14                        and that well became affected, and
15                        then affected the whole East Brookwood
16                        water company's water, as a result
17                        digging a well up there and find that
18                        that well suddenly became contaminated
19                        with TCEs, and then we would all
20                        collectively be in the association,
21                        and all of us might have this, you
22                        know, the same circumstance they have,
23                        we would have.
24                                     MR. GARCIA:         Well, I will say
25                        this, that any well -- if for argument


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 117 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 37
1                                       Proceedings
2                         sake we had to install another well
3                         somewhere, that would be one of the
4                         factors we look at.              We would only be
5                         installing a well in an area that we
6                         could ensure that that water was safe.
7                                      MS. MORAN:         So, in other words
8                         you would know if it was safe in the
9                         beginning, but you said that all wells
10                        are tested all the time, would be
11                        tested for TCEs.             What if they showed
12                        up?     What would you do?
13                                     MR. GARCIA:         Then we'd address
14                        that.
15                                     MS. MORAN:         You would have to
16                        dig another well --
17                                     MR. GARCIA:         Again, ma'am --
18                                     MS. SEPPI:         You have such good
19                        questions.         They really are.
20                                     MR. GARCIA:         These are great
21                        questions.
22                                     MS. SEPPI:         We don't have the
23                        answers yet until we get into the
24                        design.
25                                     MR. GARCIA:         They are great


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 118 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 38
1                                       Proceedings
2                         questions and when we get into the CAG
3                         meeting we can talk about some more
4                         details when we gather more
5                         information.
6                                      MS. MORAN:         Well, I mean the
7                         people with the TCEs are affected, but
8                         whatever water company you choose is
9                         also going to impact them.                   So, I
10                        think those people, even though they
11                        aren't a member of the CAG, once you
12                        decide on a company, should certainly
13                        be invited to sit in on the CAG
14                        meetings.
15                                     MS. SEPPI:         That's a very good
16                        point too.         We have, for the people
17                        who don't know, a community advisory
18                        group here.          It's made up of about
19                        twenty people.           We meet quarterly for
20                        the most part.           Those meetings are
21                        open to the public.              So, if anybody
22                        who signed in and left me their email,
23                        when we have those CAG meetings,
24                        you'll be notified.              It doesn't
25                        necessarily mean you're a sitting


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 119 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 39
1                                       Proceedings
2                         member of the CAG, but, you know, you
3                         can certainly sit up there and listen
4                         to the presentation, and make any
5                         comments you would have.                 So, that's
6                         why I said, it's important, you know,
7                         to have your email so we can reach out
8                         to you as this moves on.                 So, I think
9                         the further we move on and get into
10                        the design, you know, we'll be having
11                        meetings pretty regularly.
12                                     MS. MORAN:         Do you have any
13                        projections when you'll know the
14                        company?        A guesstimate maybe?
15                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            No.
16                                     MR. GARCIA:         At this point our
17                        concentration is to get this
18                        completed.
19                                     MS. SEPPI:         Get the 'Record of
20                        Decision --
21                                     MS. MORAN:         That will be
22                        September, right?
23                                     MR. GARCIA:         We're hoping.
24                                     MS. SEPPI:         We're hoping.
25                        That's the goal.


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 120 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 40
1                                       Proceedings
2                                      MS. MORAN:         You're not too far
3                         away from that, but beyond that you
4                         don't have any kind of idea?
5                                      MR. GARCIA:         Well, we still
6                         have to do the design.                So, we'll be
7                         focused on the design.                And any
8                         information, like I said, we gather,
9                         certainly will be presented at the CAG
10                        meeting.        But it's, you know, steps
11                        that we have to follow to get to that
12                        point.
13                                     MS. MORAN:         Okay.      Thank you.
14                                     MR. OLSON:         Scott Olson.          I've
15                        got a couple of questions on how we're
16                        going to clean up, and when Christian
17                        was still here, at one point he
18                        mentioned a bio-method, to inject some
19                        kind of molecular structure that
20                        literally eats the volatile chemicals,
21                        some kind of chemical reaction.
22                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            I would say
23                        unless it has to do with this remedy,
24                        we're going to say that we're going to
25                        push that off until we come up with


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 121 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 41
1                                       Proceedings
2                         the OU2.
3                                      MR. OLSON:         That's what I was
4                         going to ask.           The OU2, and the same
5                         thing with the pump and filters?
6                                      MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yeah, so this
7                         would all be part of the OU2 remedy to
8                         actually address the contamination and
9                         do a cleanup.
10                                     MR. OLSON:         That would be a
11                        final step?
12                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yeah.
13                                     MS. SEPPI:         That would be a
14                        final alternative more to that portion
15                        of the site.
16                                     MR. OLSON:         And the other
17                        question I had on that, is, you got
18                        new contaminants or a new home that's
19                        contaminated, and you've pretty much
20                        got a decision made as to what is
21                        going to happen.             I'm assuming this
22                        home is going to get a POET system put
23                        on it very quickly.
24                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            It already
25                        has.


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 122 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 42
1                                       Proceedings
2                                      MR. OLSON:         Okay.      So, in a
3                         perfect world, you got your decision,
4                         you have installed a new POET on it
5                         because someone has a contaminated
6                         home.      It's $2,000, roughly, a year,
7                         to put POETS on homes or to maintain
8                         them?
9                                      MS. ROSENBLATT:            Mm-mm.       Yes.
10                                     MR. OLSON:         Could we find the
11                        $4,000.00 somewhere to put a POET on
12                        his home?        I mean you got a decision,
13                        you've got a solution, temporary or
14                        permanent, either way it's going to
15                        get a POET, you know.                It should be,
16                        at this point, where no one should be
17                        having to do it themselves.
18                                     MS. SEPPI:         He has a POET.
19                                     MR. OLSON:         Yeah, but he's
20                        maintaining it.
21                                     MS. SEPPI:         That's the bad
22                        thing.       But he does have a POET.
23                                     MR. OLSON:         That just doesn't
24                        seem fair to me.             So, I would like to
25                        put that on the record that I would


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 123 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 43
1                                       Proceedings
2                         suggest that that be part of the
3                         clean-up as you start now.
4                                      MR. GARCIA:         Scott, just two
5                         things; one is that the POET that was
6                         just recently installed on that home
7                         was installed through the Spill Fund.
8                                      MR. OLSON:         At what point
9                         then, I guess would be appropriate, at
10                        what point does the EPA take over that
11                        part of the funding?
12                                     MR. GARCIA:         We don't maintain
13                        those systems.
14                                     MR. OLSON:         So, you rely on
15                        the DEP to make it all the way through
16                        until the pipes are finished?
17                                     MR. GARCIA:         Yes.
18                                     MR. OLSON:         I would still
19                        suggest that at a certain point you
20                        actually consider doing something for
21                        these people.           It's so little money.
22                        It's so little money.                These are
23                        people that, you know, it's their
24                        home.
25                                     MS. SEPPI:         We understand.            We


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 124 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 44
1                                       Proceedings
2                         do.     Thank you.
3                                      MR. COLLINSON:           My name is
4                         Chess Collinson, C-O-L-L-I-N-S-O-N.
5                         Just to further to his point, we were
6                         one of the original homes in the
7                         neighborhood, 79 Brookwood, that
8                         actually was found to have
9                         contamination.           When we bought our
10                        home it wasn't brought to our light by
11                        the attorney at the time.                  So, we kind
12                        of got raw-ended by the attorney.                       We
13                        missed the window by one month and we
14                        had to pay for our system and we
15                        maintain our own system.                 So, I guess
16                        my question goes back to:                  When you
17                        guys did your search on the cleanup,
18                        all the sites, have you gone far
19                        enough out?          Do we see any kind of
20                        actual level dropping at this point?
21                        I mean have you checked all these
22                        areas?       I see the floodwaters coming
23                        down through the woods.                 So, if you're
24                        not going back, all the way out by the
25                        high school, you haven't searched far


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 125 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 45
1                                       Proceedings
2                         enough.       You may even find further
3                         homes contaminated on the other end of
4                         Sparta Stanhope Road.
5                                      MS. ROSENBLATT:            We are still
6                         in R1/FS.        So, there is investigation
7                         going on and there's new wells being
8                         put out there to investigate to the
9                         full extent, to fully develop that.
10                                     MR. COLLINSON:           Okay.
11                                     MS. SEPPI:         If they find a
12                        well that has TCEs, they don't stop
13                        there.       Then they move out until they
14                        find something that's clean.
15                                     MR. GARCIA:         They keep going.
16                                     MR. COLLINSON:           Thank you.
17                                     MS. GRIFF:         Donna Griff.          I
18                        want to ask a question.                 So, the new
19                        home that was discovered, you put a
20                        POET system in, who is maintaining
21                        that?
22                                     MS. SEPPI:         The Spill Fund.
23                                     MS. GRIFF:         That is not right.
24                        They may have been newly discovered,
25                        but why does that house get to be


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 126 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 46
1                                       Proceedings
2                         maintained and the houses like his is
3                         not?     I don't understand that.                  I want
4                         that on the record.              Because it's an
5                         important point that we have these
6                         homes that are contaminated by the
7                         same contamination that all of our
8                         houses are, and they are being treated
9                         differently.          It is not fair.
10                                     MR. BAKEMAN:          It's a legal
11                        decision that was made.                 I mean, you
12                        know, the state decided to go with
13                        that decision.
14                                     MS. QURKOT:         Stephanie Qurkot,
15                        Q-U-R-K-O-T.          I have two questions.
16                        When can a map be made available on
17                        where the delineations have been
18                        conducted so far?             It might already be
19                        online.       I couldn't find it.               And, 2,
20                        has the NAPL been conducted in the
21                        bedrock?
22                                     MR. GARCIA:         I will mention,
23                        in terms of, we do not present maps
24                        that show the homes.
25                                     MS. QURKOT:         I'm a former


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 127 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 47
1                                       Proceedings
2                         resident of the area.
3                                      MS. MISHKIN:          So, during some
4                         earlier investigation we did find some
5                         products in the groundwater.                    Yeah,
6                         so, NAPL, Non Aqueous Phased Liquid,
7                         and so we tested for that
8                         specifically.           And we didn't have very
9                         high concentrations of TCEs so it
10                        wasn't very clear what that was, but
11                        it's probably not very mobile in that
12                        area where the, you know, the original
13                        dumping took place.
14                                     MS. QURKOT:         What about the
15                        bedrock?
16                                     MS. MISHKIN:          So, in the
17                        bedrock we found product, but not very
18                        high concentrations.
19                                     MS. SEPPI:         Would that map be
20                        helpful?
21                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            It has all of
22                        the information from the previous
23                        investigation.
24                                     MR. GARCIA:         Well, that will
25                        give you more information about the


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 128 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 48
1                                       Proceedings
2                         contamination, the results, the
3                         figures, maps.           That was the one done
4                         in 2013 and as we gain more
5                         information we'll certainly make it
6                         available.
7                                      MS. SEPPI:         Leave your email.
8                         Thank you.
9                                      MS. QURKOT:         Thank you.
10                                     MS. SEPPI:         Mary.
11                                     MS. SCHNEIDER:           Mary
12                        Schneider, S-C-H-N-E-I-D-E-R.                     Anne,
13                        you and I had briefly spoke about it,
14                        and I just want to go on record, if
15                        you decide to put the water system in
16                        there, and those with the POET
17                        systems, some of them decide not to
18                        hook up to the water, will the POET
19                        system continue to be maintained by
20                        the state or federal government?
21                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            No.
22                                     MS. SCHNEIDER:           So, we have no
23                        choice?
24                                     MR. GARCIA:         Well, no, you
25                        have a choice you can certainly


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 129 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 49
1                                       Proceedings
2                         maintain it yourself.
3                                      MS. ROSENBLATT:            But this is
4                         what's being proposed by the EPA, and
5                         the state concurs, they are all
6                         acknowledging that's the proposed
7                         remedy.
8                                      MS. SCHNEIDER:           Thank you.
9                                      MS. SEPPI:         Good question
10                        Mary.
11                           MS. SCHNEIDER:            Thanks.
12                                     MS. MORAN:         Jeannie Moran
13                        again.       If the water supply company
14                        you choose says, no, what would you
15                        do?     What's your action then?
16                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            In design
17                        phase we're going to be finding the
18                        ultimate supplier.
19                                     MR. GARCIA:         To answer your
20                        question though, I think we'll keep
21                        trying.       We're not going to let it go.
22                        We'll make this work somehow.
23                        Whatever it is, we'll make it work.
24                                     MS. MORAN:         So, if they said,
25                        no, you wouldn't push it then, you


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 130 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 50
1                                       Proceedings
2                         would have a second choice and a third
3                         choice?
4                                      MR. GARCIA:         We're not really
5                         sure of what is going to happen.                      We
6                         haven't spoken in that detail to them.
7                         So, it's a tough question to answer
8                         what the response will be.                   Generally,
9                         you know, when we get those responses
10                        from the companies, we speak to --
11                        that's when we make those decisions.
12                        We don't really know yet.                  We have to
13                        speak to the people more formally.
14                                     MS. MORAN:         Okay, but if they
15                        said, no, I know it's a hypothetical,
16                        but I think it's important for those
17                        who live in the area, and how the
18                        supplies you're considering, if they
19                        have voting power they might vote it
20                        down as an association, or as in town,
21                        the council will vote it down
22                        unanimously, or whatever, what would
23                        you do if that occurred?
24                                     MR. GARCIA:         Are you referring
25                        to one specific water company or in


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 131 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 51
1                                       Proceedings
2                         general?
3                                      MS. MORAN:         No.     Any one you
4                         chose.       Like some of us have voting
5                         rights.       Like Stanhope is a municipal
6                         government so the council would make
7                         that decision.           So, I was bringing
8                         that up in terms of if they vote "no"
9                         are you going to impose this on them?
10                                     MR. GARCIA:         We can't impose
11                        anything.        We can't force anybody, but
12                        we can certainly, you know, reach out
13                        to as many people as we can to have
14                        those discussions, and hopefully in
15                        the future, when it's advisable, we
16                        will explain what we found out, what
17                        those answers were.
18                                     MS. MORAN:         Okay, but there's
19                        nothing like emanate domain that you
20                        would force yourself on a company and
21                        say they need it because it's such a
22                        critical situation?
23                                     MR. GARCIA:         EPA doesn't do
24                        that.
25                                     MS. MORAN:         Okay.


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 132 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 52
1                                       Proceedings
2                                      MS. ROSENBLATT:            Thank you.
3                                      MS. SEPPI:         Anybody else have
4                         any questions?
5                                      MR. BOUCHER:          Darrin Boucher,
6                         B-O-U-C-H-E-R.           So, the POETS that the
7                         state, real quick, for a rental
8                         property if you were to move, let's
9                         say some people want to move out early
10                        in those couple of years until, let's
11                        say the final solution is made, the
12                        water is piped in, the POET system is
13                        still maintained, if it's not your
14                        primary residence is it still going to
15                        be maintained by the state?
16                                     MR. GARCIA:         That's a question
17                        for Mark.
18                                     MR. HERZBERG:           I think the
19                        only trigger is the change of
20                        ownership.
21                                     MR. BOUCHER:          Okay.      So, it
22                        doesn't have to be your primary
23                        residence?
24                                     MS. SEPPI:         It stays with the
25                        house.       Whoever lived there would be


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 133 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 53
1                                       Proceedings
2                         maintaining it.
3                                      MR. BOUCHER:          Thank you.
4                                      UNANNOUNCED SPEAKER:               And just
5                         to touch on the question to why, my
6                         understanding, is, I mean this is
7                         something that went through the
8                         attorneys that deal with these kind of
9                         questions, is that the damage is done
10                        to an existing homeowner, and funds
11                        were made available to try to
12                        compensate for those damages.                     At a
13                        time when a property transfers, that
14                        that issue, along with multiple
15                        issues, is reflected in the purchase
16                        of the house, the purchase price, and
17                        that is not any kind of damage to a
18                        future homeowner.             You know, I think
19                        that was the largest piece of why the
20                        change was made, popular or unpopular.
21                                     MS. SEPPI:         Any other
22                        questions?
23                                     MR. MUELLER:          Ray Mueller,
24                        M-U-E-L-L-E-R.           Did you say that there
25                        will be a final step in this project


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 134 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 54
1                                       Proceedings
2                         that will address the contaminants in
3                         the groundwater itself?
4                                      MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes.
5                                      MR. GARCIA:         That's the next
6                         phase.
7                                      MS. ROSENBLATT:            Site wide.
8                                      MR. MUELLER:          Is it possible
9                         that that step would take care of the
10                        contaminated well water in the homes?
11                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yeah.      So,
12                        the reason why we tried to fast track
13                        this remedy for the residential
14                        drinking water is because through our
15                        investigation that we've done we found
16                        that it's a very complex fractured
17                        bedrock and we don't think that it's
18                        going to be a quick remedy for the
19                        overall site groundwater.                  So, we
20                        thought it would be prudent to try to
21                        fix this problem and then continue to
22                        work on that problem.
23                                     MS. SEPPI:         That can take
24                        years and years to do something like
25                        that.      You pump it out, treat it, put


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 135 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 55
1                                       Proceedings
2                         it back.
3                                      MR. MUELLER:          Thank you.
4                                      MS. SEPPI:         That's a good
5                         question.
6                                      MS. COLEMAN:          Ann Marie
7                         Coleman, C-O-L-E-M-A-N.                 I was just
8                         curious, if Eastbrook were to be
9                         picked, and we were to agree, we have
10                        never had a vote on it, but if we were
11                        to agree, do the people understand
12                        that they pay $95 a month right now,
13                        and that when Suez buys us they are
14                        going to meter roll the homes?                     So,
15                        that's something that they should
16                        know.
17                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            Okay.
18                                     MS. SEPPI:         Thank you.
19                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            I think the
20                        full details on how an agreement of
21                        any sort with the water supply
22                        company, would be figured out more
23                        fully in design phase.                And, you know,
24                        there would be a lot of communication
25                        and talks with the CAG and the


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 136 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 56
1                                       Proceedings
2                         supplier at that time to figure all
3                         that out.
4                                      MR. GARCIA:         Anything else?
5                                      MS. SEPPI:         Anything else.
6                                      MS. SCHNEIDER:           Mary
7                         Schneider.         I do want to offer
8                         compliments to the EPA and DEP.                      I
9                         have been part of this since 2005 when
10                        it first started.             And, as you know, I
11                        do a lot of research on environmental
12                        things that happen in the community.
13                        It took Chester thirty years to get
14                        public water pumped in and I think we
15                        are moving along pretty quick.                     So, I
16                        want to thank you.
17                                     MS. SEPPI:         I worked on that
18                        site.      Yeah, that was a long time.
19                        Thank you for your kind words.                     We
20                        don't get that very often.                   So, we
21                        appreciate it.
22                                     Scott, you have a question?
23                                     MR. OLSON:         Yes, I just want
24                        to echo on what Mary said.                   Everybody
25                        from Christian at the start, Diego and


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 137 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 57
1                                       Proceedings
2                         Anne, all you people who work in
3                         geology, and the CDC, it's been a
4                         pleasure actually working with you.
5                         You've always been responsive, the
6                         town has been here as an assistant,
7                         and I'm glad to have helped get the
8                         room scheduled, find land you can test
9                         on.     I think it's been a really
10                        cooperative and collaborative effort.
11                        Thank you guys.            Even Mark.
12                                     MS. SEPPI:         You know that was
13                        on my little page, I wanted to thank
14                        you and Doris both for being so
15                        cooperative, and it makes such as
16                        difference to work with the town and a
17                        group of people who are cooperative.
18                        I know a lot of times we are telling
19                        you things you don't want to hear,
20                        but, you know, we have always been
21                        able to be civil and talk to each
22                        other, and that's something else that
23                        we appreciate on our end, very much.
24                                     MR. GARCIA:         Absolutely.
25                                     MS. GRIFF:         Donna Griff.          I


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 138 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 58
1                                       Proceedings
2                         get angry about the process.                    It's not
3                         the people.          So, all of us are
4                         frustrated and angry about what
5                         happened to the Collinson's and what
6                         happened to our neighbors, and what we
7                         have had to go through for the past,
8                         you know, eleven years.                 A lot of us,
9                         not all of us, some are young, but
10                        some of us are older and thinking of
11                        retiring and moving on, and thinking,
12                        what are we going to do with these
13                        houses.       So, the fact that you're
14                        moving quickly, can't move fast enough
15                        for some of us, right, but I do
16                        appreciate the people.                You have been
17                        outstanding in communicating with us.
18                        So, hopefully that -- I know that will
19                        continue, but I want to say that it's
20                        been rough on us, you know, because we
21                        have to wait for the next stage of our
22                        lives based on what's happening with
23                        the remedies.
24                                     MS. SEPPI:         And that works two
25                        ways.      We get freighted with our


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 139 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 59
1                                       Proceedings
2                         process.        You know, we think we have
3                         such great ideas and ways to move
4                         forward and move more quickly, bring
5                         it back, oh, you know, that's against
6                         the regulations, we really can't do
7                         that.      So, yeah.
8                                      MS. GRIFF:         So, the anger is
9                         not directed at you.               It's directed at
10                        the stuff that's happened.
11                                     MS. SEPPI:         Question?
12                                     MS. PARRISH:          My name is
13                        Marilynne P-A-R-R-I-S-H.                 I live at 5
14                        Ross Road.         I purchased our home in
15                        2005, and I believe I was one of the
16                        first purchases, at that time, when
17                        the problem arose.              I have been
18                        responsible for the POET system in our
19                        home.      What happens from here?                 I mean
20                        I have been responsible for it now
21                        going forward.           I haven't gotten any
22                        help.      I paid for my own testing.                   I
23                        paid for the POET.              The whole bit.
24                        What happens here with the water now
25                        that we are going to be hooked up and


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 140 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 60
1                                       Proceedings
2                         taken care of?
3                                      MR. GARCIA:         Certainly once we
4                         hook you up then you won't have to
5                         operate that POET, and you would just
6                         get a water bill every month.                     I mean
7                         there is a lot of steps we have to do
8                         to get there.
9                                      MS. PARRISH:          At this point in
10                        the process we'll be brought in?
11                                     MR. GARCIA:         If you're one of
12                        the homes that was impacted,
13                        certainly.
14                                     MS. PARRISH:          Yeah.      Up until
15                        now we have been on our own.
16                                     MS. SEPPI:         But the bad news
17                        is, in the meantime you're still going
18                        to have to maintain the POET.
19                                     MS. PARRISH:          Which isn't fair
20                        because when purchased the home they
21                        didn't tell us that.               They told us
22                        that the state was going to take over
23                        otherwise I never would have bought
24                        the home.
25                                     MS. SEPPI:         You're not the


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 141 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 61
1                                       Proceedings
2                         only one.
3                                      MR. OLSON:         Add her to my
4                         list.      There's five now.
5                                      MS. SEPPI:         There's five now?
6                                      MR. OLSON:         Yes.
7                                      MS. PARRISH:          I remember going
8                         off on them when I first found out.
9                         I'm an oncologist.              I spend my days
10                        with cancer patients.                This is not
11                        what you want.           And I do have concerns
12                        about the hookup to the well in East
13                        Brookwood.         What are our choices, how
14                        are our choices going to be made as a
15                        community, and what businesses and
16                        services we bring in, how that's going
17                        to impact that well, the
18                        responsibility of a pure water supply,
19                        and what you're recommendations will
20                        be.
21                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            Did you sign
22                        in?
23                                     MR. GARCIA:         I would like to
24                        have you involved at the CAG meeting.
25                                     MS. PARRISH:          I appreciate it.


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 142 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 62
1                                       Proceedings
2                         I was working evenings for the last,
3                         God knows how many years.
4                                      MR. GARCIA:         If you need an
5                         update or something, or, you know, you
6                         can't make one, reach out to Anne.
7                                      MS. PARRISH:          You know me now,
8                         and thank you.
9                                      MS. SEPPI:         Any other
10                        questions?
11                                     MR. MORAN:         Jack Moran,
12                        M-O-R-A-N.         I have a question that has
13                        to do with East Brookwood Water
14                        Company, proposed site supplier.                      I
15                        think you should have named all the
16                        water companies under consideration,
17                        whether -- you know, I understand you
18                        haven't made a final choice yet, I
19                        know that, but there's only a finite
20                        number of companies in the area that
21                        supply water.           I think it's just --
22                        rather than keep it like it's a
23                        secret, make it open, everyone who is
24                        under consideration, so that people
25                        can properly comment.                There isn't


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 143 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 63
1                                       Proceedings
2                         just -- I guess all water companies
3                         are going to supply potable water up
4                         to standards, that's the law, but at
5                         what cost?         And in what kind of
6                         arrangement?          The municipal water
7                         supply is private, or in a corporate
8                         setting, and there is also other
9                         considerations involved here.                     East
10                        Brookwood was considering selling.
11                        Part of the purchase price involves
12                        the fact that they'll have to gives us
13                        a certain amount of money because they
14                        have to remedy some of our wells and
15                        treat the problem.              Well, if you're
16                        going to come in and pay for it, then
17                        we should be compensated because the
18                        homeowner's pay $95 a month, and they
19                        have been paying for that asset of
20                        that water supply, and they should
21                        know if you're willing to pay them up
22                        front or make the cost, that if you're
23                        going to, you know, compensate Suez
24                        for part of that, then we should know
25                        that before we make an informed vote.


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 144 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 64
1                                       Proceedings
2                         It shouldn't be secret to us that
3                         there is negotiations with Suez
4                         through EPA, and if we pay for it, you
5                         know, through Suez, then you don't
6                         have to do that remedy for the
7                         nitrites.        So, EPA could be saving
8                         money.       Suez comes in, remedies the
9                         nitrite problems before the EPA makes
10                        their decision.            So, you're saving
11                        money one way.           Suez is saving money.
12                        We're saying they can't provide us
13                        with a certain price because they have
14                        to remediate the nitrates, but we
15                        should know, you know, before we sell.
16                        We need to have this information, and
17                        not have it kept from us.                  There is a
18                        transparency issue.              I mean, you know,
19                        that this hasn't really been discussed
20                        openly with the members of East
21                        Brookwood.         And you know that, and you
22                        know that you're considering East
23                        Brookwood.         I just think it's fair
24                        that you, at least provide all the
25                        water companies.             Not just East


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 145 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 65
1                                       Proceedings
2                         Brookwood, that they're under
3                         consideration.           Because this doesn't
4                         just impact the people that you're
5                         supplying, you know, it's the people
6                         whose system would have to be
7                         maintained in memorium.                 Now, it isn't
8                         just you, I know you're paying the
9                         initial costs.           But we have to bear
10                        all the maintenance costs that go
11                        forward.        You know, if there's
12                        problems, if we have nitrite problems,
13                        we have all these other issues, could
14                        be supply issues.             After you made the
15                        investment and walk away, it's borne
16                        on -- all those costs get borne on the
17                        remaining people in that system.                      So,
18                        there is a lot to think about.                     I just
19                        think eyes wide open when it comes to
20                        making a decision.
21                                     MS. SEPPI:         And you make very
22                        good points.
23                                     MR. MORAN:         And it's not a
24                        small amount of money.                I mean the
25                        nitrates, correct me if I'm wrong,


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 146 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 66
1                                       Proceedings
2                         it's hundreds of thousands possibly.
3                                      MS. SEPPI:         I don't know.
4                                      MS. ROSENBLATT:            So, I would
5                         say going forward, you know, East
6                         Brookwood is welcome to attend the CAG
7                         meetings, and you have been to at
8                         least some of the CAG tag meetings,
9                         and we have always told you what our
10                        thoughts were, and kind of where we
11                        are in the process, and I think that
12                        will continue, if not more so going
13                        forward.
14                                     MR. MORAN:         It's an
15                        alternative water supplier.                   We don't
16                        know who is under consideration, and
17                        that was my point.
18                                     MS. ROSENBLATT:            Right.       Okay.
19                        Thank you.
20                                     MS. SEPPI:         Thank you.         Any
21                        other questions?             Comments?        We thank
22                        you very much for coming.                  We
23                        appreciate all your comments.                     We will
24                        add the other names to our list and
25                        we'll notify everyone.


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 147 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 67
1
2                                      MS. ROSENBLATT:            Please sign
3                         in if you have not already given your
4                         contact information, or if you want
5                         information about CAG meetings, times,
6                         or want to be on that list, let us
7                         please know.          Also, don't forgot the
8                         comment period extends to the 13th,
9                         but we'll close for now.
10                                     (Whereupon, at 8:10 o'clock
11                        p.m., the hearing was concluded.)
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 148 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 68
1
2                          C E R T I F I C A T E
3
4                     I, GINA MARIE VERDEROSA-LAMM, a Certified
5     Shorthand Reporter and Notary Public, certify that the
6     foregoing is a true and accurate transcript of the
7     proceedings, on the date and place hereinbefore set
8     forth.
9                     I FURTHER CERTIFY that I am neither
10    attorney, nor counsel for, nor related to or employed
11    by, any of the parties to the action in which this
12    deposition was taken, and further that I am not a
13    relative or employee of any attorney or counsel
14    employed in this action, nor am I financially
15    interested in this case.
16
17                        ________________________________
                          GINA MARIE VERDEROSA-LAMM, C.S.R.
18                             LICENSE NO. XI2043
19
20
21
22
23
24
25


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 149 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Attachment D
Written Comments

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 150 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Rosenblatt, Anne

From:                      John Moran
Sent:                      Thursday, July 13, 2017 8:19 AM
To:                        Rosenblatt, Anne
Cc:                        Garcia, Diego
Subject:                   Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund site comments on proposed plan

Follow Up Flag:            Follow up
Flag Status:               Flagged



Anne,

Here are my comments and questions. If you need anything clarified please do not hesitate to
contact me.
Please do not combine your answers to my questions with others who are commenting or
revise/rephrase them.

Jack Moran
EPA / CAG Member

When you make any changes to the permanent alternate water supplier’s system will you be
using EPA standards or NJDEP standards?
For instance maximum contaminant levels can be different between the EPA and
NJDEP. Water systems must comply with NJDEP standards and regulations
In NJ. The EPA stated they would pay to have a permanent alternate water supply provided
to these 19 homes. Will the EPA be paying for everything that
is necessary to meet NJDEP standards?

Will you be contacting the 19 homes in order to determine if they are willing to connect to an
alternate permanent water supply before you proceed with the design phase?
How can you plan to build a water system before finding out how many people intend to
connect to it?
Are you going to proceed even if only a few homes decide to connect? Are you contacting
other surrounding homes (beyond the 19 that are contaminated)
in that area to determine their willingness to connect? Will you require that written
commitments be provided in order to connect to the system?
If so will these commitments be required of both the 19 contaminated homes as well as any
surrounding homes wishing/needing to connect?
Doesn't the design of the water system modifications depend on how many homes intend to
connect to the system?

                                                   1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 151 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

How do you expect the public to intelligently comment on your choice of a "permanent
alternate water supplier" when you do not name the water company you intend to use? There
is a significant difference in the cost of the water between the many local water systems under
consideration. Some have meters while others do not. Others are run by a municipality while
others are run by a volunteer homeowner association board. Some systems are newer while
others are older and will require costly capital improvements. How are the present users of
the nearby water systems able to comment if they do not know they are being considered as
the alternate water source and may have to incur the burden of future maintenance for these
19 homes which may raise their rates and negatively impact the quality and supply/pressure of
their water?
One water system is considering selling their system and the sale price may be impacted by
the fact that the EPA may be willing to pay for capital improvements
to supply these 19 homes which if true would allow the water company to increase the sale
price of their water system .

Have you determined what the effect of decommissioning the 19 private wells might cause on
the flow of contaminated TCE water within the aquifer? Could this cause other wells to
become contaminated as those 19 wells will no longer be pulling water from the aquifer and
cause the flow of ground water to change?

Did the East Brookwood Estates Property Owners Association board state that they are willing
to work with the EPA to supply these 19 contaminated homes with water?




                                               2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 152 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Rosenblatt, Anne

From:                      Jeanne Moran
Sent:                      Wednesday, July 12, 2017 8:26 AM
To:                        Rosenblatt, Anne
Cc:                        Garcia, Diego
Subject:                   Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund site comment period written submission

Follow Up Flag:            Follow up
Flag Status:               Flagged



Anne/Diego,

Here is my comment period submission:

I have been a CAG member since the Mansfield Trail Dump site was added to the EPA
Superfund National Priorities List. My primary objective was to represent the members of the
East Brookwood Estates Property Owners Association of which I have been a member since
1964. I was Vice President of EBEPOA for the majority of my involvement on the CAG. I
cannot carry out my role as a CAG member to promote community awareness regarding the
site without cooperation from the EPA. You, Pat and Diego are those sources.

The press release does not reveal the FACT that the EBEPOA is named in the FFS and is a
permanent alternate water supply being considered in the proposal plan according to the EPA
info in the link. In my opinion the uncertain statements are the EPA’s unwillingness to provide
a factual proposal as to naming a designated water supply. The public cannot realistically
comment or ask meaningful questions about the proposed plan if you don’t name the water
supply. EBEPOA is preparing to sell our water association, if the sale occurs, we will not be
voting since we will no longer be the owners. Suez is offering a price for our association based
on the amount of expenditures they project are needed for capital improvements. These
expenditures would be effected if the EPA provides the financing for these capital
improvements. This EPA proposal could affect the selling price that we are negotiating with
Suez and the amount that EBEPOA members may be receiving as a distribution of funds after
all expenses of the dissolution are paid.

In my opinion any viable water system being considered should have been named in the press
release so consumers in those systems were aware this could impact them and they had an
opportunity to comment at the meeting or within the comment period.

I feel that our water company’s name is being withheld until we sell, since our board is only
interested if we sell. If we vote to sell, the EPA will announce that SUEZ water is the
permanent alternate water supply for the proposed plan. If you stated in your press release
                                                   1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 153 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

during the comment period that the water supply was EBEPOA the members would have had
the opportunity to react and weigh in with a vote. Our board has chosen to control the options
by not sharing their game plan and not allowing the members to participate in this
decision. Myself, as well as, our board and you and Diego have no idea how this will play out
for us in the future. For most of us in the EBEPOA our homes are our biggest investment, in
my opinion your lack of transparency along with our under represented board has put our
future health and water supply in jeopardy. I believe given the opportunity many of our
members would vote NO if they thought that our water supply would be connected with the
stigma of the TCE contaminated homes. I also believe that the only reason the EPA would
reconsider the two other water companies that initially said no to the proposed plan, would
be if EBEPOA doesn’t sell to Suez.

How will the EPA proceed if the 19 TCE contaminated homeowners split their decision
regarding connecting into a waterline?
Will you proceed with the proposed plan with less than a majority number of the TCE homes
agreeing to connect?

I spoke with George Zachos, EPA Public Liaison for Region 2, who was unaware of a written
protocol for naming the water supply in the design phase of the proposed plan.
Although he was unfamiliar with the site and the project managers he contacted Anne. Mr.
Zachos said that a water supply cannot be named until a contract is signed.
I never heard Anne or Diego state that was the case. Please provide me with where this info is
available for the public to review.

Respectfully submitted,
Jeanne Moran
EPA/CAG Member
Past VP/EBEPOA, Inc.




                                              2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 154 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Rosenblatt, Anne

From:                             pogue
Sent:                             Monday, July 10, 2017 6:39 PM
To:                               Rosenblatt, Anne
Subject:                          Mansfield Trail Dump Site water supply recipients

Follow Up Flag:                   Follow up
Flag Status:                      Flagged




As a member of the East Brookwood Estates Property Owners Association, I feel it’s premature to identify our water
supply as the answer to
the problem affecting the 18 affected homes above us that have contaminated water. Our water company members
have not voted to accept this
solution. In fact, when I spoke to our Water Association President, Mr. Jim McCole, he advised me that he never said to
the EPA that he was
in favor of this alternative.

We currently have a contamination problem of our own as you well know. We currently cannot accept responsibility for
future problems
that may arise associated with the contamination of the 18 homes in question. If we are purchased by Suez in the near
future, they
may be open to this solution because they have the resources needed to address future problems – we do not.

At present, your choice of EBEPOA as your answer to getting rid of your responsibility in dealing with the POET
systems in the 18
Homes affected by landfill contamination is definitely not acceptable to our members.

We are aware that the other water companies you have contacted have said they are not interested. We also are not
interested.




                                                            1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 155 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Rosenblatt, Anne

From:                           Mary Schneider
Sent:                           Thursday, June 22, 2017 8:27 AM
To:                             Seppi, Pat; Rosenblatt, Anne;
                                                              Christa.Fontecchio@doh.state.nj.us; dflynn@byramtwp.org;
                                Garcia, Diego;


                                                                                    LaBlanc, Elizabeth;
                                                                    mark.herzberg@dep.state.nj.us;

                                solson@byramtwp.org; somia.aluwalia@doh.state.nj.us;
Subject:                        Re: Mansfield news release

Follow Up Flag:                 Follow up
Flag Status:                    Flagged



Hi Pat,

I think we were taken back by the announcement prior to a CAG meeting to discuss the decision of the
EPA. Many of us were under the impression that we would meet prior to public announcement or at least an
email with a little more substance other than a decision was made and that you were going public.

I have a number of questions.

1 - Who is the water company?
2 - Timeframe of installation?
3 - If we go with the water company, will the poet systems be removed by the state?
4 - If the homeowner decides not to go with the water company, will the state continue to maintain the POET
system?
5 - If the homeowner decides not go to with the water company but 5 - 10 years later decides to hook up,
what is the cost from the street to the home?
6 - Our homes are large -- will there be enough water supply to accommodate our usage?

Thank you.

Regards,

Mary




From: Seppi, Pat <Seppi.Pat@epa.gov>
Sent: Tuesday, June 13, 2017 11:08 AM
To: Rosenblatt, Anne;
Christa.Fontecchio@doh.state.nj.us; dflynn@byramtwp.org; Garcia, Diego;

                                                         1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 156 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         LaBlanc, Elizabeth;                                          mark.herzberg@dep.state.nj.us;
                                                                                                  Seppi, Pat;
                   singh; solson@byramtwp.org; somia.aluwalia@doh.state.nj.us;
Subject: Mansfield news release



Hi Everyone,
I wanted to make sure you saw this release before it made it to the newspaper. Please note that the public meeting for
the proposed plan is scheduled for Tuesday, June 27 at the Municipal Bldg. You are welcome to comment on the plan at
that time or at any time within the comment period. There should be a public notice in the newspaper today. There’s a
link in the press release if you want to read the entire proposed plan. Feel free to share this information with anyone
you think might be interested. Don’t hesitate to contact me with any questions.

Thanks!
Pat




                                                           2
