LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: RECORD OF DECISION FOR OU2 AND RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT FOR OU1 FOR THE DIAMOND HEAD OIL REFINERY DIVISION SITE
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/528297
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: e66ca7be7fb1d41a9b228aa0932ae2888711280d82b8cc1ca74fd2612aa83ce2
Source PDF pages: 132
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 RECORD OF DECISION

            Operable Unit 2 - Soil and Sediments


         RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT

Operable Unit 1 - Light Non-Aqueous Phase Liquid Source Area



        Diamond Head Oil Refinery Superfund Site

      Kearny Township, Hudson County, New Jersey




           U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

                         Region 2

                      September 2017

                                                               *528297*
                                                                 528297

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            DECLARATION STATEMENT
                       RECORD OF DECISION AND AMENDMENT


SITE NAME AND LOCATION

Diamond Head Oil Refinery Superfund Site (EPA ID# NJD092226000)
Kearny Township, Hudson County, New Jersey


STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

This decision document selects two remedies for the Diamond Head Oil Refinery Superfund
Site, located in Kearny Township, Hudson County, New Jersey: (1) the amendment to the Light
Non-Aqueous Phase Liquid (LNAPL) source area remedy selected in the Operable Unit 1 (OU1)
September 25, 2009 Record of Decision (ROD), and (2) the Operable Unit 2 (OU2) remedy to
address soil and sediments at the Site.

The Amended Remedy and Selected Remedy (collectively, the Remedies) were selected in
accordance with the requirements of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, as amended (CERCLA), 42 U.S.C. §9601 et seq., and
to the extent practicable, the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan
(NCP), 40 CFR Part 300. This decision is based on the Administrative Record file for the Site, an
index of which can be found in Appendix IV.

The State of New Jersey concurs with the Remedies. A copy of the concurrence letter can be
found in Appendix V.


ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE

The Remedies are necessary to protect public health, welfare, or the environment from actual or
threatened releases of hazardous substances from the Site into the environment.


DESCRIPTION OF THE REMEDIES

First, this document amends the OU1 ROD remedy for the LNAPL source area, which included
excavation of the principal threat LNAPL source areas, construction of an on-site biocell for
treatment of lesser contaminated LNAPL wastes, and off-site disposal of the most highly
contaminated portion of the excavated material. EPA has concluded, based on extensive bench
scale testing of the biocell during the design phase, that it will not effectively treat the LNAPL.
Therefore, the LNAPL source areas will instead be excavated and disposed off Site.

Second, this document selects the remedy for OU2 (OU2 Selected Remedy), which is envisioned
to be implemented in conjunction with the Amended Remedy for OU1, and involves the disposal
of contaminated soils; installation of a vegetative soil cover in Areas A, B, and C; institutional
controls to restrict future use; and excavation of sediments in the drainage ditch.

                                                 1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The major components of the OU1 Amended Remedy include:

   •   Excavation and off-site disposal of the LNAPL source areas;

   •   Backfilling of excavated areas with non-hazardous I-280 berm soil, and additional clean
       fill to grade; and,

   •   Supplementing backfill with clean soil as needed.

The major components of the OU2 Selected Remedy include:

   •   Excavation of two feet of surface soil from Areas B and C, and wetland areas located in
       Area A, totaling 31,300 cubic yards;

   •   Disposal of any Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) or Toxic Substances
       Control Act (TSCA) hazardous waste at an appropriate off-site facility (i.e., RCRA
       Subtitle C or TSCA disposal facility);

   •   Distribution of excavated soils not requiring off-site disposal from Areas B and C, and
       wetland areas, across Area A for regrading;

   •   Disposal of excavated sediments from the drainage ditch at an appropriate off-site
       facility;

   •   Installation of a two-foot vegetated soil cover as an engineering control;

   •   Wetland restoration; and

   •   Implementation of a deed notice as an institutional control.

OU3 groundwater investigations have been conducted at the Site and groundwater conditions
will be re-assessed after implementation of the OU1 and OU2 soil remedies to determine the
appropriate response action for groundwater.


DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

Part 1 - Statutory Requirements

The Remedies are protective of human health and the environment, comply with federal and
state requirements that are applicable or relevant and appropriate to the remedial actions, and are
cost-effective. EPA has determined that the Amended Remedy represents the maximum extent to
which permanent solutions and treatment technologies can be utilized in a practicable manner at
the Site.




                                                 2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Part 2 - Statutory Preference for Treatment

The Remedies do not meet the statutory preference for the use of remedies that involve treatment
as a principal element. Treatability testing of the OUl source material indicated that the
treatment remedy was not feasible. EPA has determined that the Amended Remedy represents
the maximum extent to which permanent solutions and treatment technologies can be utilized in
a practicable manner at the Site. No source materials constituting principal threats will be
addressed within the scope of the OU2 remedy.

Part 3 - Five-Year Review Requirements

The Remedies will result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants remaining above
levels that do not allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure; therefore, a five-year review
will be required for both OUl and OU2.


ROD DATA CERTIFICATION CHECKLIST

The following information is included in the Decision Summary section of this document.
Additional information can be found in the Administrative Record file for this Site.

    •   Chemicals of concern and their respective concentrations may be found in the "Site
        Characteristics" section.
    •   A discussion of source materials constituting principal threats may be found in the
        "Principal Threat Waste" section.
    •   A discussion of the baseline risk represented by the chemicals of concern may be found
        in the "Summary of Site Risks" section. This discussion is based on the baseline risk
        assessment found in the OU2 Remedial Investigation Report. Cleanup goals can be found
        in the "Remedial Action Objectives" section.
    •   Current and reasonably anticipated future land use assumptions used in the baseline risk
        assessment and OUl ROD can be found in the "Current and Potential Future Site and
        Resource Uses" section.
    •   Estimated capital, operation and maintenance (O&M), and total present worth costs, and
        the number of years over which the remedy cost estimates are projected can be found in
        the "Description of Remedial Alternatives" section.
    •   Key factors that led to selecting the remedy may be found in the "Comparative Analysis
        of Alternatives" and "Statutory Determinations" sections.




                                                                           9- 29 · 11-
 Angela C~i11 g1rect or                                                      Date
 Emergency & Remedial Response Division
 EPA Region 2


                                                  3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 DECISION SUMMARY




         RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT

Operable Unit 1 - Light Non-Aqueous Phase Liquid Source Area


              AND RECORD OF DECISION

            Operable Unit 2 - Soil and Sediments




        Diamond Head Oil Refinery Superfund Site

       Kearny Township, Hudson County, New Jersey




           U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
                         Region 2
                   New York, New York
                      September 2017

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SITE NAME, LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION ........................................................................... 1

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES ................................................................. 1

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION .................................................................... 3

SCOPE AND ROLE OF OPERABLE UNITS ................................................................................. 3

SITE CHARACTERISTICS.............................................................................................................. 4

CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES .................................. 10

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS ......................................................................................................... 10

ECOLOGICAL RISK ASSESSMENT ........................................................................................... 17

REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES ............................................................................................ 18

OU1 RAOS FROM THE 2009 OU1 ROD ...................................................................................... 18

OU2 RAOs ....................................................................................................................................... 18

BASIS FOR OU1 REMEDY MODIFICATION ............................................................................ 19

DESCRIPTION OF PROPOSED CHANGES TO THE OU1 LNAPL SOURCE AREA REMEDY

.......................................................................................................................................................... 19

EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES FOR OU1 ......................................................................... 21

DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES FOR OU2 ................................................... 24

EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES FOR OU2 ......................................................................... 27

COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES ....................Error! Bookmark not defined.

PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE ..................................................................................................... 32

SELECTED REMEDIES................................................................................................................. 32

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS ............................................................................................. 34

DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES .................................................................. 36

                                                                                     ii

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Appendices

APPENDIX     I     Figures
APPENDIX     II    Tables
APPENDIX     III   Responsiveness Summary
APPENDIX     IV    Administrative Record Index
APPENDIX     V     State Letter of Concurrence




                                     iii

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE NAME, LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION

The Diamond Head Oil Refinery site (Site), located at 1401 Harrison Avenue, Kearny Township,
Hudson County, New Jersey, near the Hackensack Meadowlands, is a former waste oil
reprocessing facility. Figure 1 shows the Site location. The Site is comprised of a 20.2-acre
unoccupied parcel that includes wetland areas and drainage ditches, a small wetland/pond, a
vegetated landfill area along the western border, and the remnants of the former Diamond Head
Oil Refinery facility on the eastern portion of the Site (designated Area A in Figure 2). Area A is
bordered by Harrison Avenue (also called the Newark Turnpike) to the north, entrance ramp "M"
of Interstate 280 (I-280) to the east, I-280 to the south, and Campbell Distribution Foundry to the
west. The construction of I-280 and associated entrance and exit ramps across the original
property created a cloverleaf, dividing the Site into several sections, Areas A, B and C (see
Figure 2). Area A, is also referred to as the current property; Areas B and C of the Site are
cloverleaf areas created during the construction of I-280, addressed as part of OU2.

Land use surrounding the Site is industrial or open space/wetlands; the nearest residential area is
approximately one half-mile to the west. To the south, a Municipal Sanitary Landfill Authority
(MSLA) landfill, identified as the 1-D Landfill, is situated south of I-280. Area A is fenced along
the north, east and south. Former operations took place on the eastern half of Area A. A landfill
area which rises 10 to 15 feet above the rest of the Site is located on the western portion of Area
A and was once an access road to the 1-D Landfill. Surface water drains through a drainage ditch
that discharges to Frank's Creek, which in turn discharges to the Passaic River.

Based on 2015 tax records, Area A is currently divided into three parcels with mixed ownership.
The western and eastern portions (Block 285, Lots 14 and 15) of Area A are owned by the Town
of Kearny. The central portion of the Area A (Block 285, Lot 3) is owned by the Hudson
Meadows Urban Renewal Corporation. New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
owns a parcel with soil berms adjoining the I-280 clover leaf (Block 285, Lot 2.01 in Area A and
Block 285, Lot 4 in Areas B and C).


SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES

The former Diamond Head Oil Refining Company operated from February 1, 1946, to early
1979 under several company names, including PSC Resources, Inc., Ag-Met Oil Service, Inc.,
and Newtown Refining Corporation. All of these companies were owned by Mr. Robert Mahler.
During facility operations, multiple aboveground storage tanks and possibly subsurface pits were
used to store oil wastes. These wastes were intermittently discharged directly to adjacent
properties to the east, and to the wetland area on the south side of the Site, creating an “Oil
Lake.”

In 1968, as part of its plans for construction of I-280, the NJDOT acquired part of the property
from PSC Resources Inc., a subsidiary of the Phillips Screw Company, which in turn had
acquired the property from the Diamond Head Oil Refining Company.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

In 1977, NJDOT removed over 10 million gallons of oil and oil-contaminated liquid, and over
230,000 cubic yards of oil sludge, from the vicinity of the Oil Lake. The liquid wastes were
shipped to waste-oil recycling facilities. The oil-contaminated sludge was excavated and placed
in a series of disposal cells – one atop the MSLA 1-D Landfill, and a series of smaller cells
located on the Site within the I-280 highway right-of-way (ROW), next to the oil-reprocessing
facility which was still in operation at the time. The details of these disposal efforts are not well
documented, but a simple liner and clay-based capping material were used as part of the disposal
efforts for the sludge. While the surficial Oil Lake was removed and filled in, the NJDOT also
reported finding an “underground lake” of oil-contaminated groundwater, extending from the
eastern limits of the I-280 ROW to Frank’s Creek, located west of the Site.

From the close of operations in 1979 until 1982, the abandoned Site was not completely fenced.
In 1982, during the dismantling of the oil reprocessing facility, approximately 7,500 gallons of
materials were pumped out of tanks and disposed off Site, and 27 tons of contaminated soil were
reportedly removed from the Site. Sampling conducted during this cleanup effort identified
hazardous substances, including polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in waste material collected
from the Site. Aerial photographs from 1982 show that the oil reprocessing facility infrastructure
had been dismantled. The buildings and facilities associated with previous Site operations were
constructed on the eastern half of the Site, and some remnant concrete building and tank
foundations remain. In 1985, the refinery property was sold to Mimi Urban Development
Corporation, which subsequently changed its name to Hudson Meadows Urban Development
Corporation.

The property sat idle for a number of years, at least in part because of the alleged contamination.
NJDEP requested that EPA evaluate the Site for inclusion on the National Priorities List (NPL) in
1999. The Site was added to the NPL in September 2002.

In 2003, EPA began an OU1 Remedial Investigation (RI) to determine the nature and extent of
the contamination at the Site. In addition to the light non-aqueous phase liquid (LNAPL), the
OU1 RI found soil, sediment, groundwater, and surface water contamination attributable to the
Site. The OU1 RI also included a number of test trenches through the landfill portion of the Site
to assess the nature of the material buried there, and collected borings along the I-280 ROW soil
berms to ascertain the presence of buried sludge. New groundwater monitoring wells were
installed in 2009 on a number of neighboring properties in order to fully assess the extent of the
groundwater contamination.

In 2009, EPA initiated an OU2 RI to supplement the results of the OU1 RI. The general
objectives of the OU2 RI were to investigate the nature and extent of contamination, and
determine if the chemical contamination observed during the OU1 RI was present beyond the
boundary of the property addressed in OU1

In September 2009, EPA signed the ROD for OU1, addressing the LNAPL source material at the
Site. The ROD selected on-site biocell treatment technology as a component of the remedy.
Excavation and disposal was another component of the remedy.




                                                  2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

A Pre-Design Investigation (PDI) for OU1 was conducted between 2010 and 2015. The PDI
refined the criteria used for measuring the extent of LNAPL source material, identified the
remedial target areas (RTA) for LNAPL source material, and demonstrated that the on-site
biocell treatment technology would not attain the remedial action objectives and remediation
goals outlined in the OU1 ROD.

In April of 2017, EPA identified several parties as potentially responsible parties (PRPs) for the
Site and informed each party of their potential liability for the cleanup or costs associated with
environmental response actions at the Site. The search for PRPs is ongoing.


HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Supporting documentation for the OU1 ROD Amendment, the RI/FS Report and Proposed Plan
for OU2 were released to the public for comment on June 19, 2017. These documents were made
available to the public at the EPA Region 2 Superfund Records Center, 290 Broadway, 18th
Floor, New York, New York and at the Kearny Public Library, 318 Kearny Avenue, Kearny,
New Jersey. A notice of the availability of these documents was published in the Kearny
newspaper, The Observer, on June 19, 2017. A public comment period was held from June 19 to
July 19, 2017. At this meeting, representatives from EPA answered questions about problems at
the Site and remedial alternatives. EPA’s response to comments received during this period is
included in the Responsiveness Summary section of this document.


SCOPE AND ROLE OF OPERABLE UNITS

As with many Superfund sites, the problems at the Diamond Head Oil Refinery Site are
complex. EPA has organized the work into three operable units (OUs) for the purpose of
managing Site-wide response actions:

Operable Unit 1:       LNAPL Source Area.
Operable Unit 2:       Comprehensive site remedy addressing contaminated soil and sediments.
Operable Unit 3:       Groundwater.

The first operable unit, the subject of this ROD Amendment, addresses soils contaminated with
LNAPL that constitute a principal threat.

The second operable unit, also the subject of this ROD, addresses residual soil and sediment
contamination at the Site, not addressed as part of OU1, and the on-site landfill.

The third operable unit focuses on groundwater. Groundwater investigations have been
conducted at the Site and groundwater conditions will be re-assessed after implementation of the
OU1 and OU2 soil remedies to determine the appropriate response action for groundwater.




                                                 3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE CHARACTERISTICS

Site Features

The major physical features on the property include the remnants of concrete foundations in the
oil reprocessing area of the former Diamond Head Oil refinery, the remnants of a former refinery
in the northern section of the property, a landfill (covering approximately 7 acres) occupying the
western section of the property, soil berms along the eastern and southern borders of the property
along the I-280 ROW, and a stormwater drainage ditch between the berms and I-280, flowing
south-southwest (see Figure 3). Wetland areas are present on the property in the western,
southern, and central sections, and a remnant feature referred to as the “sludge lagoon” is present
in the southern section of the property. The location of the former Oil Lake, which is evident in
historical aerial photographs from the period of operation of the former oil refinery, is no longer
a major physical feature of the property.

Site Geology

The stratigraphy at the Site consists of a relatively uniform vertical sequence of unconsolidated
materials from top to bottom. A highly variable (in content and thickness) layer of anthropogenic
fill is found across the Site, consisting of typical demolition-type debris, including wood, brick,
metal, glass, plastic, and concrete mixed in a matrix of poorly sorted fine to coarse sand and
gravel or silt, sand, and gravel. The next unit that is encountered is a sand unit about five feet
thick on the western side of the Site, pinching out until it is not present on the eastern side of the
Site. A silty clay unit, up to eight feet thick in sections of the Site, that appears to be continuous
throughout the study area is encountered next, followed by a distinctive peat layer of varying
thickness, but considered continuous across the Site. A silt and sand unit approximately 15 to 20
feet thick, beneath the peat layer, is encountered next, and followed by a laminated silt and clay
unit, the full thickness of which was not observed in any of the study borings to date (as deep as
50 feet). The final unit is bedrock, which also has not been encountered to date.

Surface soils at the Site have been disturbed and reworked as a result of numerous construction
and earthmoving activities.

Site Hydrology

Groundwater at the Site is generally observed from 2 to 6 feet below ground surface, within the
fill materials and natural and reworked soils that form the shallow overburden aquifer. The water
table fluctuates seasonally and is highly influenced by precipitation and freeze-thaw cycles.
Groundwater in some areas of the Site is observed in the form of perched water that is trapped
above less permeable materials at shallower depths than the water table.

Water levels in the shallow groundwater above the silty clay and peat layers indicate a mounding
of water near the wetland area in the southeastern portion of the property. At the local scale of
the property, the shallow groundwater is considered to flow somewhat radially from this
mounded area.




                                                  4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

In the water-bearing unit below the peat layer, groundwater flows generally from northeast to
southwest, consistent with regional trends in groundwater flow.

Surface Water

As a result of the construction of I-280, all drainage on the north and west side of the highway
now travels a distance of 600 feet to Frank’s Creek via a man-made drainage ditch. Frank’s
Creek discharges to the Passaic River. Prior to the 1940s, the area south of Harrison Avenue was
wetlands. Landfilling activities that started in the 1940s began to shrink and divide the wetland
areas. The eventual Oil Lake, estimated in 1977 to be between six and seven acres, appears to
have formed in a remaining lowland area surrounded by properties filled for industrial
development, and by what would become the MSLA 1-D Landfill to the south. With the
construction of I-280, including the placement of the ROW berms, there is an isolated, frequently
ponded wetland located just south of the former Diamond Head Oil facility.

The presence of wetlands along the southern Site boundary that include areas of surface water,
and the presence of an LNAPL plume in the southeast corner of the Site, in the area of the former
lagoon, have a significant influence on the water table at the Site. Although lighter than water,
the density of the LNAPL has the effect of depressing the water table and influencing
groundwater flow.

Five wetland areas and vegetated drainage channels were delineated during the RI. In general,
these areas were observed to be significantly disturbed and degraded because of historical
industrial activities that have occurred at the Site. These wetlands were characterized as
palustrine forested, palustrine, emergent, and open water resources and total approximately 1.85
acres.


Nature and Extent of Contamination

The purpose of the RIs is to obtain data on the nature and extent of soil, groundwater, surface
water, and sediment contamination at the Site. The OU1 RI was conducted in two phases and the
OU2 RI was conducted in one phase.

The OU1 RI investigated the extent of LNAPL that had been observed in the former surficial Oil
Lake area as well as the groundwater conditions at the upgradient and downgradient boundaries
of the landfill, and at the boundary of the Diamond Head Oil property. The OU1 RI also
investigated surface and subsurface soil contamination, and the nature and extent of surface
water and sediment contamination on the Site and at the junction of Frank’s Creek and within the
drainage ditch. Wetland delineation was conducted during the OU1 RI.

EPA initiated a second phase of the OU1 RI in 2008. The objectives were to investigate
contamination associated with the principal threat LNAPL and to confirm that, as suggested by
the Phase 1 RI results, the landfill did not represent a source of groundwater contamination.




                                                5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Summary of the OU1 RI

The results of the OU1 RI were presented in the OU1 ROD. The results are being repeated here
for completeness and to provide a full understanding of the contamination at the Site.

The OU1 RI identified two potential source areas where LNAPL may be continuing to release
contamination to the environment. The first potential source area is the former oil reprocessing
section of the Site, once containing two buildings, multiple aboveground storage tanks (ASTs),
drum storage areas, and possibly underground pits. The second potential source area is the
former Oil Lake, estimated in 1977 to cover an area of six to seven acres, located in the southern
section of the Site, extending into the I-280 cloverleaf to the east and south.

In the former oil processing section of the Site, only the foundations of one building and two ASTs
are visible. No remnants of the oil lake are visible, but historical information indicates the lagoon
occupied the southeastern section of the Site and extended eastward. Figure 2 shows the boundary
of the Oil Lake.

There was evidence of oil contamination in nearly every boring installed within Area A and in
many borings to the southeast. Because of this "smear" of oil contamination across the Site, the
following methods were used to document the nature and extent of the LNAPL, and to identify
the more severely contaminated areas of the Site:

   •   A geotechnical measurement tool called laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) allowed for the
       subsurface mapping of borings that contain LNAPL. LIF can rapidly identify an oil
       "fingerprint," including both extent and relative concentration;

   •   Soil borings were collected throughout the Site down to the laminated silt and sand unit
       as much as 50 feet deep, and the presence of oil staining or separate-phase oil in the soil
       borings was documented. These results were compared with the LIF sample points to
       calibrate the LIF data to site-specific conditions; and

   •   A number of monitoring wells, meant to measure groundwater contamination, have
       thicknesses of floating product in the tops of the wells, with as much as five feet of
       LNAPL floating in some wells.

Samples of contaminated soil, oily wastes, and sludge were collected and sent for laboratory
analysis to identify potential contaminants of concern, and to establish an analytical profile of the
LNAPL.

Using the methods outlined above, several characteristics of the LNAPL were established:

   •   The LIF study concluded that LNAPL is present in the subsurface throughout most of the
       investigated area, though the LIF showed wide variations in the intensity of the LNAPL
       signal, indicating substantial variation in concentration across the Site;




                                                 6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   •   LNAPL was measured in wells in three areas of the Site, one in the former processing
       area, and two within the footprint of the Oil Lake;

   •   The vertical occurrence of LNAPL can be further separated into two depth intervals: (1)
       at the water table (approximately two feet below ground surface), sometimes with an
       extended smear zone into the saturated fill-containing material and soil to about 10 feet
       below ground surface; and (2) as a distinct deeper interval at depths of 10 to 16 feet
       below ground surface within the silty/clayey soil. The bulk of LNAPL-containing soil is
       located near the water table within the fill layer;

   •   LNAPL appears to contain more diesel range organics than gasoline range organics. The
       following compounds or classes of compounds were detected in the LNAPL: benzene,
       toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylenes, as well as a number of other volatile and semivolatile
       organic compounds (VOCs and SVOCs) consistent with a petroleum matrix. In addition,
       two PCBs (Aroclor 1232 and Aroclor-1260) and a variety of metals, including lead and
       cyanide were also identified in LNAPL-zone samples;

   •   Despite the large thickness of LNAPL found in some monitoring wells and its relatively
       high saturation, LNAPL is extremely viscous and is relatively immobile under ambient
       gradients;

   •   This is indicative of a highly weathered LNAPL where much of the more mobile
       components have degraded or already traveled away from the Site, leaving the less
       mobile fractions; and

   •   Within the LNAPL source areas, there are pockets of less weathered LNAPL of high
       saturation that present a leaching concern to groundwater.

A total area of approximately 176,000 square feet was identified in the OU1 ROD as LNAPL
source areas. This included the two areas of the Site where monitoring wells contain measurable
thicknesses of LNAPL. The thicknesses of the principal threat LNAPL varies. Based on an
average depth of seven feet below ground surface, a total volume of 45,825 cubic yards
(including 2,593 cubic yards where LNAPL floating product is found in wells) constitutes the
principal threat LNAPL.

In 2015, EPA completed PDI of the principal threat LNAPL waste at the Site. The PDI objective
was to define the area of OU1 principal threat waste and support the remedial design of a biocell.
The PDI helped to refine the criteria used to measure the extent of LNAPL source material at the
Site. Based on the refined criteria, the volume of LNAPL source material measured at the Site
increased by approximately 3,000 cubic yards – from approximately 46,000 cubic yards to
approximately 49,000 cubic yards.

Of note, areas below the east and south berms are considered to represent principal threat and are
included in the RTA of principal threat waste. The berms themselves, however, are not considered
to contain principal threat LNAPL waste.




                                                7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Summary of the OU2 RI

EPA collected additional soil, sediment, and surface water samples from the Site over the course
of the OU2 RI. Samples were analyzed for VOCs, SVOCs, pesticides, PCBs, metals, and dioxins
and furans. Soil samples at the Site were categorized as being taken from within or outside the
property boundary – “within” referring to the 20.2 acres of Area A that served as the original
Diamond Head Oil Refinery property, and “outside” referring to the 10.3 acres of Areas B and C
containing the I-280 interchange cloverleaf.

Analytical results were compared to Federal or New Jersey standards for each medium,
whichever was more stringent, to determine if concentrations pose a potential threat to human
health or the environment and need further evaluation in the baseline risk assessment.

Analytical results were compared to the following:

   •   Soil – New Jersey Non-Residential Direct Contact Soil Remediation Standards
       (NJNRDCSRS), New Jersey Ecological Screening Criteria, National Oceanic and
       Atmospheric Administration Screening Quick Reference Tables (SQuiRTs), and EPA
       Regional Screening Levels (RSL) for Dioxins and Furans;
   •   Sediment - NJDEP’s Ecological Screening Criteria Lowest Effects Levels;
   •   Surface water - New Jersey Surface Water Quality Standards (NJSWQS) for Fresh
       Water; and
   •   Impact to groundwater pathway - NJDEP’s Impact to Groundwater Soil Screening
       Levels.

The OU2 RI indicated the presence of multiple contaminants, including chromium, dioxin,
PCBs, lead, aldrin, thallium, and benzo[a]pyrene.

Soils: Soil samples were taken in approximately 118 sample locations at multiple depths, from
surface soils (0-4 ft.), subsurface soils (5-10 ft.), and the I-280 ROW soil berms, both inside
(Area A) and outside (Area B and Area C) the property boundary (Figure 2). Samples were
tested for VOCs, SVOCs, pesticides, PCBs, metals, and dioxins and furans. Surface soil samples
taken within the property boundary detected maximum concentrations of lead at 27,900 parts per
million (ppm), chromium at 7,650 ppm, and PCBs at 14 ppm. Subsurface soil samples taken
within the property boundary revealed concentrations of chromium at 22,300 ppm, thallium at
45.7 ppm, and benzo[a]pyrene at 35 ppm. The highest levels of contamination in the surface and
subsurface soils were located in Area A in the general area of the former refining operations, and
in the central section of Area A at the location of the former Oil Lake.

Sampling of the I-280 ROW soil berms on the eastern and southern portion of the Site revealed
maximum concentrations of lead at 306 ppm and chromium at 7,700 ppm, at depths of 5-7 feet.
Surface soil samples taken outside the property boundary (Areas B and C) detected maximum
concentrations of PCBs at 1,800 ppm and aldrin at 75 ppm. Subsurface soil samples taken
outside the property boundary revealed concentrations of lead at 13,200 ppm and PCBs at 8.4
ppm. The highest levels of contamination in the surface and subsurface soils were found from 0-




                                                8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

2 feet in the surface soil and 5-17 feet in the subsurface soil, and were located in Areas B and C,
within the footprint of the former Oil Lake.

Surface soil samples analyzed for dioxin and furan contamination from within the property
boundary detected a concentration of 1,873 parts per trillion (ppt) at 0-2 feet, located in the
central section of Area A, within the footprint of the former Oil Lake. Soil samples taken from
outside the property boundary detected concentrations of dioxin/furans at 8,188 ppt from 0-2
feet, and 11,172 ppt from 2.5-3 feet, and were located in Area C, within the footprint of the
former Oil Lake.

Sediment: Sediment samples were taken from the drainage ditch, which is only underwater
during flooding events, and from Frank’s Creek in approximately 25 locations. Sediment
samples were tested for VOCs, SVOCs, pesticides, PCBs, metals, and dioxins and furans.
Analysis of sediment samples detected lead contamination at a concentration of 84,400 ppm,
found at 0-3 feet in the central section of Area A, within the footprint of the former Oil Lake.
Sediment samples taken from the drainage ditch, near it’s confluence with Frank’s Creek,
indicated the presence of lead contamination at a concentration of 84,300 ppm from a depth of 0-
0.5 feet. The sediments analyzed from the drainage ditch function more like soils, in that they are
compacted and vegetated, and are less likely to travel into Frank’s Creek. The contamination
present in sediments that were analyzed from Frank’s Creek are therefore likely related to
contributing sources other than the Site, which is reflective of the industrial nature of the Creek’s
surrounding and upstream areas.

Surface Water: Surface water samples were taken from approximately 10 sample locations.
Samples were tested for VOCs, SVOCs, pesticides, PCBs, and metals. Analysis of surface water
samples detected maximum concentrations of lead at 712 µg/L (micrograms per Liter), thallium
at 160 µg/L, and beryllium at 990 µg/L, found in ponded surface water within Area A, and in
one sample taken in the drainage ditch near its confluence with Frank’s Creek.

Landfill: Two trenches were dug along the length of the landfill. The majority of the landfill
content was observed to consist of municipal-type wastes with a lesser component of demolition-
type debris. In general, the municipal-type waste consisted of glass and plastic beverage bottles,
steel and aluminum cans from foodstuffs, residential and consumer papers including newspapers
(the oldest noted were from 1959), and other glass, metal, plastic, wood, and cardboard-type
materials typical of residential and consumer goods. Demolition-type debris was also observed,
including brick and concrete fragments up to 5 feet in diameter; wood products including
timbers, planks, and tree stumps; metal including pipes, rebar, and flatiron; and general
construction materials, including shingles and sheet plastic. Industrial-type debris was also
observed including steel, poly and fiber drums, and industrial resin or polymer-type materials
intermixed with the general landfill refuse.

Samples were taken at 14 locations in the trenches that were excavated along the length of the
landfill. All samples contained VOCs. VOCs exceeded the NJNRDCSRS at 1 of the 14 sampling
locations, and the New Jersey Impact to Groundwater Soil Screening Levels at 12 of the 14
sampling locations. Benzene exceeded its standards and criteria most often. Benzene was the
only VOC that exceeded the NJNRDCSRS. The following VOCs exceeded their New Jersey



                                                 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Impact to Groundwater Soil Screening Levels: benzene, ethylbenzene, chlorobenzene, toluene,
cis-1,3-dichloropropene, 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane, PCE, and TCE. SVOCs exceeded the
NJNRDCSRS and the New Jersey Impact to Groundwater Soil Screening Levels at all 14
sampling locations. The SVOCs that exceeded standards and criteria most often include
benzo(a)pyrene, benzo(a)anthracene, and dibenzo(a,h)anthracene. All 14 trench samples
contained pesticides. Pesticides exceeded the NJNRDCSRS at 2 of the 14 sampling locations,
and the New Jersey Impact to Groundwater Soil Screening Levels at all 14 sampling locations.
The pesticides that exceeded standards and criteria most often include BHC-alpha, BHC-beta,
and heptachlor epoxide. The concentrations measured in the samples from the landfill trenches
were not observed to increase or decrease with depth within the landfill or in any pattern along
the length of the trenches. This lack of trend in concentration changes was expected based on the
heterogeneous nature of the landfill materials.

EPA concluded that while contamination is present in the landfill materials, the results of three
rounds of groundwater sampling suggest the materials do not present a significant source to
groundwater contamination, as an increase in groundwater concentrations is not evident
downgradient of the landfill. The landfill is also not a source of LNAPL.


CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES

The Site, located within the Kearny Urban Enterprise Zone, is currently undeveloped, and is
designated on the tax map as industrial/commercial. The land use surrounding the Site is
industrial/commercial and open space/wetlands, and is not anticipated to change in the future.
The nearest residential area is located a half-mile to the west, and is not impacted by Site
contamination. An MSLA landfill, identified as the 1-D Landfill, is situated south of I-280.
Based on the zoning of the Site and the surrounding land uses, it is anticipated that the future use
of the Site will involve industrial/commercial/or retail use.

Groundwater beneath the Site is located in the Newark Basin and is classified by the State of
New Jersey as Class IIA - Groundwater for Potable Water Supply. Municipal water is provided
to the town’s residences and businesses through the North Jersey District Water Supply
Commission. The Commission primarily takes its water from the Wanaque Reservoir. It is
supplemented by the Monksville Reservoir during periods of drought.


SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS

EPA conducted a baseline risk assessment to estimate the current and future effects of
contaminants on human health and the environment. A baseline risk assessment is an analysis of
the potential adverse human health and ecological effects of releases of hazardous substances
from a site in the absence of any actions or controls to mitigate such releases, under current and
future land uses. The baseline risk assessment includes a human health risk assessment and an
ecological risk assessment. It provides the basis for taking action and identifies the contaminants
and exposure pathways that need to be addressed by the remedial action. The remedial
alternative that was chosen for the Site addresses contamination at the Site. The risks and hazards



                                                 10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

for the Site were presented in the baseline risk assessments and will be summarized in this
section.


Human Health Risk Assessment

A four-step process is utilized for assessing site-related human health risks for a reasonable
maximum exposure scenario: Hazard Identification – uses the analytical data collected to
identify the contaminants of potential concern at the Site for each medium, with consideration of
a number of factors explained below; Exposure Assessment - estimates the magnitude of actual
and/or potential human exposures, the frequency and duration of these exposures, and the
pathways (e.g., ingesting contaminated surface soil) by which humans are potentially exposed;
Toxicity Assessment - determines the types of adverse health effects associated with chemical
exposures, and the relationship between magnitude of exposure (dose) and severity of adverse
effects (response); and Risk Characterization - summarizes and combines outputs of the
exposure and toxicity assessments to provide a quantitative assessment of site-related risks. The
risk characterization also identifies contamination with concentrations which exceed acceptable
levels, defined by the National Contingency Plan (NCP) as an excess lifetime cancer risk greater
than 1 x 10-6 – 1 x 10-4, an excess of lifetime cancer risk greater than 1 x 10-6 (i.e., point of
departure) combined with site-specific circumstances, or a Hazard Index greater than 1.0;
contaminants at these concentrations are considered chemicals of concern (COCs) and are
typically those that will require remediation at the Site. Also included in this section is a
discussion of the uncertainties associated with these risks.


Hazard Identification

In this step, the chemicals of potential concern (COPCs) in each medium were identified based
on such factors as toxicity, frequency of occurrence, fate and transport of the contaminants in the
environment, concentrations, mobility, persistence, and bioaccumulation. The risk assessment
focused on surface soil, subsurface soil, berm soil, surface water, and sediment contaminants
related to the Site, which may pose a significant risk to human health. Analytical information
was collected to determine the nature and extent of contamination, and indicated the presence of
site-related contaminants in surface soil, subsurface soil, berm soil, surface water, and sediment
at concentrations of potential concern.

A comprehensive list of all COPCs that were investigated can be found in the Baseline Human
Health Risk Assessment (BHHRA), contained within the OU2 RI report for the Site. This
document is available in the Administrative Record file. The list of COCs identified in surface
soil, subsurface soil, surface water, and sediment, as well as exposure point concentrations, are
presented in Table 1.




                                                11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Exposure Assessment

Consistent with Superfund policy and guidance, the BHHRA, is an assessment, and therefore
assumes no remediation or institutional controls to mitigate or remove releases of hazardous
substance. Cancer risks and noncancer hazard indices were calculated based on an estimate of
the reasonable maximum exposure (RME) expected to occur under current and future conditions
at the Site. The RME is defined as the highest exposure that is reasonably expected to occur at a
site. For those contaminants where the risk or hazard exceeded the acceptable levels, the central
tendency estimate (CTE), or the average exposure, was also evaluated.

The Site is currently zoned for industrial use. In addition, the drainage ditches and Frank’s Creek
could be used for recreational activities by trespassers. It is expected that future use will be
similar to the current use. The BHHRA evaluated potential risks to populations associated with
both current and potential future land uses.

Exposure pathways were identified for each potentially exposed population and each potential
exposure scenario for exposure to surface soil, subsurface soil, berm soil, surface water, and
sediment. Exposure pathways assessed in the BHHRA are presented in Table 2. The current and
future land use scenarios refer to exposure to soil from within or outside the property boundary –
“within” referring to the 20.2 acres of Area A that is the former Diamond Head Oil Refinery
property, and “outside” referring to the 10.3 acres of Areas B and C containing the I-280
interchange clover leaf. As the Site is currently undeveloped and is designated on the tax map as
industrial/commercial, the current and future land use scenarios included the following exposure
pathways and populations:

   •   Site Maintenance Worker (adult): current/future ingestion, dermal contact and inhalation
       of soil particles and vapors for surface and subsurface soil from within the property
       boundary (Area A, Figure 2), and future exposure to the I-280 ROW berm;

   •   Trespassers (child/adult): current/future ingestion, dermal contact and inhalation of soil
       particles and vapors for surface and subsurface soil from within the property boundary
       and the I-280 ROW berm, and sediment and surface water;

   •   Highway Worker (adult): current/future ingestion and dermal contact and inhalation of
       soil particles and vapors for surface and subsurface soil from outside of the property
       boundary (Area B and C), including the I-280 ROW berm;

   •   Industrial Worker (adult): future ingestion, dermal contact and inhalation of soil particles
       and vapors for surface and subsurface soil from within the property boundary and the I-
       280 ROW berm; and

   •   Construction Workers (adult): future ingestion, dermal contact and inhalation of soil
       particles and vapors from surface and subsurface soil from within the property boundary
       and the I-280 ROW berm.




                                                12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

In this assessment, exposure point concentrations were estimated using either the maximum
detected concentration of a contaminant or the 95% upper-confidence limit (UCL) of the average
concentration. Chronic daily intakes were calculated based on the reasonable maximum exposure
(RME), which is the highest exposure reasonably anticipated to occur at the Site. The RME is
intended to estimate a conservative exposure scenario that is still within the range of possible
exposures. Central tendency exposure assumptions, which represent typical average exposures,
were also developed. A complete summary of all exposure scenarios can be found in the
BHHRA.
Toxicity Assessment

Under current EPA guidelines, the likelihood of carcinogenic risks and noncancer hazards due to
exposure to site-related chemicals are considered separately. Consistent with current EPA policy,
it was assumed that the toxic effects of the site-related chemicals would be additive. Thus, cancer
and noncancer risks associated with exposures to individual COPCs were summed to indicate the
potential risks and hazards associated with mixtures of potential carcinogens and
noncarcinogens, respectively.

Toxicity data for the human health risk assessment were provided by the Integrated Risk
Information System (IRIS) database, the Provisional Peer Reviewed Toxicity Database
(PPRTV), or another source that is identified as an appropriate reference for toxicity values
consistent with EPA’s directive on toxicity values. The toxicity values for the contaminants
identified as COCs are presented in Table 3 (noncancer) and Table 4 (cancer). The toxicity
information for all COPCs is presented in the BHHRA.

Risk Characterization

Noncarcinogenic risks were assessed using a hazard index (HI) approach, based on a comparison
of expected contaminant intakes and benchmark comparison levels of intake (reference doses,
reference concentrations). Reference doses (RfDs) and reference concentrations (RfCs) are
estimates of daily exposure levels for humans (including sensitive individuals) which are thought
to be safe over a lifetime of exposure. The estimated intake of chemicals identified in
environmental media (e.g., the amount of a chemical ingested from contaminated drinking water)
is compared to the RfD or the RfC to derive the hazard quotient (HQ) for the contaminant in the
particular medium. The HI is obtained by adding the hazard quotients for all compounds within a
particular medium that impacts a particular receptor population.

The HQ for oral and dermal exposures is calculated as below. The HQ for inhalation exposures
is calculated using a similar model that incorporates the RfC, rather than the RfD.

HQ = Intake/RfD

Where:         HQ = hazard quotient
               Intake = estimated intake for a chemical (mg/kg-day)
               RfD = reference dose (mg/kg-day)




                                                13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The intake and the RfD will represent the same exposure period (i.e., chronic, subchronic, or
acute).

As previously stated, the HI is calculated by summing the HQs for all chemicals for likely
exposure scenarios for a specific population. An HI greater than 1 indicates that the potential
exists for noncarcinogenic health effects to occur as a result of site-related exposures, with the
potential for health effects increasing as the HI increases. When the HI calculated for all
chemicals for a specific population exceeds 1.0, separate HI values are then calculated for those
chemicals which are known to act on the same target organ. These discrete HI values are then
compared to the acceptable limit of 1.0 to evaluate the potential for noncancer health effects on a
specific target organ. The HI provides a useful reference point for gauging the potential
significance of multiple contaminant exposures within a single medium or across media.

For carcinogens, risks are generally expressed as the incremental probability of an individual
developing cancer over a lifetime as a result of exposure to a carcinogen, using the cancer slope
factor (SF) for oral and dermal exposures and the inhalation unit risk (IUR) for inhalation
exposures. Excess lifetime cancer risk for oral and dermal exposures is calculated from the
following equation, while the equation for inhalation exposures uses the IUR, rather than the SF:

Risk = LADD x SF

Where:         Risk = a unitless probability (1 x 10-6) of an individual developing cancer
               LADD = lifetime average daily dose averaged over 70 years (mg/kg-day)
               SF = cancer slope factor, expressed as [1/(mg/kg-day)]

These risks are probabilities that are usually expressed in scientific notation (such as 1 x 10-4).
An excess lifetime cancer risk of 1 x 10-4 indicates that one additional incidence of cancer may
occur in a population of 10,000 people who are exposed under the conditions identified in the
assessment. Again, as stated in the National Contingency Plan, the point of departure is 10-6 and
the acceptable risk range for site-related exposure is 10-6 to 10-4.

The HIs for noncancer effects are presented in Table 5 and the cancer risks are presented in
Table 6. Lead was evaluated separately for surface soil. Initially lead concentrations were
compared to the NJNRDCSRS value of 800 ppm. An additional evaluation for lead using the
Adult Lead Model was also conducted. Specifically, four default parameters in the ALM were
modified to reflect the current science. The blood lead value of 10 µg/dl was changed to 5 µg/dl,
the geometric standard deviation (GSDi) was adjusted from 1.7 to 1.8 to reflect the most recent
National Health and Nutrition Evaluation Survey (NHANES) data set (2009-2014), the baseline
blood lead concentration was changed from 0.7 to 0.6 to reflect the most recent NHANES data
set (2009-2014), and the soil ingestion rate was modified from 100 mg/kg to 67 mg/kg based on
recent literature studies on soil ingestion rates for outdoor receptors. The modifications to the
ALM are documented in a technical memorandum in the administrative record. The ALM
provided a comparison value of 784 ppm. Based on both evaluations (NJNRDCSRS and ALM),
surface soil lead concentrations were elevated within the property boundary, the berm soil, and
surface water, resulting in lead being identified as a COC in surface soil, subsurface soil and
sediment.



                                                14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Surface Soil

Risks and hazards were evaluated for current and/or future exposure to surface soil. The
populations of interest included adult maintenance workers, child and adult trespassers, adult
highway workers, adult industrial workers and adult construction workers.

The potential current hazards for trespassers (child), industrial workers and construction workers
are above the acceptable hazard index of 1 from exposure to surface soil within the property
boundary. The potential current risk for all populations is above the acceptable risk range for
exposure to surface soil within the property boundary. Chromium 1, dioxin, and PCBs are COCs
for surface soil within the property boundary. Exposure to surface soil from the berms results in
estimated hazards that are equal to or below the acceptable hazard index of 1, and the cancer risk
is equal to or above the acceptable risk range, with chromium being identified as a COC. The
potential future hazards and risks for future highway workers exposed to surface soil outside of
the property boundary exceed the acceptable hazard index of 1 and the cancer risk range, due to
dioxin, aldrin and PCBs.

Subsurface Soil

Risks and hazards were evaluated for the potential future exposure to subsurface soil. The
populations of interest included future adult industrial workers, construction workers,
maintenance workers and trespassers within the property boundary, and highway workers from
outside of the property boundary. The hazard index was equal to or greater than 1 for all
populations, and the cancer risk was above the acceptable risk range for all populations. The
COCs within the property boundaries were chromium, thallium, and benzo[a]pyrene, while the
COCs outside of the property boundary were PCBs and dioxin.

Surface Water and Sediment

Risks and hazards were evaluated for the potential current and future exposure to surface water
and sediment in Frank’s Creek, and sediment from the drainage ditch, which is more
representative of soil. The populations of interest included adult maintenance workers and adult
and child trespassers. The non-cancer hazards for surface water were above the EPA acceptable
value of 1 for the maintenance worker and child trespasser. The COCs identified for surface
water were beryllium and thallium. The cancer risks were below or within EPA’s acceptable
ranges for all populations. Lead was also identified as a COC for the sediment due to several hot
spot locations with lead concentrations exceeding both the NJNRDCSRS and ALM values.




1 Chromium speciation was not conducted on the samples, therefore the risks and hazards from chromium exposure
was evaluated assuming that total chromium was 100% chromium VI, the most toxic form of chromium.




                                                      15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Groundwater and Vapor Intrusion

Although LNAPL source material is present on Site, contaminant levels in groundwater, in
general, slightly exceed the groundwater standards. For example, benzene (with relatively higher
solubility and mobility compared to other site-related contaminants) was detected in exceedance
of the NJ Class IIA standard of 1 part per billion (ppb) in groundwater in only 4 wells where
LNAPL source material was present in the RTA (Area A, Figure 2). The large majority of wells
had no exceedances of VOC criteria, or had just one exceedance for only one VOC during the
three sampling rounds, and were observed in wells that contained LNAPL source material.
LNAPL has not been observed in any deep monitoring wells (monitoring wells screened beneath
the clay and peat layers) in any of the monitoring events conducted. Based on the low level of
contaminants in groundwater, the low solubility of SVOCs, dioxins/furans and PCBs, and the
removal of LNAPL source material, there would be limited potential for remaining soil
contaminants to migrate to groundwater and thus levels of groundwater contaminants would be
expected to decrease over time.

The potential risks and hazards associated with contaminated groundwater and volatilization of
volatile organic compounds (VOCs) from contaminated groundwater into future buildings built
over the contaminated groundwater were evaluated in the human health risk assessment,
however, exposure to groundwater and vapors are being addressed in OU3, thus they are not
discussed here.

Uncertainties

The procedures and inputs used to assess risks in this evaluation, as in all such assessments, are
subject to a wide variety of uncertainties. More specific information concerning uncertainty in
the health risks is presented in the baseline human health risk assessment report. In general, the
main sources of uncertainty include:

   •   Environmental data;
   •   Environmental parameter assumptions;
   •   Toxicity data; and,
   •   Risk characterization.

Two of the primary sources of uncertainty identified in the HHRA were associated with exposure
parameters and toxicological data. Uncertainty in exposure parameters leads to many of the
parameters being associated with default values since site-specific values were not available.
This would tend to provide a conservative estimate of potential risk and hazards.

Another important source of uncertainty was toxicological data. The toxicity factors used in the
quantitative evaluation of potential risks and hazards were primarily selected from the Integrated
Risk Information System (IRIS). For many chemicals, there is a lack of appropriate information
on effects in humans (i.e., epidemiologic studies). Therefore, animal studies are generally used to
develop toxicity values in human health risk assessments, which may under- or over-estimate
potential risks and hazards, Additionally, for this evaluation, chromium was analyzed as total
chromium, however the toxicity value for hexavalent chromium was used to estimate risks and



                                                16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

hazards. Given that trivalent chromium, which is less toxic than hexavalent chromium, is the
most frequent form of chromium in the environment, it is likely that the risks and hazards from
chromium exposure are overestimated.

The Remedies are necessary to protect the public health or welfare or the environment from
actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances in the environment.

Ecological Risk Assessment

An Ecological Risk Assessment (BERA) was performed, evaluating the potential for impacts to
sensitive ecological receptors from site-related COCs through exposure to surface soil, surface
water, sediment, and prey items (i.e., small mammals and fish). Surface soil, surface water and
sediment concentrations were compared to ecological screening values, and food web modeling
for upper trophic level predators was completed to determine the potential for adverse effects to
ecological receptors. A complete summary of all exposure scenarios can be found in the BERA
in the Administrative Record.

Surface Soil

Although animals using the Site do not distinguish boundaries, soil was evaluated using two
different exposure areas, exposure to Site-wide soil and exposure to berm soil. This was done to
identify if there are different risks associated with different areas of the Site. Soil concentrations
were compared with screening values that are protective for soil invertebrates. Based on the
evaluation, there is a potential for adverse effects to soil invertebrates from exposure to surface
soil in both the Site-wide soil and the berm soil. The risk from exposure to berm soil was less
than the risk for Site-wide soil. The surface soil screening criteria for soil invertebrates were
exceeded for 38 compounds consisting of metals, pesticides, SVOCs and PCBs in soil Site-wide,
which resulted in hazard quotients (HQs) greater than the acceptable value of 1. The soil
screening criteria for soil invertebrates were exceeded for 30 hazardous substances consisting of
metals, pesticides, SVOCs, a VOC and dioxin in berm soil, which resulted in HQs greater than
the acceptable value of 1.

Food Web Modeling

Exposure to compounds in the soil and prey items (small mammals) was evaluated for upper
trophic level terrestrial animals, including the short-tailed shrew, white-footed mouse, mourning
dove, barred owl, American woodcock and red fox. All of the terrestrial receptors exposed to
Site-wide soil had HQs greater than 1 due to metals, PCBs and dioxin for both No Observed
Adverse Exposure Levels (NOAELs) and Lowest Observed Adverse Exposure Levels
(LOAELs) comparisons. Short-tailed shrew, white-footed mouse, and American woodcock
exposed to berm soil had HQs greater than 1 for LOAEL comparisons due to a combination of
either metals, PCBs, and/or dioxin, and all terrestrial receptors had HQs above 1 for NOAEL
comparisons due to metals, PCBs and/or dioxin.

Exposure to compounds in the surface water, sediment and prey items (fish) was evaluated for
upper trophic level aquatic animals, including mink, muskrat, raccoon, and belted kingfisher. All



                                                 17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

of the aquatic receptors evaluated had HQs greater than 1 due to a combination of metals, PCBs,
and/or dioxin for the NOAEL comparison. Muskrat had an HQ greater than 1 for the LOAEL
comparison due to lead, and belted kingfisher had an HQ greater than 1 for the LOAEL
comparison due to mercury. The rest of the aquatic receptors had HQs less than 1. Additionally,
mummichogs in the drainage ditch had HQs greater than 1 for 9 compounds consisting of metals,
pesticides, and PCBs.


REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES

Remedial Action Objectives (RAOs) are specific goals to protect human health and the
environment. These objectives are based on available information and standards, such as
applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs) and risk-based levels established
in the BHHRA, prepared at the time of the 2009 OU1 ROD. Because the BHHRA established
that the principal threat LNAPL source areas at the Site pose an unacceptable risk to human
health and the environment, remedial action objectives (RAOs) were established. EPA has
concluded that these remedial action objectives are still appropriate.

OU1 RAOs from the 2009 OU1 ROD

   •    Remove or treat principal threats, consistent with the NCP, to the extent practicable;

   •    Prevent current and future migration of LNAPL and associated chemical contaminants to
        the various media at the Site, including groundwater and seeps to surface water; and,

   •    Prevent human exposure through direct contact with the principal threat LNAPL.

OU2 RAOs

EPA established the OU2 RAOs to prevent/minimize potential receptor exposures that present
unacceptable risk as a result of contact, ingestion, or inhalation (dust).

Surface water on the Site appears only as surficial flooding, areas of standing water during wet
seasons or flooding events, and in delineated wetlands. An RAO for surface water has therefore
not been developed, as soils are the contributing source of contamination to surface water, and
any risks presented by surface water will be addressed through attainment of the soil RAO.

Soil:

   •    Prevent/minimize potential ecological receptor exposures and human receptor exposures
        through contact, ingestion, and inhalation of contaminated soils.

Sediment:

   •    Prevent/minimize potential ecological receptor exposures and human receptor exposures
        to contaminated sediment in the drainage ditch.


                                                18

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

After the concurrent implementation of the OU1 and OU2 remedial actions, OU3 will evaluate
changes in groundwater concentrations over time.

To achieve the RAOs for OU2, EPA is proposing soil and sediment remediation goals for the
COCs based on NJDEP’s NRDCSRS and EPA risk-based values with the exception of thallium 2.
The remediation goals are as follows:
Soil:
    • Chromium: 20 ppm
    • Dioxin: 730 ppt
    • PCBs: 1 ppm
    • Aldrin: 0.2 ppm
    • Lead: 800 ppm
    • Benzo[a]pyrene: 2 ppm

Sediment:
   • Lead: 800 ppm 3


BASIS FOR OU1 REMEDY MODIFICATION

The biocell treatment component of the Original Remedy selected in the 2009 ROD will not be
effective in treating the LNAPL source areas and therefore will not meet the RAOs.


DESCRIPTION OF PROPOSED CHANGES TO THE OU1 LNAPL SOURCE AREA
REMEDY

After the OU1 ROD was signed, new information was generated that affected the
implementation of the selected remedy. The PDI demonstrated that biocell treatment would not
be effective and therefore would not achieve the OU1 RAOs, as those pertained to the LNAPL
that was to be treated on-site. This prompted EPA to amend the source area remedy. EPA began
by reevaluating other the alternatives that were considered at the time of the OU1 ROD to see if
any of them would now be more appropriate. EPA believes that the original Alternative 4,
Excavation and Off-Site Treatment/Disposal of Entire LNAPL Source Area, is appropriate for

2 The toxicity value for thallium used in the risk assessment is no longer supported as a basis for decision making.
As a result, it is not possible to calculate non-cancer hazards to support a decision. NJDEP also removed the soil
remediation value from their promulgated soil standards in September of 2017, thus there is no remediation goal
provided for thallium. Thallium is co-located with the COCs for which remediation goals are available so the
original identified areas that contained thallium at elevated levels will be removed as part of the remedy.
3 The resulting preliminary remediation goal (PRG) value using the latest information from the National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) (2009-2014) is 784 ppm, incorporating the Region 2 proposed adjusted
adult soil and dust ingestion rate and a target blood level of 5 µg/dl. This value was rounded to 800 ppm which is
also the NJNRDCSRS value. This value will be used as the PRG for both soil and sediment cleanup, as sediments
found in the drainage ditch function more like soils (compacted and vegetated), and are only underwater during
flooding events. The drainage ditch areas represent a small percentage of the area used by the ecological receptors,
therefore the cleanup goal should be protective for both human health and the environment.



                                                        19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

comparison to the Original Remedy that was selected. A description of each of the OU1
alternatives is provided below followed by a comparison between the Original Remedy,
Alternative 2: On-Site Biocell, and Alternative 4: Excavation and Off-Site Treatment/Disposal of
Entire LNAPL Source Area.

OU1 Alternative 2: On-Site Biocell

Capital Cost:                 $16,080,000
Annual O&M Cost:              $0
Present Worth Cost:           $17,340,000
Construction Time Frame:      1 year

The Original Remedy called for the off-site disposal of the principal threat LNAPL source
material, and construction of an on-site biocell for the treatment of the remaining low-level threat
source material.

The major components of the Original Remedy included:

   •   Isolation of the RTAs with cut-off walls, and excavation of the principal threat LNAPL
       source material, a total of approximately 45,825 cubic yards of material;

   •   Transportation and off-site disposal to a facility (with treatment as required to meet
       Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) Land Disposal Requirements) for the
       principal threat LNAPL portion of the excavated material that is not amenable to on-site
       treatment;

   •   For the low-level threat LNAPL material amenable to on-site treatment, construction of a
       biocell within the excavated area to facilitate biodegradation of the LNAPL wastes,
       including the installation of piping for air and nutrient distribution and a collection
       system for air and water that may accumulate in the biocell;

   •   Introduction of nutrients and bulking agents to the low-level threat LNAPL material to
       enhance permeability and the conditions for biological activity, followed by placement of
       the augmented LNAPL material in the biocell for treatment and capping;

   •   Operation of the aeration, nutrient distribution, and water collection systems for the biocell
       for an estimated five-year period; and,

   •   Performance sampling and final confirmation sampling to demonstrate that the LNAPL
       wastes have been destroyed through biological degradation, at which time the biocell
       components will be dismantled.




                                                20

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

OU1 Alternative 4: Excavation and Off-Site Treatment/Disposal of Entire LNAPL Source
Area

Capital Cost:                 $13,733,000
Annual O&M Cost:              $0
Present Worth Cost:           $13,733,000
Construction Time Frame:      1 year

The major components of the Amended Remedy for OU1 include:

   •   Isolation of the RTAs with cut-off walls, and excavation of the LNAPL source material, a
       total of approximately 49,000 cubic yards of material, and

   •   Transportation and off-site disposal to an appropriate facility (with treatment as required
       to meet RCRA Land Disposal Requirements).

The estimated volume of the LNAPL source area to be excavated has increased by 3,175 cubic
yards, to 49,000 cubic yards. The increase is due to a refined areal extent principal threat LNAPL
in the PDI and the volume of the low level threat LNAPL that will now be excavated.

This Alternative, Excavation and Off-Site Treatment/Disposal, was evaluated in the OU1 Phase
2 Focused FS and presented as Alternative 4 in the 2009 OU1 ROD. This alternative called for
the excavation of only principal threat LNAPL, and is now being modified to also include
excavation of low-level threat LNAPL, as well as utilizing non-hazardous I-280 ROW berm soils
as fill for the excavated RTA. Under this alternative, all LNAPL source material would be
excavated from the RTA, which is approximately 49,000 cubic yards. The excavated material
would then be stabilized on Site to allow for transportation to off-site treatment and disposal
facilities. The excavated areas would then be backfilled with the non-hazardous I-280 ROW
berm soil, which in turn would be covered with clean fill. Any hazardous wastes would be
transported to an appropriate disposal facility. This alternative would be conducted concurrently
with the OU2 remedial action. As with the Original Remedy, dewatering would be required prior
to excavation, and the removed water would need to be treated prior to discharge. The FS
estimates that this alternative could be implemented in approximately one year. Five-year
reviews would be conducted since contamination would remain above levels that allow for
unlimited use and unrestricted exposure.


EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES FOR OU1

A Comparative Analysis between the Original Remedy and the Amended Remedy is presented
below.

In selecting a remedy, EPA considered the factors set out in CERCLA §121, 42 U.S.C. §9621,
by conducting a detailed analysis of the viable remedial response measures pursuant to the NCP,
40 CFR §300.430(e)(9) and OSWER Directive 9355.3-01. The detailed analysis consisted of an
assessment of the individual response measure against each of nine evaluation criteria described



                                               21

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

below and a comparative analysis focusing upon the relative performance of each response
measure against the criteria.


Threshold Criteria - The first two criteria are known as “threshold criteria” because they are
the minimum requirements that each response measure must meet in order to be eligible for
selection as a remedy.

1. Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment
Overall protection of human health and the environment addresses whether each alternative
provides adequate protection of human health and the environment and describes how risks
posed through each exposure pathway are eliminated, reduced, or controlled, through treatment,
engineering controls, and/or institutional controls.

Because the treatment component of the Original Remedy failed, it will not meet RAOs or the
remediation goals outlined in the OU1 2009 ROD, and is not protective of human health and the
environment. The Amended Remedy for OU1 would achieve the RAOs and remediation goals
by removing contamination, and thereby preventing direct contact with the LNAPL source area.

2. Compliance with Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements (ARARs)
Section 121(d) of CERCLA and NCP §300.430(f)(1)(ii)(B) require that remedial actions at
CERCLA sites at least attain legally applicable or relevant and appropriate Federal and State
requirements, standards, criteria, and limitations which are collectively referred to as "ARARs,”
“ unless such ARARs are waived under CERCLA section 121(d)(4).

The Original Remedy is not effective and therefore would not meet the RAOs and not attain the
ARARs. The Amended Remedy for OU1 would remove the entire LNAPL source area and meet
the RAOs. EPA has developed site-specific remediation goals that are consistent with the
expectations of the New Jersey Technical Requirements for the remediation of free product
(N.J.A.C 7:26E-1). The RCRA is applicable for assessing the disposal requirements of
potentially hazardous wastes, such as the LNAPL-contaminated soils. Based upon the available
documentation, EPA has concluded that the LNAPL wastes are not listed hazardous waste under
RCRA, but will require treatment to meet RCRA Land Disposal Restrictions. The Amended
Remedy can be designed to meet location- and action-specific ARARs, and would also require a
reliance on institutional controls (ICs) indefinitely to prevent damage to the soil cover and any
intrusive activities into the residual contamination.

3. Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence
A similar degree of long-term effectiveness and permanence refers to expected residual risk and
the ability of a remedy to maintain reliable protection of human health and the environment over
time, once clean-up levels have been met. This criterion includes the consideration of residual
risk that will remain on site following remediation and the adequacy and reliability of controls.

The Original Remedy kept the low-level threat LNAPL within an on-site biocell, and provided a
cover to control the potential risks associated with direct contact and erosional transport of the
low-level threat LNAPL, which was originally thought to be adequate and reliable. Since the



                                                22

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

biocell was shown to be ineffective at treating the low-level threat LNAPL, the Original Remedy
would not satisfy this criterion.

The Amended Remedy would achieve remediation goals that are protective for the LNAPL
source material by removing all potential risks associated with the presence of LNAPL source
material, thereby providing long-term effectiveness and permanence.

4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume through Treatment
Reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment refers to the anticipated performance
of the treatment technologies that may be included as part of a remedy.

The Original Remedy would not reduce toxicity, mobility, or volume because the biocell
treatment was ineffective. The Amended Remedy does not employ treatment and therefore
would not reduce toxicity, mobility, or volume.

5. Short-Term Effectiveness
Short-term effectiveness addresses the period of time needed to implement the remedy and any
adverse impacts that may be posed to workers, the community and the environment during
construction and operation of the remedy until cleanup levels are achieved.

The Original Remedy would not provide short-term effectiveness.

The Amended Remedy would mitigate potential risks to workers through adherence to site-
specific health and safety plans, to communities through the use of engineering controls, and
would have minimal potential risks to the environment during construction. The Amended
Remedy has a construction duration of approximately one year.

6. Implementability
Implementability addresses the technical and administrative feasibility of a remedy from design
through construction and operation. Factors such as availability of services and materials,
administrative feasibility, and coordination with other governmental entities are also considered.

The Original Remedy is not implementable.

The Amended Remedy is technically and administratively feasible. The necessary engineering
services, equipment, and materials are readily available, and excavation and disposal are well
proven technologies. The Amended Remedy would require ICs to prevent intrusive activities
into remaining residual contamination.

7. Cost
Includes estimated capital and operation and maintenance costs, and net present-worth values.

The Original Remedy has a present worth cost of $17,340,000 4 based on the Phase 2 Focused
FS, while the Amended Remedy has a present worth cost of $13,733,000.

4
    The present worth costs for the Biocell remedy were not updated because the biocell treatment is not technically feasible.




                                                                  23

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Modifying Criteria - The final two evaluation criteria, criteria 8 and 9, are called “modifying
criteria” because new information or comments from the state or the community on the Proposed
Plan may modify the preferred response measure or cause another response measure to be
considered.

8. State Acceptance
Indicates whether based on its review of the RI/FS reports and the Proposed Plan, the state
supports, opposes, and/or has identified any reservations with the selected response measure.

The State of New Jersey concurs with EPA’s selected remedies. A letter of concurrence is attached
in Appendix IV.

9. Community Acceptance
Summarizes the public’s general response to the response measures described in the Proposed
Plan and the RI/FS reports. This assessment includes determining which of the response measures
the community supports, opposes, and/or has reservations about.

EPA solicited input from the community on the Amended Remedy proposed for the Site. The
community was not opposed to EPA’s Proposed Plan for the OU1 ROD Amendment. Appendix
III, The Responsiveness Summary, addresses the comments received at the public meeting. No
substantive comments were received during the public comment period.


DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES FOR OU2

CERCLA requires that each selected remedy be protective of human health and the environment,
be cost effective, attain a level or standard of control of the hazardous substances, pollutants and
contaminants, which at least attains ARARs under federal and state laws, unless a waiver can be
justified, utilize permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies, and utilize resource
recovery alternatives to the maximum extent practical. In addition, the statute includes a
preference for the use of treatment as a principal element for the reduction of toxicity, mobility,
or volume of hazardous substances.

Potential technologies applicable to soil remediation were identified and screened by
effectiveness, implementability, and cost, with emphasis on effectiveness. Those technologies
that passed the initial screening were then assembled into remedial alternatives.

Full descriptions of each proposed alternative can be found in the FS which is part of the
Administrative Record. Table 7 provides a summary of the components for each alternative.

The time frames below are for construction and do not include the time to design a remedy, or
the time to procure necessary contracts. Five-year reviews will be conducted as a component of
the three alternatives (Alternative 2, Alternative 3, and Alternative 4) that leave contamination in
place above levels that would allow for unrestricted use/unlimited exposure. The present worth
cost for all alternatives includes the periodic present worth cost of five-year reviews.




                                                24

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 1 - No Action

Capital Cost:                 $0
Annual O&M Cost:              $0
Present Worth Cost:           $0
Timeframe:                    0 years

The NCP requires that a “No Action” alternative be evaluated to establish a baseline for
comparison with other remedial alternatives. Under this alternative, no action would be taken to
control or remove low-level contamination or to prevent exposure at the Site.


Alternative 2 – Excavation of Soils in Areas B and C; Vegetated Soil Cover in Areas A, B,
and C; Institutional Controls; and Excavation of Sediments

Capital Cost:                 $8,461,000
Annual O&M Cost:              $67,000
Present Worth Cost:           $10,048,000
Construction Time Frame:      Less than 1 year

This alternative consists of construction of a two-foot soil cover as the primary measure to
prevent exposure to residual contamination in the underlying soil, that is, contaminated soil not
addressed in OU1. In Areas B and C (Figure 2), up to two feet of surface soil would be
excavated before placing a cover to maintain the current drainage patterns. Excavated soils not
requiring off-site disposal from Areas B and C would be placed within Area A, and would be
graded to facilitate cover placement. The soil cover for Areas A, B, and C would consist of 18
inches of clean fill and six inches of topsoil. The wetland areas within Area A would also be
excavated to a depth of two feet, to accommodate the soil cover and wetland restoration, but no
other locations within Area A would be excavated.

Sediment in the drainage ditch along I-280 would be excavated to an approximate depth of 18
inches, and 18 inches of stone bedding would be added.

Approximately 440 cubic yards of TSCA/RCRA contaminated soil, and 800 cubic yards of
sediment, would be removed under this alternative and transported to an appropriate disposal
facility (i.e., RCRA Subtitle C or TSCA disposal facility).

For cost-estimation purposes, EPA has assumed that approximately 500 cubic yards of soil
contaminated with dioxin greater than 7,300 ppt would be disposed of at a RCRA Subtitle C
facility.

Institutional controls, such as a deed notice, would be used to prevent contact with contaminated
soil and sediment remaining under the cover material, and ensure that future use of the Site does
not damage the covers. Five-year reviews would be conducted since contamination would
remain above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure.




                                                 25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 3 – Excavation of Soils in Areas A, B, and C and Off-Site Disposal; Vegetated
Soil Cover; Institutional Controls; and Excavation of Sediments

Capital Cost:                 $18,745,000
Annual O&M Cost:              $67,000
Present Worth Cost:           $20,337,000
Construction Time Frame:      Less than 1 year

This alternative consists of construction of a two-foot soil cover as the primary measure to
prevent exposure to residual contamination in the underlying soil. Soils in Areas A, B, and C
would be excavated to a depth of two feet, except for the landfill, which would be covered
without any prior excavation. The wetland areas within Area A would also be excavated to a
depth of two feet, to accommodate the soil cover and wetland restoration, but no other locations
within Area A would be excavated. The soil cover for Areas A, B, and C would consist of 18
inches of clean fill and six inches of topsoil.

Sediment in the drainage ditch along I-280 would be excavated to an approximate depth of 18
inches, and 18 inches of stone bedding would be added.

Approximately 72,450 cubic yards of soils excavated from Areas A, B, and C, 800 cubic yards of
contaminated sediment, and 5,250 cubic yards of TSCA/RCRA contaminated soil, would be
removed under this alternative and transported off Site to an appropriate disposal facility (e.g.,
RCRA Subtitle C or TSCA disposal facility).

For cost-estimation purposes, EPA has assumed that approximately 500 cubic yards of soil
contaminated with dioxin greater than 7,300 ppt will be disposed of at a RCRA Subtitle C
facility.

Institutional controls, such as a deed notice, would be used to prevent contact with contaminated
soil and sediment remaining under the cover material, and ensure that future use of the Site does
not damage the covers. Five-year reviews would be conducted since contamination would
remain above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure.


Alternative 4 – Excavation of Soils in Areas A, B, and C; On-Site Stabilization and
Consolidation of Soils and Sediments in Area A; Vegetated Soil Cover; Institutional
Controls; and Excavation of Sediments

Capital Cost:                 $10,561,000
Annual O&M Cost:              $67,000
Present Worth Cost:           $12,148,000
Construction Timeframe:       2 years

This alternative consists of construction of a two-foot soil cover as the primary measure to
prevent exposure to residual contamination in the underlying soil. Soils in Areas A, B, and C
would be excavated to a depth of two feet, except for the landfill. Excavated soil not requiring



                                                 26

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

off-site disposal from Areas A, B, and C would then be stabilized and placed in Area A, and a
six-inch topsoil cover would be added. The wetland areas within Area A would also be
excavated to a depth of two feet, to accommodate the soil cover and wetland restoration, but no
other locations within Area A would be excavated. The soil cover placed in Areas B and C
would consist of 18 inches of clean fill and six inches of topsoil.

Sediment in the drainage ditch along I-280 would be excavated to an approximate depth of 18
inches, and 18 inches of stone bedding would be added.

Approximately 94,200 cubic yards of soil will be removed, stabilized and put back in place.
Approximately 5,250 cubic yards of TSCA/RCRA contaminated soil, and 800 cubic yards of
sediment, will be removed and transported off site to an appropriate disposal facility (e.g., RCRA
Subtitle C or TSCA disposal facility).

For cost-estimation purposes, EPA has assumed that approximately 500 cubic yards of soil
contaminated with dioxin greater than 7,300 ppt will be disposed of at a RCRA Subtitle C
facility.

ICs, such as a deed notice, would be used to prevent contact with contaminated soil and sediment
remaining under the cover material, and ensure that future use of the Site does not damage the
covers. Five-year reviews would be conducted since contamination would remain above levels
that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure.


EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES FOR OU2

EPA uses nine criteria to evaluate the remedial alternatives individually and against each other to
select a remedy. This section presents the relative performance of each alternative against the
nine criteria, noting how each alternative compares to the other alternatives under consideration.
The nine evaluation criteria are discussed below. A detailed analysis of each of the alternatives is
presented in the FS report.


Threshold Criteria - The first two criteria are known as “threshold criteria” because they are
the minimum requirements that each response measure must meet in order to be eligible for
selection as a remedy.

1. Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment
Overall protection of human health and the environment addresses whether each alternative
provides adequate protection of human health and the environment and describes how risks
posed through each exposure pathway are eliminated, reduced, or controlled, through treatment,
engineering controls, and/or institutional controls.

Alternative 1, No Action, would not be protective of human health or the environment since it
does not include measures to prevent exposure to contaminated soils or sediments.




                                                27

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternatives 2, 3 and 4 are protective, and prevent unacceptable human health and ecological risk
by eliminating exposure pathways through containment, removal, or treatment.

Each alternative includes varying degrees of removal and cover, and institutional controls to help
protect against exposure and address the risk at the Site. Alternative 4 includes treatment (i.e.,
stabilization) of soil and incorporation of stabilized soil into the Area A cover, while Alternatives
2 and 3 use clean fill for the soil cover. The stabilization under Alternative 4 would aim to
achieve the NJNRDCSRS, which are appropriate for the anticipated future industrial use of the
Site. Treatability testing would be needed to determine the effectiveness of stabilization under
Alternative 4 to achieve these standards.


2. Compliance with applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs)
Section 121(d) of CERCLA and NCP §300.430(f)(1)(ii)(B) require that remedial actions at
CERCLA sites at least attain legally applicable or relevant and appropriate Federal and State
requirements, standards, criteria, and limitations which are collectively referred to as "ARARs,”
unless such ARARs are waived under CERCLA section 121(d)(4).

Actions taken at any Superfund site must meet all ARARs under federal and state laws or
provide grounds for invoking a waiver of those requirements. EPA evaluated NJDEP’s Impact to
Groundwater Soil Remediation Standards while developing alternatives for the Site. New Jersey
relies on a series of guidance documents to provide a basis for developing site-specific impact-
to-groundwater soil cleanup goals, however, the methodologies for developing the site-specific
numbers have not been promulgated, and are therefore not ARARs, but are “to be considered”.

The three broad categories of ARARs include chemical-specific, location-specific and action-
specific ARARs.

Alternative 1 is the only alternative that would not comply with chemical-, action-, or location-
specific ARARs, since no action will be taken, leaving soils and sediments in place that exceed
NJNRDCSRS, posing an unacceptable risk to human health and the environment.

Alternatives 2, 3, and 4 comply with chemical‐specific ARARs, such as the NJNRDCSRS,
which establish minimum direct contact soil remediation levels. Alternatives 2 and 3 accomplish
this by removing and covering soils and sediment that exceed NJNRDCSRS, while Alternative 4
accomplishes this by treating soils and sediment through stabilization. Location- and action-
specific ARARs can be met through design and implementation for Alternatives 2, 3, and 4.
Action-specific ARARs, such as the Toxic Substances Control Act will be met through the
proper management of PCB remediation wastes, while location-specific ARARs, such as the
Flood Hazard Area Control Act Regulations, will be met by ensuring that measures for
excavating, grading, and fill do not impede overland flow of stormwater.




                                                 28

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Primary Balancing Criteria - The next five criteria, criteria 3 through 7, are known as “primary
balancing criteria”. These criteria are factors with which tradeoffs between response measures
are assessed so that the best option will be chosen, given site-specific data and conditions.


3. Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence
A similar degree of long-term effectiveness and permanence refers to expected residual risk and
the ability of a remedy to maintain reliable protection of human health and the environment over
time, once clean-up levels have been met. This criterion includes the consideration of residual
risk that will remain on site following remediation and the adequacy and reliability of controls.

Alternative 1 provides no controls and does not maintain protection of human health and the
environment over the long-term because there is no mechanism to prevent exposure to
contaminated soils or sediment.

With regard to the soil cover alternatives, Alternatives 2 and 3 would both provide long-term
effectiveness and permanence since the cover thickness is the same under both alternatives and
the cover material would meet New Jersey Residential Direct Contact Soil Remediation
Standards. Under Alternative 4, surface soils that are excavated from Areas B and C to
accommodate the soil cover would be stabilized and incorporated into the soil cover material in
Area A.

Under Alternatives 2, 3, and 4, ICs, such as a deed notice, would be used to help protect against
direct contact with contaminated soil and sediment remaining under the cover material, and
ensure that future use of the Site does not damage the covers.


4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume of contaminants through Treatment
Reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment refers to the anticipated performance
of the treatment technologies that may be included as part of a remedy.

Alternative 1 does not implement any treatment processes, and therefore does not provide for a
reduction in the toxicity, mobility, or volume of contaminants. Alternative 1 also does not
generate any treatment residuals, and it does not meet the statutory preference for treatment.

Alternatives 2 and 3 do not implement any treatment processes, so the toxicity, mobility, and
volume of contaminants remains unchanged.

Alternative 4 is the only remedial alternative that includes a treatment component (stabilization),
which provides a greater reduction of toxicity and mobility than Alternatives 2 and 3. The
stabilization component of Alternative 4 results in a reduction in the toxicity and mobility, but it
would be expected to result in an increase in volume due to the addition of stabilization
materials.




                                                 29

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

5. Short-term Effectiveness
Short-term effectiveness addresses the period of time needed to implement the remedy and any
adverse impacts that may be posed to workers, the community and the environment during
construction and operation of the remedy until cleanup levels are achieved.

Alternative 1 involves no action, so there is no risk to workers, no additional risks to the
community or the environment, and the Alternative will not achieve RAOs.

Alternative 2 has the lowest potential risks for workers, the shortest construction duration, and is
the least intrusive when compared to Alternatives 3 and 4. Alternative 2 also has the lowest
potential risks to the community due to the short construction duration and the fewest impacts to
traffic. The potential for additional risks to the environment is minimal for Alternative 2, and
RAOs are expected to be met within one year.

Alternative 3 has a longer construction duration than Alternative 2 (less than one year), and a
shorter construction duration than Alternative 4 (two years). Alternative 3 would produce more
truck traffic when compared to Alternatives 2 and 4, and would have the greatest traffic impact
to the community resulting from the volume of material transported off site for disposal, and the
importing of backfill material. The potential for additional risks to the environment is minimal
for Alternative 3, and RAOs are expected to be met within two years.

Alternative 4 would have the longest construction duration, and more construction related
activities than Alternatives 2 and 3. Alternative 4 would present the highest potential risks to
workers, but have less traffic impacts than Alternative 3. Alternative 4 would also present the
highest potential risks to the community resulting from a longer construction duration, including
additional noise, odor, and dust. Additional emission control techniques would need to be
implemented under Alternative 4. The potential for additional risks to the environment is
minimal for Alternative 4, and RAOs are expected to be met within 2 years.


6. Implementability
Implementability addresses the technical and administrative feasibility of a remedy from design
through construction and operation. Factors such as availability of services and materials,
administrative feasibility, and coordination with other governmental entities are also considered.

Alternative 1 is implementable and feasible because no action would be taken.

Alternative 2 is the most technically feasible, and is administratively feasible, and materials and
services for Alternative 2 are readily available.

Alternative 3 is technically feasible, but would require additional soil management and traffic
management when compared to Alternative 2. Alternative 3 is administratively feasible, and
materials and services are readily available, however it may require increased transport distances
due to the larger quantity of backfill materials needed for this alternative.




                                                 30

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 4 is the least technically feasible, and requires additional soil management to
stabilize the soils, when compared to Alternatives 2 and 3. Alternative 4 is administratively
feasible, and materials and services are readily available. Alternative 4 would require treatability
testing to determine the effectiveness of the technology to select the appropriate stabilizing
agent(s).

Alternatives 2, 3, and 4, will require access, which would need to be addressed with property
owners for each alternative, as well as ICs, such as deed notices, which will also require the
consent of the property owners.


7. Cost
Includes estimated capital and operation and maintenance costs, and net present-worth values.

The total estimated present worth costs of Alternatives 1, 2, 3, and 4 are $0, $10,423,000,
$20,702,000, and $12,388,000, respectively. Alternative 3 is the most expensive and Alternative
1 is the least expensive.

Modifying Criteria - The final two evaluation criteria, criteria 8 and 9, are called “modifying
criteria” because new information or comments from the state or the community on the Proposed
Plan may modify the preferred response measure or cause another response measure to be
considered.


8. State Acceptance
Indicates whether based on its review of the RI/FS reports and the Proposed Plan, the state
supports, opposes, and/or has identified any reservations with the selected response measure.

The State of New Jersey concurs with EPA’s selected remedies. A letter of concurrence is attached
in Appendix IV.


9. Community Acceptance
Summarizes the public’s general response to the response measures described in the Proposed
Plan and the RI/FS reports. This assessment includes determining which of the response measures
the community supports, opposes, and/or has reservations about.

EPA solicited input from the community on the remedial alternatives proposed for the Site. The
community was generally supportive of EPA’s Proposed Plan for the OU2 ROD. Appendix III,
The Responsiveness Summary, addresses the comments received at the public meeting. No
substantive comments were received during the public comment period.




                                                 31

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE

The principal threat concept is applied to the characterization of source materials at Superfund
sites. A source material is material that includes or contains hazardous substances, pollutants or
contaminants that act as a reservoir for migration of contamination to groundwater, surface water
or air, or acts as a source for direct exposure. Principal threat wastes are those source materials
considered to be highly toxic or highly mobile that generally cannot be reliably contained, or
would present a significant risk to human health or the environment should exposure occur.
Using multiple lines of evidence, LNAPL detected at the Site was separated into areas where
LNAPL material is considered to represent a principal threat waste and areas where LNAPL can
be considered to represent a lower-level threat waste.

The OU1 ROD identified LNAPL source material as principal threat waste. EPA defines
principal threat wastes as those source materials considered to be highly toxic or highly mobile,
that generally cannot be reliably contained or would present a significant risk to human health or
the environment should exposure occur. They include liquids or other highly mobile materials
(e.g., solvents) or materials that have high concentrations of toxic compounds. By contrast, low-
level threat wastes are defined as those materials that generally can be reliably contained and that
would represent a low risk in the event of a release. They include materials that exhibit low
toxicity, low mobility in the environment, or are near health-based levels.

The OU1 ROD Amendment portion of this document addresses LNAPL principal threat waste
source material. Treatability testing during OU1 indicated that treatment of low-level threat
waste was not feasible, and therefore the alternatives considered for the OU1 ROD Amendment
do not include treatment as a principal element.


SELECTED REMEDIES

Based upon consideration of the results of the RI and PDI at the Site, the requirements of
CERCLA, the detailed analysis of the remedial alternatives and public comments, EPA has
determined that the appropriate remedies are: (1) Excavation and Off-Site Treatment/Disposal to
address the LNAPL source areas for OU1; and (2) Alternative 2 – Excavation of Soil in Areas B,
and C; Vegetated Soil Cover in Areas A, B, and C; Institutional Controls; and Excavation of
Sediments for OU2.

The Remedies best satisfy the requirements of Section 121 of CERCLA and the NCP's nine
evaluation criteria for remedial alternatives at 40 CFR §300.430 (e) (9). Below is a summary of
the major components of the Remedies.


OU1 Remedy

The selected remedy for OU1 is Excavation and Off-Site Treatment/Off-Site Disposal. EPA
anticipates that this portion of the remedy will be implemented in conjunction with the OU2
remedy. The major components of the OU1 remedy include:



                                                32

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   •   Excavation and off-site disposal of LNAPL source areas;
   •   Backfilling of excavated areas with I-280 ROW berm soil containing non-hazardous soil,
       and additional clean fill to grade; and
   •   Supplementing backfill with clean fill as needed.


OU2 Remedy

The selected remedy for OU2 is Alternative 2 – Excavation of Soil in Areas B, and C; Vegetated
Soil Cover in Areas A, B, and C; Institutional Controls; and Excavation of Sediments. The major
components of this alternative include:

   •   Excavation of two feet of surface soil from Area B and C, and wetland areas located in
       Area A;
   •   Distribution of excavated soils not requiring off-site disposal from Areas B and C across
       Area A for regrading;
   •   Disposal of excavated sediments at an appropriate off-site facility;
   •   Installation of a two-foot vegetated clean soil cover as an engineering control;
   •   Wetland restoration; and
   •   Implementation of a deed notice as an institutional control.

A two-foot soil cover will be constructed as the primary measure to prevent exposure to
contaminants in the underlying soil. In Areas B and C, up to two feet of surface soil will be
excavated before placing a cover to maintain the current drainage patterns. For cost-estimation
purposes, EPA has assumed that approximately 500 cubic yards of soil contaminated with dioxin
greater than 7,300 ppt will be disposed at a Subtitle C facility. In addition, EPA has estimated
that approximately 440 cubic yards of TSCA/RCRA contaminated soil will be disposed off Site
at an appropriate disposal facility (i.e., RCRA Subtitle C or TSCA disposal facility).

Based on groundwater data to date, EPA does not believe that soil remaining on site will
contribute to groundwater contamination. To confirm this, Synthetic Precipitation Leaching
Procedure (SPLP), or a comparable test, will be performed during the design phase. For soils that
fail SPLP, or a comparable test, additional actions will be taken to prevent the migration of
contaminants to groundwater. Excavated soils not requiring off-site disposal from Areas B and C
will be placed within Area A, and graded to facilitate cover placement. The wetland areas within
Area A will also be excavated to a depth of two feet, to accommodate the soil cover, and be
restored, but no other locations within Area A will be excavated.

Sediment in the drainage ditch along I-280 will be excavated to an approximate depth of 18
inches, and 18 inches of stone bedding will be added.

The selected remedies will reduce the risk within a reasonable time frame, and at a lower cost
than other alternatives. The selected remedies will meet chemical-specific ARARs and can be
designed to meet action- and location-specific ARARs. The selected remedies pose the lowest
potential risks to on-site workers and the community because they would have the shortest
construction duration, and the fewest impacts to traffic.


                                               33

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The selected remedies are technically feasible, and are administratively feasible, and materials
and services are readily available for their implementation. The potential for additional risks to
the environment are minimal, and RAOs are expected to be met within one year.

The selected remedies would achieve remediation goals that are protective for non-residential
use, but would not achieve levels that would allow for unrestricted use and therefore,
institutional controls, such as a deed notice would be required. Five-year reviews will be
conducted since contamination remains above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted
exposure.

Consistent with EPA Region 2’s Clean and Green policy, EPA will evaluate the use of
sustainable technologies and practices with respect to implementation of the selected remedies.


STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

As previously noted, CERCLA Section 121(b)(1) mandates that a remedial action must be
protective of human health and the environment, cost-effective, and utilize permanent solutions
and alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery technologies to the maximum extent
practicable. CERCLA Section 121(b)(1) also establishes a preference for remedial actions that
employ treatment to permanently and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity, or mobility of the
hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants at a site. CERCLA Section 121(d) further
specifies that a remedial action must attain a degree of cleanup that satisfies ARARs under
federal and state laws, unless a waiver can be justified pursuant to CERCLA Section 121(d)(4).
For the reasons discussed below, EPA has determined that the selected remedies meet the
requirements of CERCLA Section 121.


Protection of Human Health and the Environment

The selected remedies will adequately protect human health and the environment through the
removal of the LNAPL source material. The selected remedies will remove contaminated soils
and sediment that will result in the reduction of exposure levels through direct contact.
Implementation of the selected remedies will not pose unacceptable short-term risks or adverse
cross-media impacts.


Compliance with ARARs

The selected remedies will comply with all ARARs. A comprehensive ARAR discussion is
included in the FS, and a listing of ARARs is included in Table 8 of this ROD.

Location-specific ARARs would apply to wetlands protection due to excavation activities
causing the disruption of an existing wetland. When work is required within a wetland,
regulations generally favor actions that minimize ecosystem disturbance, and then expect
restoration efforts to attain similar, or where possible, improved ecosystem conditions post



                                                 34

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

action. Minimization of disturbance is generally preferred, because post-action wetlands
restoration can have limited effectiveness, and it can take many years for the pre-action
ecosystem conditions to reestablish themselves naturally. Federal Floodplain Protection and New
Jersey’s Floodplain/Flood Hazard Area Protection would also require no net loss of flood water
storage capacity, an essential wetland function.

The ARARs have been determined to be potentially applicable to the selected remedies include:

Chemical Specific ARARs

State
    • New Jersey Non-Residential Direct Contact Soil Remediation Standards NJAC 7:26D


Action Specific ARARs

Federal
   • RCRA and TSCA regulations governing disposal of hazardous waste
   • Land Disposal Restrictions (40 CFR 268)
   • Hazardous Materials Transportation Regulations (40 CFR 107,171,172,177 to 179)

State
    • New Jersey Technical Requirements for Site Remediation N.J.A.C. 7:26E
    • Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Certification, N.J.A.C. 2:90
    • Transportation of Hazardous Materials (N.J.A.C. 7:14A)

Location Specific ARARs

Federal
   • Wetlands Protection Executive Order 11990
   • Coastal Zone Management Act 16 USC 1451
   • Section 404 and Executive Order 11990

State
    • New Jersey Rules on Coastal Resources and Development (7:7E-1.1 et seq.)
    • Hackensack Meadowlands Development Commission, N.J.S.A. 13:17-1 et seq.


Cost-Effectiveness

In EPA’s judgment, the selected remedies are cost-effective and represent reasonable value for
the money to be spent. Overall effectiveness was evaluated by assessing three of the five
balancing criteria in combination (long-term effectiveness and permanence; reduction in toxicity,
mobility and volume through treatment; and short-term effectiveness). Overall effectiveness was
then compared to costs to determine cost-effectiveness. The overall effectiveness of the selected
remedies has been determined to be proportional to the costs, and the selected remedies,


                                               35

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

therefore, represent reasonable value for the money to be spent. The estimated present net worth
cost of the selected remedies is $13,733,000 for OU1 and $8,461,000 for OU2.


Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment Technologies to the
Maximum Extent Practicable

EPA has determined that the selected remedies represent the maximum extent to which
permanent solutions and treatment technologies can be utilized in a practicable manner. Of those
alternatives that are protective of human health and the environment and comply with ARARs
(or provide a basis for invoking an ARAR waiver), EPA has determined that the selected
remedies provide the best balance of trade-offs in terms of the five balancing criteria,
while also considering the statutory preference for treatment as a principal element, the bias
against off-site disposal without treatment, and State/support agency and community acceptance.
The selected remedies are implementable since they employ standard technologies that are
readily available.


Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element

The selected remedies do not meet the statutory preference for the use of remedies that employ
treatment that reduces toxicity, mobility, or volume, as a principal element to address the
principal threats at the Site. The treatment component of the Original Remedy was proven to be
ineffective. The stabilization treatment in Alternative 4 results in an unacceptable increase in
volume and also increases cost by two million dollars.


Five-Year Review Requirements

The Remedies will result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants remaining above
levels that do not allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure; therefore, a five-year review
will be required for both OU1 and OU2.


DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES

The Proposed Plan for the OU1 ROD Amendment and OU2 ROD for the Site was released for
public comment on June 19, 2017. The comment period closed on July 19, 2017. All verbal and
written comments submitted during the public comment period were reviewed by EPA. Upon
review of the comments, it was determined that no significant changes to the Remedies, as they
were originally identified in the Proposed Plan, were necessary.




                                                36

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX I - FIGURES

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX II - TABLES

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               TABLE 1
                                                 Summary of Chemicals of Concern and
                                              Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
Medium:                 Surface Soil
Exposure Medium:        Surface Soil

                                                   Concentration
                                                                                                                Exposure Point
                           Chemical of               Detected             Concentration       Frequency of                           EPC
  Exposure Point                                                                                                Concentration                    Statistical Measure
                            Concern                                          Units             Detection                             Units
                                                                                                                   (EPC)
                                                  Min         Max

                                                                                                                                               95% Chebyshev (Mean,
Within Property         Chromium                  12          7700            mg/kg               52/52               2100          mg/kg
                                                                                                                                                    Sd) UCL

                                                                                                                                                95% Adjusted Gamms
Within Property         Dioxin TEQ              0.000038     0.0019           mg/kg               19/19              0.00057        mg/kg
                                                                                                                                                       UCL

Within Property         PCB-Aroclor 1254           4            8             mg/kg                2/52                 8           mg/kg             Maximum

Within Property         Lead                      31          28000           mg/kg               51/51               2200          mg/kg               Mean

Berm Soil               Chromium                  8.2          310            mg/kg               28/28                160          mg/kg       95% Student’s-t UCL

Berm Soil               Lead                      8.9         7700            mg/kg               28/28               1300          mg/kg               Mean

Outside Property        Aldrin                   0.0033        75             mg/kg                3/17                75           mg/kg             Maximum

                                                                                                                                               99% Chebyshev (Mean,
Outside Property        Dioxin TEQ              0.000013     0.0082           mg/kg               16/16              0.0066         mg/kg
                                                                                                                                                    Sd) UCL

Outside Property        PCB-Aroclor 1242          0.14        1800            mg/kg                6/18               1200          mg/kg         99% KM(t) UCL

Outside Property        Lead                      130         7200            mg/kg               18/18               1200          mg/kg               Mean
Medium:                 Subsurface Soil
Exposure Medium:        Subsurface Soil
                                                                                                                                                95% KM (Chebyshev)
Within Property         Benzo[a]pyrene           0.022         35             mg/kg               82/96                12           mg/kg
                                                                                                                                                      UCL

Within Property         Chromium                  18          22000           mg/kg              101/101              4000          mg/kg            95% H-UCL

Within Property         Thallium                  0.65         46             mg/kg               78/101               5.1          mg/kg       95% KM (BCA) UCL

Outside Property        Dioxin TEQ              0.000025      0.011           mg/kg                9/9                0.011         mg/kg             Maximum

Outside Property        Lead                       2          1300            mg/kg               40/40               1100          mg/kg               Mean
Medium:                 Surface water
Exposure Medium:        Surface water
Drainage
                        Beryllium                 990          990              ug/l               1/10                920           ug/l             Maximum
Ditch/Frank’s Creek

Drainage
                        Thallium                  160          160              ug/l               1/10                160           ug/l             Maximum
Ditch/Frank’s Creek
Medium:                 Sediment
Exposure Medium:        Sediment
Drainage
                        Lead                      67          84000           mg/kg               37/37               3600          mg/kg               Mean
Ditch/Frank’s Creek

                                       Summary of Chemicals of Concern and Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
 This table presents the chemicals of concern (COCs) and exposure point concentrations (EPCs) for each of the COCs in surface soil, subsurface soil, surface water and
sediment, within the property boundaries, outside of the property boundaries, berms, drainage ditches and Frank’s Creek. The table includes the range of concentrations
detected for each COC, as well as the frequency of detection (i.e., the number of times the chemical was detected in the samples collected at the Site), the EPC and how
                                                                             it was derived.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 TABLE 2
                                    SELECTION OF EXPOSURE PATHWAYS
                                       Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site

   Scenario                                                                                         Receptor   Exposure     Type of
                     Medium         Exposure Medium       Exposure Point      Receptor Population
  Timeframe                                                                                           Age       Route       Analysis
                                                                                 Maintenance                   Ingestion     Quant
                                                                                   Worker            Adult      Dermal       Quant
                                                        Surface Soil Within                                    Ingestion     Quant
                                                                                                     Adult
                                                        Property Boundary                                       Dermal       Quant
                                                                                  Trespasser
                                                                                                               Ingestion     Quant
                                      Surface Soil                                                   Child
                                                                                                                Dermal       Quant
                                                                                                               Ingestion     Quant
                                                       Surface Soil Outside Maintenance Worker
                                                                                                     Adult
                   Surface Soil                         Property Boundary (Highway Worker)                      Dermal       Quant
                                                                                 Maintenance
                                                                                                     Adult     Inhalation    Quant
                                                         Within Property           Worker
                                                           Boundary                                  Adult     Inhalation    Quant
                                                                                  Trespasser
                                           Air                                                       Child     Inhalation    Quant
                                                         Outside Property     Maintenance Worker
                                                            Boundary          (Highway Worker)
                                                                                                     Adult     Inhalation    Quant
                                                                                                                Ingestion    Quant
                                                                              Maintenance Worker
                                                                                                     Adult
                                                                              (Highway Worker)
                                                                                                                Dermal       Quant
                                       Total Soil           Berm Soil                                          Ingestion     Quant
Current/ Future                                                                                      Adult
                                                                                                                Dermal       Quant
                                                                                  Trespasser
                                                                                                               Ingestion     Quant
                       Soil                                                                          Child
                                                                                                                Dermal       Quant
                                                                              Maintenance Worker     Adult     Inhalation    Quant
                                                                              (Highway Worker)       Adult     Inhalation    Quant
                                          Air                 Berm
                                                                                  Trespasser         Child     Inhalation    Quant

                                                                                 Maintenance                   Ingestion     Quant
                                                                                                     Adult
                                                                                   Worker                       Dermal       Quant
                                                       Drainage Ditches and                                     Ingestion    Quant
                    Sediment           Sediment                                                      Adult
                                                          Frank's Creek                                          Dermal      Quant
                                                                                  Trespasser
                                                                                                                Ingestion    Quant
                                                                                                     Child
                                                                                                                 Dermal      Quant
                                                                                 Maintenance                    Ingestion    Quant
                                                                                                     Adult
                                                                                   Worker                        Dermal      Quant
                                                       Drainage Ditches and                                     Ingestion    Quant
                  Surface Water      Surface Water                                                   Adult
                                                          Frank's Creek                                          Dermal      Quant
                                                                                  Trespasser
                                                                                                     Child      Ingestion    Quant
                                                                                                                 Dermal      Quant
                                                                                                                Ingestion    Quant
                                                                               Industrial Worker     Adult
                                                       Surface Soil Within                                       Dermal      Quant
                                      Surface Soil
                                                       Property Boundary         Construction                   Ingestion    Quant
                                                                                                     Adult
                   Surface Soil                                                     Worker                       Dermal      Quant
    Future
                                                                               Industrial Worker     Adult     Inhalation    Quant
                                                         Within Property
                                          Air                                    Construction
                                                           Boundary                                  Adult     Inhalation    Quant
                                                                                    Worker
                  Subsurface Soil                        Subsurface Soil         Maintenance                   Ingestion     Quant
                                     Subsurface Soil                                                 Adult
                                                         Within Property            Worker                      Dermal       Quant

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   Scenario                                                                                          Receptor   Exposure     Type of
                     Medium           Exposure Medium        Exposure Point    Receptor Population
  Timeframe                                                                                            Age       Route       Analysis
                                                               Boundary                                         Ingestion     Quant
                                                                                                      Adult
                                                                                                                 Dermal       Quant
                                                                                   Trespasser
                                                                                                                Ingestion     Quant
                                                                                                      Child
                                                                                                                 Dermal       Quant
                                                                                                                Ingestion     Quant
                                                                                Industrial Worker     Adult
                                                                                                                 Dermal       Quant
                                                                                  Construction                  Ingestion     Quant
                                                                                                      Adult
                                                                                    Worker                       Dermal       Quant
                                                            Subsurface Soil                                     Ingestion     Quant
                                                                               Maintenance Worker
                                                            Outside Property                          Adult
                                                                               (Highway Worker)                  Dermal       Quant
                                                               Boundary
                                                                                  Maintenance
                                                                                                      Adult     Inhalation    Quant
                                                                                    Worker
                                                                                                      Adult     Inhalation    Quant
                                                            Within Property        Trespasser
                                                                                                      Child     Inhalation    Quant
                                                              Boundary
                                             Air                                Industrial Worker     Adult     Inhalation    Quant
                                                                                  Construction
                                                                                                      Adult     Ingestion     Quant
                                                                                    Worker
                                                            Outside Property   Maintenance Worker
                                                                                                      Adult     Inhalation    Quant
                                                               Boundary        (Highway Worker)
                                                                                                                Ingestion     Quant
                                                                                Industrial Worker     Adult
                                                                                                                 Dermal       Quant
                                                                                  Construction                  Ingestion     Quant
                                                                                                      Adult
                                          Total Soil           Berm Soil            Worker                       Dermal       Quant
                                                                                                                Ingestion     Quant
                                                                                  Maintenance
                                                                                                      Adult
                                                                                    Worker
                                                                                                                 Dermal       Quant
                       Soil
                                                                                Industrial Worker     Adult     Inhalation    Quant
                                                                                  Construction
                                             Air                 Berm                                 Adult     Ingestion     Quant
                                                                                    Worker
                                                                                  Maintenance
                                                                                                      Adult     Inhalation    Quant
                                                                                    Worker
Quant: will be quantitatively evaluated
Qual: will be qualitatively evaluated
Child = 0-6 years
None: not considered to be a significant exposure pathway; therefore, not evaluated

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                          TABLE 3

                                                  Non-Cancer Toxicity Data Summary
Pathway: Oral/Dermal
                                                                                                                   Combined
                                     Oral                    % Absorp.      Adjusted       Adj.        Primary
    Chemical of        Chronic/                 Oral RfD                                                           Uncertainty     Sources of RfD:     Dates of
                                      RfD                    Efficiency        RfD        Dermal        Target
     Concern          Subchronic                 Units                                                             /Modifying       Target Organ        RfD:
                                     Value                   (Dermal)       ( Dermal)    RfD Units      Organ
                                                                                                                    Factors

Beryllium               Chronic      2E-03     mg/kg-day         0.7       1.4E-05       mg/kg-day        GI           300               IRIS          04/02/15

Chromium (VI)           Chronic      3E-03     mg/kg-day         2.5         7.5E-05     mg/kg-day      Blood          300               IRIS          04/02/15

                                                                                                       Sperm,
Dioxin TEQ
                        Chronic      7E-10     mg/kg-day         100          7E-10      mg/kg-day     Develop          30               IRIS          04/02/15
(2,3,7,8-TCDD)                                                                                         mental

                                                                                                        Ocular,
PCB-Aroclor 1254        Chronic      2E-05     mg/kg-day         100          2E-05      mg/kg-day       nails,        300               IRIS          04/02/15
                                                                                                       immune

Thallium                Chronic      1E-05     mg/kg-day         100          1E-05      mg/kg-day       Hair          3000            PPRTV           10/25/12

Key

GI – Gastrointestinal System
IRIS: Integrated Risk Information System, U.S. EPA
PPRTV: Provisional Peer Review Toxicity Value

                                                           Summary of Toxicity Assessment
This table provides non-carcinogenic risk information which is relevant to the contaminants of concern in surface soil, subsurface soil, sediment, and surface
water exposure within and outside of the property boundary and in the berms. When available, the chronic toxicity data have been used to develop oral
reference doses (RfDs) and inhalation reference doses (RfDi).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                TABLE 4

                                              Cancer Toxicity Data Summary
Pathway: Oral/Dermal

                                                                                                         Weight of
                                  Oral                            Adjusted
                                                                                                         Evidence/
                                 Cancer                         Cancer Slope        Slope Factor                                         Date
   Chemical of Concern                            Units                                                   Cancer          Source
                                  Slope                            Factor              Units
                                                                                                         Guideline
                                 Factor                         (for Dermal)
                                                                                                        Description

Aldrin                           1.7E+01      (mg/kg/day)-1        1.7E+01          (mg/kg/day)-1            B2            IRIS        04/02/15

Benzo[a]pyrene                   7.3E+00      (mg/kg/day)-1        7.3E+00          (mg/kg/day)-1            B2            IRIS        04/02/15

Chromium VI                       5E-01       (mg/kg/day)-1         2E+01           (mg/kg/day)-1            D              NJ         04/08/09

Dioxin TEQ
                                 1.3E+05      (mg/kg/day)-1        1.3E+05          (mg/kg/day)-1            B2           CalEPA       04/02/15
(2,3,7,8-TCDD)

PCB-Aroclor 1242                  2E+00       (mg/kg/day)-1         2E+00           (mg/kg/day)-1            B2            IRIS        04/02/15

Pathway: Inhalation
                                                                                                         Weight of
                                                                  Inhalation                             Evidence/
                                   Unit                                             Slope Factor                                         Date
   Chemical of Concern                            Units          Slope Factor                             Cancer          Source
                                   Risk                                                Units
                                                                                                         Guideline
                                                                                                        Description

Chromium VI                      8.4E-02        1(ug/m3)             -----               -----               A             IRIS        04/02/15

Key:                                          EPA Weight of Evidence:
IRIS: Integrated Risk Information System. U.S. EPA
B2: Probable Human Carcinogen
D: Not Classifiable as to Human Carcinogenicity
NJ: New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
CalEPA: California Environmental Protection Agency
----- No information available

                                                    Summary of Toxicity Assessment

This table provides carcinogenic risk information which is relevant to the contaminants of concern in surface soil, subsurface soil, surface
water and sediment. Toxicity data are provided for both the oral and inhalation routes of exposure.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                      TABLE 5
                                        Risk Characterization Summary - Noncarcinogens
Scenario Timeframe:              Current/Future
Receptor Population:             Maintenance Worker
Receptor Age:                    Adult
                                                                                                           Non-Carcinogenic Risk
                                                                                    Primary
                   Exposure              Exposure
  Medium                                                      Chemical of Concern    Target                                        Exposure
                   Medium                 Point
                                                                                     Organ     Ingestion   Dermal    Inhalation     Routes
                                                                                                                                    Total

Surface water    Surface water           Drainage        Beryllium                    GI         0.04        2          -----         2
                                        ditches and
                                       Frank’s Creek     Thallium                     Hair        1          0.4        -----         1

                                                                                                             Hazard Index Total=      3
Scenario Timeframe:              Current/Future
Receptor Population:             Trespasser
Receptor Age:                    Child (0-6 years)
                                                                                                           Non-Carcinogenic Risk
                                                                                    Primary
                   Exposure              Exposure
  Medium                                                      Chemical of Concern    Target                                        Exposure
                   Medium                 Point
                                                                                     Organ     Ingestion   Dermal    Inhalation     Routes
                                                                                                                                    Total

Surface soil      Surface soil          Surface soil     Dioxin TEQ                  Sperm,
                                       within Property                              Developm      2          0.1        -----         2
                                          Boundary                                    ental

                                                         PCB-Aroclor 1254            Ocular,
                                                                                     Nails,       0.8        0.3        -----         1
                                                                                    Immune

                                                                                                             Hazard Index Total=      3
Scenario Timeframe:              Current/Future
Receptor Population:             Trespasser
Receptor Age:                    Child (0-6 years)
                                                                                                           Non-Carcinogenic Risk
                                                                                    Primary
                   Exposure              Exposure
  Medium                                                      Chemical of Concern    Target                                        Exposure
                   Medium                 Point
                                                                                     Organ     Ingestion   Dermal    Inhalation     Routes
                                                                                                                                    Total

                                         Drainage
Surface water    Surface water          ditches and      Thallium                     Hair        2          0.2        -----         2
                                       Frank’s Creek

                                                                                                             Hazard Index Total=      2
Scenario Timeframe:              Future
Receptor Population:             Maintenance Worker (Highway Worker)
Receptor Age:                    Adult
                                                                                                           Non-Carcinogenic Risk
                                                                                    Primary
                   Exposure              Exposure
  Medium                                                      Chemical of Concern    Target                                        Exposure
                   Medium                 Point
                                                                                     Organ     Ingestion   Dermal    Inhalation     Routes
                                                                                                                                    Total

                                        Surface soil
                                                                                     Sperm,
                                         outside of
Surface soil      Surface soil                           Dioxin TEQ                 Developm      2          0.2        -----         2
                                          Property
                                                                                       ent
                                         Boundary

                                                                                                             Hazard Index Total=      2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Scenario Timeframe:              Future
Receptor Population:             Industrial Worker
Receptor Age:                    Adult
                                                                                                           Non-Carcinogenic Risk
                                                                                     Primary
                     Exposure            Exposure
  Medium                                                      Chemical of Concern     Target                                       Exposure
                     Medium               Point
                                                                                      Organ    Ingestion   Dermal    Inhalation     Routes
                                                                                                                                    Total

Surface and         Surface and         Surface and      Chromium (surface)           Blood       0.6        1          -----         2
Subsurface         subsurface soil     subsurface soil
soil                                   within Property   Chromium (subsurface)
                                          Boundary                                    Blood          1       2          -----         3

                                                                                                             Hazard Index Total=      5
Scenario Timeframe:              Future
Receptor Population:             Construction Worker
Receptor Age:                    Adult
                                                                                                           Non-Carcinogenic Risk
                                                                                     Primary
                     Exposure            Exposure
  Medium                                                      Chemical of Concern     Target                                       Exposure
                     Medium               Point
                                                                                      Organ    Ingestion   Dermal    Inhalation     Routes
                                                                                                                                    Total

Surface and         Surface and         Surface and      Chromium (surface)           Blood          1       0.6        -----         2
subsurface         subsurface soil     subsurface soil
soil                                   within Property   Chromium (subsurface)
                                          Boundary                                    Blood          2       1          -----         3

                                                                                                             Hazard Index Total=      5
Scenario Timeframe:              Future
Receptor Population:             Trespasser
Receptor Age:                    Child (0-6 years)
                                                                                                           Non-Carcinogenic Risk
                                                                                     Primary
                     Exposure            Exposure
  Medium                                                      Chemical of Concern     Target                                       Exposure
                     Medium               Point
                                                                                      Organ    Ingestion   Dermal    Inhalation     Routes
                                                                                                                                    Total

                                       Subsurface soil   Chromium                     Blood          3       2          -----         5
Subsurface
                   Subsurface soil     within Property
soil
                                          Boundary       Thallium                     Hair           1       0.2        -----         1

                                                                                                             Hazard Index Total=      6
Scenario Timeframe:              Future
Receptor Population:             Maintenance Worker (Highway Worker)
Receptor Age:                    Adult
                                                                                                           Non-Carcinogenic Risk
                                                                                     Primary
                     Exposure            Exposure
  Medium                                                      Chemical of Concern     Target                                       Exposure
                     Medium               Point
                                                                                      Organ    Ingestion   Dermal    Inhalation     Routes
                                                                                                                                    Total

                                       Subsurface soil
                                                                                     Sperm,
Subsurface                               outside of
                   Subsurface soil                       Dioxin TEQ                 Developm         3      0.41        -----         3
soil                                      Property
                                                                                      ental
                                         Boundary

                                                                                                             Hazard Index Total=      3
GI – Gastrointestinal system

                                                Summary of Risk Characterization - Non-Carcinogens

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                  TABLE 6
                                    Risk Characterization Summary - Carcinogens
Scenario Timeframe:              Current/Future
Receptor Population:             Maintenance Worker
Receptor Age:                    Adult
   Medium            Exposure          Exposure              Chemical of Concern                                  Carcinogenic Risk
                     Medium             Point
                                                                                            Ingestion          Dermal           Inhalation       Exposure
                                                                                                                                                Routes Total

Surface soil      Surface soil        Surface soil    Chromium                                 7E-05            1E-04              -----           2E-04
                                      within
                                      Property
                                      Boundary

                                                                                                                           Total Risk =            2E-04

Scenario Timeframe:              Current/Future
Receptor Population:             Trespasser
Receptor Age:       Adult

   Medium          Exposure        Exposure Point       Chemical of Concern                                    Carcinogenic Risk
                   Medium
                                                                                   Ingestion       Dermal          Inhalation              Exposure Routes
                                                                                                                                                Total

Surface soil      Surface soil     Surface soil       Chromium                      5E-05              9E-05            -----                  1E-04
                                   within Property
                                   Boundary

                                                                                                                           Total Risk =            1E-04

Scenario Timeframe:              Current/Future
Receptor Population:             Trespasser
Receptor Age:       Child

   Medium            Exposure           Exposure Point          Chemical of Concern                               Carcinogenic Risk
                     Medium
                                                                                            Ingestion          Dermal           Inhalation       Exposure
                                                                                                                                                Routes Total

Surface soil      Surface soil        Surface soil within      Chromium                        9E-04            9E-04              -----           2E-03
                                      Property Boundary

                                                                                                                           Total Risk =            2E-03

Scenario Timeframe:            Current/Future
Receptor Population:           Trespasser
Receptor Age:       Child (0-6 years)

   Medium            Exposure           Exposure Point          Chemical of Concern                               Carcinogenic Risk
                     Medium
                                                                                            Ingestion          Dermal           Inhalation       Exposure
                                                                                                                                                Routes Total

Soil              Total Soil          Berm soil                Chromium                        7E-05            7E-05              -----           1E-04

                                                                                                                           Total Risk =            1E-04

Scenario Timeframe:              Current/Future
Receptor Population:             Maintenance Worker (Highway Worker)
Receptor Age:       Adult

   Medium            Exposure           Exposure Point          Chemical of Concern                               Carcinogenic Risk
                     Medium
                                                                                            Ingestion          Dermal           Inhalation       Exposure
                                                                                                                                                Routes Total

Surface soil      Surface soil        Surface soil outside     Aldrin                          8E-05            3E-5               -----           1E-04
                                      of Property Boundary
                                                               PCB-Aroclor 1242                1E-04            9E-05              -----           2E-04

                                                                                                                           Total Risk =            3E-04

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Scenario Timeframe:              Future
Receptor Population:             Industrial Worker
Receptor Age:       Adult

   Medium            Exposure            Exposure Point        Chemical of Concern                  Carcinogenic Risk
                     Medium
                                                                                      Ingestion   Dermal    Inhalation     Exposure
                                                                                                                          Routes Total

Surface soil      Surface soil        Surface soil within      Chromium                3E-04      5E-04        -----         9E-04
                                      property boundary

                                                                                                           Total Risk =      9E-04

Scenario Timeframe:              Future
Receptor Population:             Industrial Worker
Receptor Age:       Adult

   Medium            Exposure            Exposure Point         Chemical of Concern                 Carcinogenic Risk
                     Medium
                                                                                      Ingestion   Dermal    Inhalation     Exposure
                                                                                                                          Routes Total

Subsurface soil   Subsurface soil     Subsurface soil within   Chromium                6E-04      1E-03        -----         2E-03
                                      Property Boundary

                                                                                                           Total Risk =      2E-03

Scenario Timeframe:              Future
Receptor Population:             Construction Worker
Receptor Age:       Adult

   Medium            Exposure            Exposure Point        Chemical of Concern                  Carcinogenic Risk
                     Medium
                                                                                      Ingestion   Dermal    Inhalation     Exposure
                                                                                                                          Routes Total

Subsurface soil   Subsurface soil     Subsurface soil and      Chromium                4E-05      4E-05       1E-04          2E-04
and air           and air emission    air emissions within
emissions                             Property Boundary

                                                                                                           Total Risk =      2E-04

Scenario Timeframe:              Future
Receptor Population:             Maintenance Worker
Receptor Age:       Adult

   Medium            Exposure            Exposure Point        Chemical of Concern                  Carcinogenic Risk
                     Medium
                                                                                      Ingestion   Dermal    Inhalation     Exposure
                                                                                                                          Routes Total

Subsurface soil   Subsurface soil     Subsurface soil          Chromium                1E-04      2E-04        -----         3E-04
                                      within Property
                                      Boundary

                                                                                                           Total Risk =      3E-04

Scenario Timeframe:              Future
Receptor Population:             Trespasser
Receptor Age:       Adult

   Medium            Exposure            Exposure Point         Chemical of Concern                 Carcinogenic Risk
                     Medium

                                                                                      Ingestion   Dermal    Inhalation     Exposure
                                                                                                                          Routes Total

Subsurface soil   Subsurface soil     Subsurface soil within   Chromium                1E-04      2E-04        -----         3E-04
                                      Property Boundary

                                                                                                           Total Risk =      3E-04

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Scenario Timeframe:            Future
Receptor Population:           Trespasser
Receptor Age:       Child (0-6 years)

   Medium              Exposure            Exposure Point           Chemical of Concern                            Carcinogenic Risk
                       Medium
                                                                                                Ingestion      Dermal       Inhalation       Exposure
                                                                                                                                            Routes Total

Subsurface soil     Subsurface soil     Subsurface soil within     Chromium                       2E-03         2E-03           -----           4E-03
                                        Property Boundary
                                                                   Benzo[a]pyrene                 8E-05         2E-05           -----           1E-04

                                                                                                                           Total Risk =         4E-03

Scenario Timeframe:               Future
Receptor Population:              Maintenance Worker (Highway Worker)
Receptor Age:       Adult

   Medium              Exposure            Exposure Point           Chemical of Concern                            Carcinogenic Risk
                       Medium
                                                                                                Ingestion      Dermal       Inhalation       Exposure
                                                                                                                                            Routes Total

Subsurface soil     Subsurface soil     Subsurface soil outside    Dioxin TEQ                     9E-05         1E-05           -----           1E-04
                                        of Property Boundary

                                                                                                                           Total Risk =         1E-04

                                               Summary of Risk Characterization - Carcinogens

The table presents cancer risks for surface soil, subsurface soil, sediment, and surface water exposure within and outside of the property boundary and
in the berms for all routes of exposure. As stated in the National Contingency Plan, the point of departure is 10-6 and the acceptable risk range for site-
related exposure is 10-6 to 10-4.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

TABLE 7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 8-1. Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements – Chemical Specific
Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site
                               Criteria/          Requirement/
Act/Authority     Medium        Issues               Citation             Synopsis of Requirement    Status
New Jersey Soil     Soil     New Jersey     NJAC 7:26D, Appendix 1,       Establishes minimum        ARAR
Cleanup                      Soil Quality   and Table 1B Non-             non-residential direct
Standards                                   Residential Direct Contact    contact soil remediation
                                            Soil Remediation Standards.   levels.
New Jersey Soil     Soil     New Jersey     Impact to Ground Water        Provides numerical          TBC
Cleanup                      Soil Quality   Guidance (2009) pursuant      guidance for impact to
Guidance                                    to NJSA 58:10B-12a, Impact    groundwater soil
                                            to Groundwater Soil           remediation levels.
                                            Screening Levels.
NJDEP             Sediment   New Jersey     New Jersey Ecological         Establishes screening       TBC
                             Sediment       Screening Criteria (March     criteria to evaluate
                             Quality        10, 2009).                    contaminant
                                                                          concentrations in
                                                                          sediment.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 8-2. Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements – Action Specific
Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site
                                               Requirement/
Act/Authority     Media      Criteria/Issues      Citation         Synopsis of Requirement                    Status
Toxic              Soil     Soil Containing    40 CFR          TSCA establishes requirements                   ARAR
Substances                  PCBs               761.61(c)       and thresholds for management
Control Act                                                    of PCB remediation waste (i.e.,
                                                               soil which contains >50 ppm
                                                               PCBs). 40 CFR 761.61(c) allows
                                                               for risk-based management, as
                                                               approved by the TSCA
                                                               coordinator.
New Jersey         Soil     Generation and     NJAC 7:26-1     Defines beneficial reuse                        ARAR
Solid Waste                 Management of      Solid Waste –   requirements and the exemption
Regulations                 Solid Wastes       Generator       from being solid waste. Soils that
                                               Standards       have been decontaminated to
                                                               the satisfaction of, or in a
                                                               manner acceptable to NJDEP are
                                                               categorically approved as long as
                                                               the reuse of the material, if
                                                               released, will not cause pollution
                                                               to surface or ground water, or
                                                               pose a substantial or material
                                                               threat.
Resource        Hazardous   General Waste      40 CFR 260      Establishes procedures and           ARAR. Establishes general
Conservation     Waste      Management                         criteria for modification or         requirements for hazardous
and Recovery                Practices                          revocation of any provision in 40    waste management.
Act                                                            CFR Part 260-265.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 8-2. Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements – Action Specific
Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site
                                               Requirement/
Act/Authority     Media      Criteria/Issues      Citation        Synopsis of Requirement                     Status
Resource        Hazardous   Identification     40 CFR 261     Identifies solid wastes which are   Applicable for the disposal of
Conservation     Waste      and Listing of                    subject to regulation as            hazardous solid wastes
and Recovery                Hazardous                         hazardous wastes.                   that meet the hazardous
Act                         Waste                                                                 waste characteristic
                                                                                                  thresholds.
Resource        Hazardous   Standards          40 CFR 262     Establishes requirements (e.g.,     Applicable for waste that is
Conservation     Waste      Applicable to                     EPA ID numbers and manifests)       characterized as hazardous.
and Recovery                Generators of                     for generators of hazardous
Act                         Hazardous                         waste.
                            Waste
Resource        Hazardous   Standards          40 CFR 263     Establishes standards which         Applicable for transport of
Conservation     Waste      Applicable to                     apply to persons transporting       waste that is characterized as
and Recovery                Transporters of                   manifested hazardous waste          hazardous.
Act                         Hazardous                         within the United States.
                            Waste
Resource        Hazardous   Standards          40 CFR 264     Establishes the minimum             Applicable for generation
Conservation     Waste      Applicable to                     national standards which define     and storage of hazardous
and Recovery                Owners and                        acceptable management of            waste
Act                         Operators of                      hazardous waste.
                            Treatment,
                            Storage and
                            Disposal
                            Facilities

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 8-2. Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements – Action Specific
Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site
                                               Requirement/
Act/Authority     Media      Criteria/Issues      Citation        Synopsis of Requirement                        Status
Resource        Hazardous   Interim            40 CFR 265     Establishes minimum national           Relevant and appropriate
Conservation     Waste      Standards                         standards that define the periods      since remedies should be
and Recovery                for Owners and                    of interim status and until            consistent with the more
Act                         Operators of                      certification of final closure or if   stringent 40 CFR 264
                            Hazardous                         the facility is subject to post-       standards, as these represent
                            Waste                             closure requirements, until post-      the ultimate RCRA
                            Treatment,                        closure responsibilities are           compliance standards and
                            Storage, and                      fulfilled.                             are consistent with CERCLA's
                            Disposal                                                                 goal of long-term protection
                            Facilities                                                               of public health and
                                                                                                     environment.
Resource        Hazardous   Land Disposal      40 CFR Part    Generated waste will need              Applicable for the disposal of
Conservation     Waste      Restrictions       268            to meet LDRs for offsite disposal.     hazardous solid wastes.
and Recovery                (LDRs)
Act
Resource        Hazardous   Hazardous          40 CFR 270     Establishes provisions covering        Relevant and appropriate. A
Conservation     Waste      Waste                             basic EPA permitting                   permit is not required for on-
and Recovery                Permit Program                    requirements                           site CERCLA response
Act                                                                                                  actions. Substantive
                                                                                                     requirements are added in
                                                                                                     40 CFR 264.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 8-2. Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements – Action Specific
Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site
                                                 Requirement/
Act/Authority      Media       Criteria/Issues      Citation           Synopsis of Requirement                    Status
Federal           Hazardous   Hazardous          49 CFR 107,       Regulates transportation of        Applicable. Response action
Hazardous          Waste      Materials          171-177           hazardous materials.               will involve transportation of
Material                      Transportation                                                          hazardous materials.
Transportation                Regulations
Act
State of New      Hazardous                      N.J.A.C. 7:26C    Establishes rules for the          Provides the requirements
Jersey Statutes    Waste                         Hazardous         operation of hazardous waste       for storing and handling
and Rules                                        Waste             facilities in the state of New     hazardous waste onsite.
                                                                   Jersey.
NJDEP               Soil      Beneficial Reuse   Guidance for      Provides guidance on alternative   TBC
                              of Soil During     Beneficial Use    choices for fill that will be
                              Remediation        of Soil and       protective of human health
                                                 Non-Soil          and/or the environment.
                                                 Material in the
                                                 Remediation
                                                 of
                                                 Contaminated
                                                 Sites and
                                                 Closure of
                                                 Solid Waste
                                                 Landfills, June
                                                 2008.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 8-2. Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements – Action Specific
Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site
                                               Requirement/
Act/Authority     Media      Criteria/Issues       Citation            Synopsis of Requirement         Status
NJDEP Site         Soil     Technical          Guidance            Provides guidance on technical      ARAR
Remediation                 Guidance on        Version 1.0,        and regulatory considerations in
Program                     Capping of Sites   July 14, 2014.      selecting a type of cap, and cap
                            Undergoing                             design.
                            Remediation
NJDEP Site         Soil     Technical          NJAC 7:26E-5.4      Requires the establishment of       ARAR
Remediation                 Regulations for    Remedial            engineering and institutional
Program                     Site               Action              controls pursuant to NJAC 7:26C-
                            Remediation–       Requirements        7. Substantive requirements
                            Historic Fill      for Historic Fill   establish a level or standard of
                                               and NJAC            control, such as requiring a land
                                               7:26C-7.4, 7.7,     use or activity use restriction.
                                               and 7.8.            Mechanism of institutional
                                                                   controls may be considered
                                                                   substantive if it provides for
                                                                   enforceability; non-enforceable
                                                                   provisions would be
                                                                   administrative and are not an
                                                                   ARAR.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 8-2. Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements – Action Specific
Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site
                                               Requirement/
Act/Authority     Media      Criteria/Issues      Citation         Synopsis of Requirement                      Status
New Jersey        Soil/     Generation and     NJAC 7:26G-6    Establishes requirements for         NJAC 7:26G-6 is Applicable.
Hazardous       Sediment    Management of      Standards       generators and facilities that       Regulations associated with
Waste                       Hazardous          Applicable to   manage or treat hazardous            off-site actions are not
Regulations                 Wastes             Generators of   waste.                               ARARs; land-disposal
                                               Hazardous       The AOC Policy as set forth in the   restrictions must be fully
                                               Waste and       National Contingency Plan            complied with,
                                               NJAC 7:25G-11   applies to onsite generation and     administratively and
                                               Land Disposal   management of any hazardous          substantively for off-site land
                                               Restrictions.   soils and sediments, which is        disposal of hazardous wastes.
                                                               consolidated or treated in-situ.
                                                               Land disposal treatment
                                                               standards do not apply to
                                                               hazardous soil, if such soil is
                                                               consolidated or treated in-situ
                                                               onsite within an AOC.
Soil Erosion       Soil     Standards for      NJAC 2:90       The New Jersey Department of       Applicable
and Sediment                Soil Erosion and                   Agriculture, Hudson Essex Passaic
Control Act                 Sediment                           Soil Conservation District governs
                            Control                            all soil disturbances greater than
                                                               5,000 square feet.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 8-2. Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements – Action Specific
Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site
                                                  Requirement/
Act/Authority       Media       Criteria/Issues      Citation          Synopsis of Requirement                       Status
Federal Clean     Wastewater   General          40 CFR 403         Prohibits discharge of pollutants      Potentially applicable if
Water Act                      Pretreatment                        to a publicly owned treatment          discharge of wastewater to
                               Regulations for                     works (POTW) which cause or            POTW.
                               Existing and New                    may cause pass-through or
                               Sources of                          interference with operations of
                               Pollution                           the POTW.
Effluent          Wastewater   Discharge        33 U.S.C. 1251     Technology-based discharge             Potentially applicable if
Limitations                    requirements     Section 301        limitations for point sources of       discharge of wastewater to
                                                                   conventional, nonconventional,         POTW.
                                                                   and
                                                                   toxic pollutants.
Toxic and         Wastewater   Pretreatment       33 U.S.C. 1251   Establishes list of toxic pollutants   Potentially applicable if
Pretreatment                   standards for      Section 307      and promulgates pretreatment           discharge of wastewater to
Effluent                       discharge into                      standards for discharge into           POTW.
Standards                      POTW.                               POTW.


State of New      Wastewater   Groundwater        N.J.A.C. 7:9-6   Establishes standards for the          Potentially applicable if
Jersey Statutes                Quality            Groundwater      protection of ambient                  disposal of treated
and Rules                      Standards          Quality          groundwater quality. Used as the       groundwater by reinjection.
                                                  Standards        primary basis for setting
                                                                   numerical criteria for
                                                                   discharges to groundwater.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 8-2. Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements – Action Specific
Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site
                                                  Requirement/
Act/Authority       Media       Criteria/Issues       Citation           Synopsis of Requirement                    Status
Kearny            Wastewater   Receives           Local Limits       Establishes the standards for       TBC.
Municipal                      wastewater in                         discharge of groundwater
Utilities                      South Kearny                          through the MUA's sewage
Authority                      and the                               system.
(MUA)                          Meadowlands
                               Area
Passaic Valley    Wastewater   Receives           N.J.A.C. 7:14A     Establishes the standards for the   TBC.
Sewerage                       wastewaters        and PVSC           discharge of waters to PVSC.
Authority                      from the Kearny    Local Limits
(PVSC)                         MUA
State of New      Wastewater   Surface Water      N. J. A. C. 7:9B   Establishes standards for surface   Potentially applicable if
Jersey Statutes                Quality                               water quality.                      discharge of wastewater to
and Rules                      Standards                                                                 surface water.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 8-3. Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements – Location Specific
Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site
                                                Requirement/
Act/Authority    Media      Criteria/Issues       Citation                   Synopsis of Requirement                      Status
Federal Clean   Water/     Clean Water Act,   33 CFR 330            Provides requirements for discharges to        Applicable.
Water Act       Wetlands   U.S. Army Corps    33 USC 1251 Section   areas such as waters, headwaters, and
                           of Engineers       404, 40 CFR 230,      special aquatic sites such as wetlands,
                           Nationwide         231                   caused by the containment, stabilization, or
                           Permit Program                           removal of hazardous or toxic waste
                           Permit #38                               materials. At this Site, EPA will regulate the
                           Cleanup of                               wetlands that would otherwise be
                           Hazardous and                            regulated under Section 404.
                           Toxic Waste
Executive       Wetlands   Federal Agency     EO 11990              Federal agencies are to minimize the          Applicable
Order 11990 –              Actions in                               destruction, loss or degradation of wetlands,
Protection of              Wetlands                                 and to preserve and enhance the natural
Wetlands                                                            and beneficial values of wetlands in carrying
                                                                    out their responsibilities at Federally
                                                                    undertaken, financed, or assisted
                                                                    construction and improvements.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 8-3. Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements – Location Specific
Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site
                                                                     Requirement/
Act/Authority           Media              Criteria/Issues             Citation                            Synopsis of Requirement                          Status
Flood Hazard         Water/soil/        Protection of            NJAC 7:13-10, 11              Delineates flood hazard areas and regulates               Applicable.
Area Control          wetlands          floodplains                                            use. Protects floodplains through
Act                                                                                            requirements for construction and
Regulations                                                                                    development activities. Portions of the site
                                                                                               are delineated as flood hazard zones A and
                                                                                               AE. Actions that would trigger substantive
                                                                                               requirements under the flood zone
                                                                                               regulations and that are part of the remedy
                                                                                               include altering the topography and
                                                                                               clearing/cutting of vegetation in the
                                                                                               riparian zone. However, the remedy
                                                                                               includes no permanent development so
                                                                                               many of the substantive requirements
                                                                                               would not apply.
   AOC – Area of Contamination                               ARAR – applicable or relevant and appropriate requirement   CFR – Code of Federal Regulations
   LDR – Land Disposal Restriction                           NJAC – New Jersey Administrative Code                       NJDEP – New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
   NJSA - New Jersey Statutes Annotated                      POTW – publically owned treatment works                     PRG – preliminary remediation goal
   RAO – remedial action objective                           RTA – remedial target area                                  TBC – to-be-considered
   TSDF – treatment, storage, and disposal facility          USACE – U.S. Army Corps of Engineers                        USC – United States Code

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX III – RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                          APPENDIX III

                                RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

                           Diamond Head Oil Refinery Superfund Site

INTRODUCTION

This Responsiveness Summary provides a summary of the public’s comments and concerns
regarding the Proposed Plan for the Diamond Head Oil Refinery Superfund Site, and EPA’s
responses to those comments. All comments summarized in this document have been considered in
EPA’s final decision for the selection of the remedies for the Site.

This Responsiveness Summary is divided into the following sections:

   I.       BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS - This
            section provides the history of community involvement and concerns regarding the
            Site.

   II.      COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY OF MAJOR QUESTIONS, COMMENTS,
            CONCERNS AND RESPONSES - This section includes summaries of oral
            comments received by EPA at the June 29, 2017 public meeting, EPA’s responses to
            these comments, as well as responses to written comments received during the public
            comment period.

The Responsiveness Summary includes attachments which document public participation in the
remedy selection process for the Site. The attachments are as follows:

        Attachment A – June 2017 Proposed Plan for the Site;

        Attachment B – Public Notice published in the June 19, 2017 edition of The Observer;

        Attachment C – Transcript of the June 29, 2017 Public Meeting.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS

On June 19, 2017, EPA released the Proposed Plan and supporting documentation for the
proposed change to the Light Non-Aqueous Phase Liquid (LNAPL) source area remedy selected
in the Operable Unit 1 (OU1) September 25, 2009 Record of Decision (ROD), and the Operable
Unit 2 (OU2) Preferred Alternative to address contaminated soil and sediment at the Diamond
Head Oil Refinery Div. Superfund Site. EPA made these documents available to the public, as
well as the Administrative Record repositories, which are maintained at the EPA Region 2 office
(290 Broadway – 18th Floor, New York, New York 10007) and the Kearny Public Library (318
Kearny Avenue, Kearny, New Jersey 07032). EPA published a notice of availability involving
these documents in The Observer newspaper, and opened a public comment period on the
documents from June 19, 2017 to July 19, 2017. On June 29, 2017, EPA held a public meeting at
the main council chambers in Kearny Town Hall to inform local officials and interested residents
about the Superfund process, present the preferred remedial alternative for the Site, solicit oral
comments, and respond to any questions.

The oral comments received from the public and EPA's responses can be found in the next
sections of this summary. All recorded comments for the Diamond Head Oil Proposed Plan have
been included as an attachment to this Responsiveness Summary.

I.     COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY OF MAJOR QUESTIONS, COMMENTS,
       CONCERNS AND RESPONSES

Part 1 - Verbal Comments. The following are the comments received during the June 29, 2017
public meeting.

1.1    A commenter asked whether the slides from the presentation would be available to the
       public.

       EPA Response: The slides from the presentation have been posted on the Diamond
       Head Oil Refinery Superfund Site webpage.

1.2    A commenter asked about the time frame for the work.

       EPA Response: It is expected to take about one and a half years to design the remedy
       and approximately one year to construct the remedy.

Part 2: Written Comments

No significant comments, criticisms or new relevant information were received by EPA during the
public comment period.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Attachment A – June 2017 Proposed Plan

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Superfund Proposed Plan                                     U.S. Environmental Protection
                                                                 Agency, Region II

         Diamond Head Oil Refinery Superfund Site
         Kearny Township, New Jersey


June 2017



EPA ANNOUNCES PROPOSED PLAN                                         MARK YOUR CALENDARS

This Proposed Plan identifies the U.S. Environmental                PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD
Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) proposed change to the                  June 19– July 19, 2017
Light Non-Aqueous Phase Liquid (LNAPL) source area                  EPA will accept written comments on the Proposed Plan
remedy selected in the Operable Unit 1 (OU1)                        during the public comment period.
September 25, 2009 Record of Decision (ROD), and
                                                                     PUBLIC MEETING
identifies the Operable Unit 2 (OU2) Preferred                      June 29, 2017 at 6 P.M.
Alternative to address contaminated soil and sediment               EPA will hold a public meeting to explain the Proposed
at the Diamond Head Oil Refinery Superfund Site                     Plan and all of the alternatives presented in the
(Site), located in the Town of Kearny, Hudson County,               Feasibility Study. Oral and written comments will also
New Jersey.                                                         be accepted at the meeting. The meeting will be held at
                                                                    the main council chambers in Town Hall, 402 Kearny
The 2009 OU1 ROD addressed the LNAPL source                         Avenue, Kearny, Hudson County, New Jersey, 07032
material at the Site. EPA, with the concurrence of the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection                   For more information, see the Administrative
                                                                    Record at the following locations:
(NJDEP), selected a combination of offsite disposal and
on-site biocell treatment as the remedy for OU1.                    EPA Records Center, Region 2
Results of bench-scale testing of the biocell treatment             290 Broadway, 18th Floor
technology, however, indicated that it would not                    New York, New York 10007-1866
achieve the remedial action objectives (RAOs) and                   (212) 637-4308
remediation goals outlined in the OU1 ROD. The                      Hours: Monday-Friday – 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
RAOs would be achieved by attaining the remediation
goals of no measurable thickness of LNAPL in                         Kearny Public Library
monitoring wells, and no potential for LNAPL-                        318 Kearny Avenue
contaminated soil to leach oil to groundwater. As there             Kearny, Hudson County, New Jersey 07031
                                                                    (201) 998-2666
are no Federal or State cleanup standards for LNAPL,
EPA established these remediation goals based upon                  The Administrative Record for the Diamond Head Oil
the toxicity and mobility and the principal threats to              Refinery Site can also be found at the following website:
address this continuing source. Based on these results,             https://www.epa.gov/superfund/diamond-head-oil
EPA is proposing to amend the OU1 ROD and has
identified 1excavation and off-site treatment/disposal as           Send comments on the Proposed Plan to:
the Preferred Alternative to address LNAPL source                   Brittany Hotzler, Remedial Project Manager
material at the Site.                                               U.S. EPA, Region 2
                                                                    290 Broadway, 19th Floor
                                                                    New York, NY 10007-1866
                                                                    Telephone: 212-637-4337
                                                                    Email: hotzler.brittany@epa.gov
1 Excavation and Off-Site Treatment/Disposal was evaluated in the
OU1 FS and is identified as Alternative 4 in the OU1 ROD

                                                                                                         *510579*
                                                                                                                 510579

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The Preferred Alternative for OU2 calls for the                  20.2-acre unoccupied parcel that includes wetland
placement of two feet of soil cover over residual                areas, a drainage ditch, a small wetland/pond, a
contamination found within the Diamond Head Oil                  vegetated landfill area along the western border, and the
Refinery site. Institutional controls (ICs) in the form of       remnants of the former Diamond Head Oil Refinery on
deed notices will be implemented to maintain the                 the eastern portion of the Site. The parcel is bordered
integrity of the vegetated soil cover.                           by Harrison Avenue (also called the Newark Turnpike)
                                                                 to the north, entrance ramp “M” of Interstate 280 (I-
Any hazardous wastes encountered during the                      280) to the east, I-280 to the south, and Campbell
implementation of the OU1 or OU2 remedies would be               Distribution Foundry to the west. The Site also
disposed of offsite at an appropriate disposal facility.         includes a 10.3-acre portion of the I-280 interchange
                                                                 clover leaf located east of the 20.2-acre unoccupied
Groundwater will be the subject of a subsequent                  parcel.
remedial investigation (RI), Operable Unit 3 (OU3),
after completion of the OU2 remedy.                              The Site is currently undeveloped and is designated on
                                                                 the tax map as industrial/commercial. The land use
This Proposed Plan was developed by EPA, the lead                surrounding the Site is industrial/commercial and open
agency, in consultation with NJDEP, the support                  space/wetlands, and is not anticipated to change in the
agency. EPA, in consultation with NJDEP, will select a           future. The nearest residential area is located a half-
remedy for OU1 and OU2 after reviewing and                       mile to the west, and is not impacted by Site
considering all information submitted during the 30-day          contamination.        A Municipal Sanitary Landfill
public comment period. EPA, in consultation with                 Authority (MSLA) landfill, identified as the 1-D
NJDEP, may modify the Preferred Alternative or select            Landfill, is situated south of I-280.
another response action presented in this Plan based on
new information or public comments. Therefore, the               Prior Site operations took place on the eastern half of
public is encouraged to review and comment on the                the 20.2-acre parcel. The landfilled area on the western
alternatives presented in this Proposed Plan.                    portion of the parcel was once an access road to the 1-D
                                                                 Landfill, and a landfill mound remains from those
EPA is issuing this Proposed Plan as part of its                 activities, rising 10 to 15 feet above the rest of the Site.
community relations program under Section 117(a) of              Surface water drains through a drainage ditch that
the     Comprehensive       Environmental     Response,          eventually discharges to Frank’s Creek, which in turn
Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA, or                      discharges to the Passaic River.
Superfund) 42 U.S.C. 9617(a), and Section 300.435(c)
(2) (ii) of the National Oil and Hazardous Substances            OU1 addresses the remedial target areas (RTAs)
Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP). This Proposed Plan             containing source material LNAPL, and the remedial
summarizes information that can be found in greater              alternatives for OU2 address residually contaminated
detail in the Remedial Investigation (RI) and Feasibility        soils, sediment, and surface water (Figure 2). OU2
Study (FS) reports as well as other related documents            consists of Area A, within the 20.2-acre parcel, and
contained in the Administrative Record. The location             Areas B and C, the I-280 interchange cloverleaf area.
of the Administrative Record is provided on the
previous page. EPA and NJDEP encourage the public                SITE HISTORY
to review these documents to gain a more
comprehensive understanding of the Superfund                     Oil reprocessing at the Diamond Head Oil facility
activities that have been conducted there.                       operated under several companies, including PSC
                                                                 Resources, Inc., Ag-Met Oil Service, Inc., and
SITE DESCRIPTION                                                 Newtown Refining Corporation, from 1946 to early
                                                                 1979. All of these companies were owned by Mr.
The Site, located near the Hackensack Meadowlands at             Robert Mahler. During facility operations, multiple
1401 Harrison Avenue, Kearny, New Jersey, was the                aboveground storage tanks and possibly subsurface pits
location of a former oil reprocessing facility. Figure 1         were used to store oily wastes. These wastes were
shows the Site location. The Site is comprised of a              intermittently discharged directly to adjacent properties

                                                             2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

to the east, and to the wetland area on the south side of                     The Site was added to the NPL in September of 2002,
the Site, creating an “Oil Lake.”                                             and a potentially responsible party (PRP) search is
                                                                              ongoing.
In 1968, the New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) purchased several lots from PSC Resources,                            A phased RI was initiated for the Site in 2002. The
Inc., as part of its plans for construction of I-280. In                      OU1 Phase 1 RI obtained data on the nature and extent
1977, NJDOT removed over 10 million gallons of oil                            of soil, sediment, surface water, and groundwater
and oil-contaminated liquid, and over 230,000 cubic                           contamination in areas of the Site where there was no
yards of oily sludge, from the vicinity of the Oil Lake.                      information from previous investigations.             The
The liquid wastes were shipped to waste-oil recycling                         investigation also included a number of test trenches
facilities. The oil-contaminated sludge from the bottom                       through the landfill in Area A to assess the nature of the
of the Oil Lake was excavated and placed in a series of                       buried material, and borings along the I-280 ROW soil
disposal cells – one atop the MSLA 1-D Landfill, and a                        berms to confirm the presence of buried sludge. The
series of smaller cells located within the I-280 right-of-                    OU1 Phase 2 Focused RI/FS investigated
way (ROW) soil berms, next to the oil-reprocessing                            contamination associated with the LNAPL source
facility which was still in operation at the time. The                        material and also concluded that the landfill in Area A
details of these disposal efforts are not well                                was not a contributing source of contamination to the
documented, but a simple liner and clay-based capping                         Site.
material were to be used as part of the disposal efforts
for the sludge. While the surficial Oil Lake was                              The RI for OU2 commenced in 2009 and was followed
removed and filled in, the NJDOT also reported finding                        by two supplemental investigations in 2011 and 2015.
an      “underground      lake”   of     oil-contaminated                     Over the course of the investigation soil, sediment,
groundwater, extending from the eastern limits of the I-                      surface and groundwater media were sampled and
280 right-of-way to Frank’s Creek, located west of the                        analyzed for VOCs, SVOCs, pesticides, PCBs, metals,
Site.                                                                         and dioxins and furans. The main objective of the OU2
                                                                              RI was to identify and delineate areas containing
Plant operations ceased in 1979. In 1982, during the                          contamination in soils and sediment that pose a direct
dismantling of the oil reprocessing facility,                                 exposure risk. Groundwater will be addressed under
approximately 7,500 gallons of materials were pumped                          OU3 after completion of the remedial actions for OU1
out of tanks and disposed of off-site, and 27 tons of                         and OU2.
contaminated soil were reportedly removed from the
Site. Sampling conducted during this cleanup effort                           The OU1 ROD, signed in 2009, addressed the LNAPL
identified      hazardous     substances,    including                        source material at the Site. The Selected Remedy
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in waste material                            included the construction of an on-site biocell for
collected from the Site. In 1985, part of the refinery                        treatment of low-level threat source material, and off-
property, Block 285, Lot 3, was sold to Mimi Urban                            site disposal of principal threat source material.
Development Corporation, which subsequently changed
its name to Hudson Meadows Urban Development                                  SITE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE DIAMOND
Corporation. The Town of Kearny has owned the                                 HEAD OIL REFINERY SUPERFUND SITE
landfill parcel located in Area A and the parcel to the
east of the Hudson Meadows Urban Development                                  Site Hydrogeology
Corporation parcel since 1942. Parcels in Areas B & C                         The stratigraphy at the Site consists of a relatively
are owned by the NJDOT.                                                       uniform vertical sequence of unconsolidated materials
                                                                              from top to bottom, as follows:
NJDEP requested that EPA evaluate the Site for
inclusion on the National Priorities List (NPL) in 19992.                              A highly variable (in content and thickness)
                                                                                        layer of anthropogenic fill across the Site,
                                                                                        consisting of typical demolition-type debris,
2 The National Priorities List (NPL) is the list of national priorities
among the known releases or threatened releases of hazardous
substances, pollutants, or contaminants throughout the United States          determining which sites warrant further investigation.
and its territories. The NPL is intended primarily to guide EPA in

                                                                          3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        including wood, brick, metal, glass, plastic, and       construction, all drainage on the north side of the
        concrete mixed in a matrix of poorly sorted fine        highway now travels a distance of 600 feet to the creek
        to coarse sand and gravel or silt, sand, and            by a man-made drainage ditch. Prior to the 1940s, the
        gravel;                                                 area south of Harrison Avenue was wetlands.
                                                                Landfilling activities that started in the 1940s began to
       A sand unit about five feet thick on the western        shrink and divide the wetland areas. The eventual Oil
        side of the Site, pinching out until it is not          Lake, estimated in 1977 to be between six and seven
        present on the eastern side of the Site;                acres, appears to have formed in a remaining lowland
                                                                area surrounded by properties filled in for industrial
       A silty clay unit, up to eight feet thick in            development, and by what would become the MSLA 1-
        sections of the Site, that appears to be                D Landfill. With the construction of I-280, including
        continuous throughout the study area;                   the placement of the I-280 ROW soil berms, there is an
                                                                isolated, frequently ponded wetland located just south
       A distinctive peat layer of varying thickness,          of the former Diamond Head Oil facility.
        but considered continuous across the Site;
                                                                Two factors have a significant influence on the water
       A silt and sand unit approximately 15 to 20 feet        table at the Site: the first is the presence of wetlands
        thick, beneath the peat layer;                          along the southern Site boundary that includes areas of
                                                                surface water, and the second is the presence of an
       Laminated silt and clay unit, the full thickness        LNAPL plume in the southeast corner of the Site in the
        of which was not observed in any of the study           area of the former Oil Lake. Although lighter than
        borings to date (as deep as 50 feet); and               water, the density of the LNAPL has the effect of
                                                                depressing the water table and influencing groundwater
       Bedrock, which also has not been encountered            flow. Excepting these areas, groundwater is generally
        to date.                                                first encountered at a depth of 2 to 6 feet below ground
                                                                surface. During wet seasons, extensive surficial
Groundwater at the Site is generally observed from 2 to         flooding and standing water occur across much of the
6 feet below ground surface, within the fill materials          property, including the delineated wetland areas.
and natural and reworked soils that form the shallow
overburden aquifer.       The water table fluctuates            Summary of Diamond Head Oil Refinery Superfund
seasonally and is highly influenced by precipitation and        Site Investigations
freeze-thaw cycles. Groundwater in some areas of the
Site is observed in the form of perched water that is           The complete results of the OU1 and OU2 Remedial
trapped above less permeable materials at shallower             Investigations can be found in the Diamond Head Oil
depths than the water table.                                    Refinery Superfund Site Remedial Investigation
                                                                Reports (2005 & 2009; 2016) which are part of the
Water levels in the shallow groundwater above the silty         Administrative Record.
clay and peat layers indicate a mounding of water near
the wetland area in the southeastern portion of the             Summary of the OU1 Pre-Design Investigation
property. At the local scale of the property, the shallow
                                                                A Pre-Design Investigation (PDI) for OU1 was
groundwater is considered to flow somewhat radially
                                                                conducted between 2010 and 2015. The PDI: (1)
from this mounded area.
                                                                refined the criteria used for measuring the extent of
                                                                LNAPL source material; (2) identified the RTA for
In the water-bearing unit below the peat layer,
                                                                LNAPL source material, and (3) determined that the
groundwater flows generally from northeast to
                                                                on-site biocell treatment technology would not attain
southwest, consistent with regional trends in
                                                                the RAOs and remediation goals outlined in the 2009
groundwater flow.
                                                                ROD. The information collected has been used to refine
                                                                the excavation/off-site disposal component of
The nearest surface water body is Frank’s Creek which
                                                                Alternative 4 (EPA’s Preferred Alternative) in the OU1
drains into the Passaic River. As a result of I-280’s
                                                                ROD.

                                                            4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Following extensive bench scale testing, it was                   served as the original Diamond Head Oil Refinery
determined that the biocell technology would not be an            property, and “outside” referring to the 10.3 acres of
effective treatment for the low-level threat source               Areas B and C containing the I-280 interchange clover
material.                                                         leaf.

Bench-scale testing of the biocell technology was                 Analytical results were compared to Federal or New
performed in two phases, with Phase 1 testing focusing            Jersey standards for each medium, whichever was more
on LNAPL solubility, and the application of the biocell           stringent, to determine if concentrations pose a
technology on soils excavated from areas of source                potential threat to human health or the environment and
material containing principal threat waste LNAPL.                 need further evaluation in the baseline risk assessment.
Phase 2 testing focused on the application of the biocell
technology on soils excavated from areas of source                Analytical results were compared to the following:
material containing low-level threat waste. Phase 1
testing concluded that biocell technology would not be                   Soil: NJDEP’s Non-Residential Direct Contact
effective for treating LNAPL principal threat waste.                      Soil Remediation Standards (NRDCSRS), New
Following 8 months of monitoring and testing during                       Jersey Ecological Screening Criteria, National
Phase 2, no significant changes in contaminant mass                       Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
were observed, and there was no definitive indication                     Screening Quick Reference Tables (SQuiRTs),
that augmented degradation would occur in the low-                        and EPA Regional Screening Level (RSL) for
level threat waste. Phase 2 bench-scale testing was                       Dioxins and Furans;
therefore terminated before fully completing the
scheduled test cycle.                                                    Sediment: NJDEP’s Ecological          Screening
                                                                          Criteria Lowest Effects Levels;
In 2014/2015, EPA completed a second PDI of the
LNAPL source material at the Site. The PDI collected                     Surface water: New Jersey Surface Water
a significant amount of information on the chemical                       Quality Standards (NJSWQS) for Fresh Water;
and physical characteristics of the LNAPL, and the                        and,
extent of its presence at the Site. It also included
information on the Site’s physical characteristics and                   Impact to groundwater pathway: NJDEP’s
how such characteristics may relate to LNAPL behavior                     Impact to Groundwater Soil Screening Levels.
and implemented remedies. The PDI helped to refine
the criteria used to measure the extent of LNAPL                  The RI revealed multiple contaminants, including
source material at the Site. Based on the refined criteria,       chromium, dioxin, PCBs, lead, aldrin, thallium, and
the volume of LNAPL source material measured at the               benzo[a]pyrene.
Site increased by 3,000 cubic yards – from
approximately 46,000 cubic yards to approximately                 Soils: Soil samples were taken in approximately 118
49,000 cubic yards. The PDI also helped to identify the           sample locations at multiple depths, from surface soils
RTA for LNAPL source material, and helped to further              (0-4 ft.), subsurface soils (5-10 ft.), and the I-280 ROW
refine the preliminary remediation goals (PRGs) to                soil berms, both inside (Area A) and outside (Area B
permit field verification of their attainment.                    and Area C) the property boundary (Figure 2). Samples
                                                                  were tested for VOCs, SVOCs, pesticides, PCBs,
Summary of the OU2 Remedial Investigation                         metals, and dioxins and furans. Surface soil samples
                                                                  taken within the property boundary revealed maximum
EPA collected additional soil, sediment, and surface              concentrations of lead at 27,900 parts per million
water samples from the Site over the course of the OU2            (ppm), chromium at 7,650 ppm, and PCBs at 14 ppm.
RI. Samples were analyzed for VOCs, SVOCs,                        Subsurface soil samples taken within the property
pesticides, PCBs, metals, and dioxins and furans. Soil            boundary revealed concentrations of chromium at
samples at the Site were categorized as being taken               22,300 ppm, thallium at 45.7 ppm, and benzo[a]pyrene
from within or outside the property boundary –                    at 35 ppm. The highest levels of contamination in the
“within” referring to the 20.2 acres of Area A that               surface and subsurface soils were located in Area A in

                                                              5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

the general area of the former refining operations, and          Creek’s surrounding and upstream areas.
in the central section of Area A at the location of the
former Oil Lake.                                                 Surface Water: Surface water samples were taken from
                                                                 approximately 10 sample locations. Samples were
Sampling of the I-280 ROW soil berms on the eastern              tested for VOCs, SVOCs, pesticides, PCBs, and metals.
and southern portion of the Site revealed maximum                Surface water samples revealed maximum
concentrations of lead at 306 ppm and chromium at                concentrations of lead at 712 µg/L (microgram per
7,700 ppm, at depths of 5-7 feet.                                Liter), thallium at 160 µg/L, and beryllium at 990 µg/L,
                                                                 found in ponded surface water within Area A, and in
Surface soil samples taken outside the property                  one sample taken in the drainage ditch near its
boundary (Areas B and C) revealed maximum                        confluence with Frank’s Creek.
concentrations of PCBs at 1,800 ppm and aldrin at 75
ppm. Subsurface soil samples taken outside the                   PRINCIPAL THREATS
property boundary revealed concentrations of lead at
13,200 ppm and PCBs at 8.4 ppm. The highest levels               OU1 LNAPL source material is a principal threat
of contamination in the surface and subsurface soils             waste. Exposure to residual contaminants in OU2 soil
were found from 0-2 feet in the surface soil and 5-17            and sediment, while not considered principal threat
feet in the subsurface soil, and were located in Areas B         waste, present unacceptable risks to ecological and
and C, within the footprint of the former Oil Lake.              human receptors if not addressed by remedial action.

Surface soil samples analyzed for dioxin and furan                              WHAT IS A "PRINCIPAL THREAT"?
contamination from within the property boundary                   The NCP establishes an expectation that EPA will use treatment
revealed a concentration of 1,873 parts per trillion (ppt)        to address the principal threats posed by a site wherever
at 0-2 feet, located in the central section of Area A,            practicable (NCP Section 300.430(a) (1) (iii) (A)). The
                                                                  "principal threat" concept is applied to the characterization of
within the location of the former Oil Lake. Soil
                                                                  "source materials" at a Superfund site. A source material is
samples taken from outside the property boundary                  material that includes or contains hazardous substances,
revealed concentrations of dioxin/furans at 8,188 ppt             pollutants or contaminants that act as a reservoir for migration
from 0-2 feet, and 11,172 ppt from 2.5-3 feet, and were           of contamination to ground water, surface water or air, or acts
located in Area C, within the footprint of the former Oil         as a source for direct exposure. Contaminated ground water
                                                                  generally is not considered to be a source material; however,
Lake.                                                             Non-Aqueous Phase Liquids (NAPLs) in ground water may be
                                                                  viewed as source material. Principal threat wastes are those
Sediment: Sediment samples were taken from the                    source materials considered to be highly toxic or highly mobile
drainage ditch, which is only underwater during                   that generally cannot be reliably contained, or would present a
                                                                  significant risk to human health or the environment should
flooding events, and from Frank’s Creek in
                                                                  exposure occur. The decision to treat these wastes is made on a
approximately 25 locations. Sediment samples were                 site-specific basis through a detailed analysis of the alternatives
tested for VOCs, SVOCs, pesticides, PCBs, metals, and             using the nine remedy selection criteria. This analysis provides
dioxins and furans. Sediment samples revealed lead                a basis for making a statutory finding that the remedy employs
contamination at a concentration of 84,400 ppm, found             treatment as a principal element.
at 0-3 feet in the central section of Area A, within the
footprint of the former Oil Lake. Sediment samples               SCOPE AND ROLE OF ACTION
taken from the drainage ditch, near it’s confluence with
Frank’s Creek, revealed lead contamination at a                  EPA is addressing the Diamond Head Oil Refinery Site
concentration of 84,300 ppm, from a depth of 0-0.5               in three operable units (OUs):
feet. The sediments analyzed from the drainage ditch
function more like soils, in that they are compacted and         OU1:               LNAPL Source Area
vegetated, and are less likely to travel into Frank’s
Creek. The contamination present in sediments that               OU2:               Residual contamination in                   soils,
were analyzed from Frank’s Creek are therefore likely                               sediment, and surface water
related to contributing sources other than the Site,
which is reflective of the industrial nature of the              OU3                Groundwater

                                                             6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

This Proposed Plan identifies EPA’s proposed change             WHAT ARE THE “CONTAMINANTS OF CONCERN”
                                                                (COCs)?
to the remedy selected in the 2009 OU1 ROD, and
                                                                EPA has identified Chromium, Dioxin, PCBs, Aldrin, Lead,
contains descriptions and evaluations of the remedial           Thallium, and Benzo[a]pyrene, as the primary contaminants
alternatives considered for OU2. The remedies for OU1           of concern at the Diamond Head Oil Refinery Superfund Site
and OU2 will be implemented concurrently. While the             that pose the greatest potential risk to human health and the
scope of OU2 originally included contaminated                   environment.
groundwater at the Site, at this time, EPA is adding a
                                                                Chromium: Chromium is a naturally-occurring element that can
third operable unit (OU3) to address groundwater, after         exist in several different forms, and is widely used in
completion of the OU1 and OU2 remedies.                         manufacturing processes to make various metal alloys.
                                                                Chromium (VI) compounds are classified as known carcinogens.
The remedy identified in the 2009 OU1 ROD intended
to address the LNAPL source material at the Site                Dioxin: Dioxins can occur during the manufacture of certain
                                                                organic chemicals.
through excavation and off-site disposal of principal
threat waste source material and on-site treatment of           PCBs: Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are mixtures of
low-level threat waste source material (biocell                 chlorinated compounds that have historically been used as
treatment technology). However, bench scale testing             coolants and lubricants in electrical equipment. PCBs are
                                                                classified as probable carcinogens.
indicated that the biocell treatment technology would
not meet the RAOs and remediation goals outlined in             Aldrin: Aldrin is an insecticide that was widely used on crops
the 2009 OU1 ROD. EPA’s proposed changes to the                 such as corn and cotton. Aldrin is considered to be a probable
2009 OU1 ROD include excavation and off-site                    carcinogen.
treatment/disposal of all LNAPL source material, as
                                                                Lead: Lead is a naturally-occurring metal found in the earth’s
defined by the OU1 RTA (Figure 2). The I-280 ROW                crust. Lead is used in the production of batteries and
soil berms containing non-hazardous wastes will be              ammunition, and was formerly used in the production of paints,
moved during excavation to facilitate removal of                caulking, and as an additive to gasoline. Lead is considered a
LNAPL source materials from the RTA identified                  probable carcinogen.
below the berms. After excavation, berm soils will be           Thallium: Thallium is a naturally-occurring metal found in trace
used as backfill in the excavated areas in Area A               amounts in earth’s crust, and is mostly used in the manufacture
(Figure 2).                                                     of electronic devices.

After the LNAPL source material has been removed,               Benzo[a]pyrene: Benzo[a]pyrene is a polycyclic aromatic
                                                                hydrocarbon (PAH) that forms during the incomplete burning of
OU2 will address the residually contaminated surface            coal, oil, gas, wood, or other organic substances.
and subsurface soil, sediment, and surface water at the         Benzo[a]pyrene is classified as a probable carcinogen.
Site.

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS
                                                               the concentrations, frequency and duration of a variety
As part of the RI/FS, a baseline human health risk             of individual's exposure to chemicals selected as
assessment (HHRA) and a baseline ecological risk               contaminants of potential concern (COPCs), as well as
assessment (BERA) were conducted to estimate the               the toxicity of these contaminants.
risks and hazards associated with the current and future
effects of contaminants on human health and the                For the ecological risk assessment, representative
environment. A baseline human health risk assessment           ecological receptors were identified for each exposure
is an analysis of the potential adverse human health           area. Measurement and assessment endpoints were
effects caused by hazardous-substance exposure in the          developed during the BERA to identify those receptors
absence of any actions to control or mitigate these            and areas where unacceptable risks are present.
under current and future land uses.
                                                               Human Health Risk Assessment
In the HHRA, cancer risk and noncancer health hazard
estimates are based on current reasonable maximum              A four-step human health risk assessment process was
exposure scenarios. They were developed by taking              used for assessing site-related cancer risks and
into account various health protective estimates about
                                                           7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

noncancer health hazards. The four-step process is              In this assessment, exposure point concentrations were
comprised of: Hazard Identification, Exposure                   estimated using either the maximum detected
Assessment, Toxicity Assessment, and Risk                       concentration of a contaminant or the 95% upper-
Characterization (see adjoining box “What is Risk and           confidence limit (UCL) of the average concentration.
How is it Calculated” for more details on the risk              Chronic daily intakes were calculated based on the
assessment process).                                            reasonable maximum exposure (RME), which is the
The baseline human health risk assessment began with            highest exposure reasonably anticipated to occur at the
selecting COPCs in the various media (i.e., surface soil,       Site. The RME is intended to estimate a conservative
subsurface soil, sediment and surface water) that could         exposure scenario that is still within the range of
potentially cause adverse health effects in exposed             possible exposures. Central tendency exposure (CTE)
populations. The current and future land use scenarios          assumptions, which represent typical average
refer to exposure to soil from within or outside the            exposures, were also developed. A complete summary
property boundary – “within” referring to the 20.2 acres        of all exposure scenarios can be found in the baseline
of Area A that served as the original Diamond Head Oil          human health risk assessment.
Refinery property, and “outside” referring to the 10.3
acres of Areas B and C containing the I-280                     Summary of the Human Health Risk Assessment
interchange clover leaf. As the Site is currently
undeveloped and is designated on the tax map as                 This section provides an overview of the human health
industrial/commercial, the current and future land use          risks from the major COCs. A complete discussion of
scenarios included the following exposure pathways              all risks from the Site can be found in the Human
and populations:                                                Health Risk Assessment which is contained in the
                                                                Administrative Record.
   Site Maintenance Worker (adult): current/future
    ingestion, dermal contact and inhalation of soil            Surface Soil
    particles and vapors for surface and subsurface soil
    from within the property boundary (Area A, Figure           Risks and hazards were evaluated for current and/or
                                                                future exposure to surface soil. The populations of
    2), and future exposure to the I-280 ROW berm soil
                                                                interest included adult maintenance workers, child and
   Trespassers (child/adult): current/future ingestion,        adult trespassers, adult highway workers, adult
    dermal contact and inhalation of soil particles and         industrial workers and adult construction workers. The
    vapors for surface and subsurface soil from within          estimated hazards and risks are presented in Table 1.
    the property boundary and the I-280 ROW berm,
    and sediment and surface water                              The potential current hazards for trespassers (child),
                                                                industrial workers and construction workers is above
   Highway Worker (adult): current/future ingestion            the acceptable hazard index of 1 from exposure to
    and dermal contact and inhalation of soil particles         surface soil within the property boundary.           The
    and vapors for surface and subsurface soil from             potential current risk for all populations is above the
    outside of the property boundary (Area B and C,             acceptable risk range for exposure to surface soil within
    Figure 2), including the I-280 ROW berm                     the property boundary. Chromium3, dioxin, and PCBs
                                                                are COCs for surface soil within the property boundary.
   Industrial Worker (adult): future ingestion, dermal
                                                                Exposure to surface soil from the berms results in
    contact and inhalation of soil particles and vapors
                                                                estimated hazards that are equal to or below the
    for surface and subsurface soil from within the
                                                                acceptable hazard index of 1, and the cancer risk is
    property boundary and the I-280 ROW berm
   Construction Workers (adult): future ingestion,
    dermal contact and inhalation of soil particles and         3 Chromium speciation was not conducted on the samples,
    vapors from surface and subsurface soil from                therefore the risks and hazards from chromium exposure was
                                                                evaluated assuming that total chromium was 100%
    within the property boundary and the I-280 ROW              chromium VI, the most toxic form of chromium.
    berm



                                                            8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

equal to or above the acceptable risk range, with               construction workers, maintenance workers and
chromium being identified as a COC. The potential               trespassers within the property boundary and highway
future hazards and risks for future highway workers             workers from outside of the property boundary. The
exposed to surface soil outside of the property                 hazard index was equal to or greater than 1 for all
boundary exceed the acceptable hazard index of 1 and            populations, and the cancer risk was above the
the cancer risk range, due to dioxin, aldrin and PCBs.          acceptable risk range for all populations. The COCs
                                                                within the property boundaries were chromium,
Lead was evaluated separately for surface soil. Initially       thallium and benzo[a]pyrene while the COCs outside of
lead concentrations were compared to the New Jersey             the property boundary were PCBs and dioxin (Table 2).
Non-Residential Direct Contact value of 800 ppm. An
additional evaluation for lead using the Adult Lead
Model, which is documented in a technical                       Table 2 Summary of hazards and risks associated with
memorandum in the administrative record, was also               subsurface soil.
conducted. The ALM provided a comparison value of
784 ppm. Based on both evaluations, surface soil lead                                            Hazard     Cancer
                                                                Receptor
concentrations were elevated within the property                                                 Index       Risk
boundary, the berm soil, and surface water. Therefore,          Within Property Boundary
                                                                Future
lead was also identified as a COC at the site.
                                                                Industrial Worker – Adult           5        2x10-3
                                                                Construction Worker - Adult         8        2x10-4
Table 1. Summary of hazards and risks associated with
surface soil.                                                   Maintenance Worker – Adult          1        4x10-4
                                                                Trespasser – Adult                  1        3x10-4
                                                                Trespasser – Child                  9        4x10-3
                                     Hazard    Cancer
            Receptor                                            Outside of Property Boundary
                                     Index      Risk
                                                                Future
Within Property Boundary
                                                                Highway Worker – Adult              3        4x10-4
Current/Future
                                                                The COCs identified in the subsurface soil within
    Maintenance Worker – adult         0.8     2x10-4
                                                                the property boundary are chromium, thallium and
         Trespasser – adult            0.8     2x10-4           benzo[a]pyrene. PCBs and dioxin were identified as
         Trespasser – child             7      2x10-3           a COC in subsurface soil outside of the property
Future                                                          boundary. In addition, lead was detected in elevated
     Industrial Worker – adult          4      9x10-4           concentrations in subsurface soil in several areas
    Construction Worker – adult         5      1x10-4           outside of the property boundary.
Berm
Future
                                                                Surface Water and Sediment
         Trespasser – child             1      2x10-4
     Industrial Worker – adult         0.8     1x10-4
Outside Property Boundary                                       Risks and hazards were evaluated for the potential
Future                                                          current and future exposure to surface water and
     Highway Worker – adult             3      4x10-4           sediment in Frank’s Creek, and sediment from the
The COCs identified in the surface soil within the              drainage ditch, which is more representative of soil.
property boundary were chromium, dioxin and PCBs.               The population of interest included adult maintenance
The COCs identified in the berm surface soil was                workers and adult and child trespassers. The non-
chromium. The COCs identified in the off property               cancer hazards for surface water were above the EPA
surface soil were dioxin, aldrin and PCBs. In addition,         acceptable value of 1 for the maintenance worker and
lead is a COC in surface soil within the property               child trespasser. The COCs identified for surface water
boundary and the berm.                                          were beryllium and thallium. The cancer risks were
                                                                below or within the EPA acceptable ranges for all
Subsurface Soil                                                 populations. Lead was also identified as a COCs for
                                                                the sediment due to several hot spot locations with lead
Risks and hazards were evaluated for the potential              concentrations exceeding both the NJNRDC and ALM
future exposure to subsurface soil. The populations of          values.
interest included future adult industrial workers,

                                                            9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 3. Summary of hazards and risks associated with          The potential risks and hazards associated with
surface water and sediment.                                    contaminated groundwater and volatilization of volatile
                                                               organic compounds (VOCs) from contaminated
                                Hazard     Cancer              groundwater into future buildings that are over the
         Receptor
                                 Index      Risk               contaminated groundwater were evaluated in the human
Frank’s Creek and Drainage Ditch                               health risk assessment, however, exposure to
Current/Future                                                 groundwater and vapors are being addressed in OU3,
Surface Water
                                                               thus they are not discussed in this proposed plan.
 Maintenance Worker – Adult        3       5x10-5
      Trespasser – Adult          0.6      2x10-5
      Trespasser – Child           3       6x10-5
                                                               Based on the results of the human health risk
Frank’s Creek and Drainage Ditch                               assessment a remedial action is necessary for
Current/Future                                                 substances in the surface soil, subsurface soil, surface
Sediment                                                       water, and sediment to protect public health, welfare
 Maintenance Worker – Adult       0.05     2x10-5              and the environment from actual or threatened releases
      Trespasser – Adult          0.09     2x10-5              of hazardous substances.
      Trespasser – Child          0.02     5x10-5
Beryllium and thallium were identified as COCs in              Ecological Risk Assessment
the surface water. Lead was identified in several
locations at elevated concentrations. These areas              A baseline ecological risk assessment (BERA) focused
may represent hot spots and lead would be                      on evaluating the potential for impacts to sensitive
considered a sediment COC.
                                                               ecological receptors to site-related constituents of
                                                               concern through exposure to surface soil, surface water,
Groundwater and Vapor Intrusion                                sediment, and prey items (i.e., small mammals and
                                                               fish). Surface soil, surface water and sediment
Although LNAPL source material is present on site,             concentrations were compared to ecological screening
contaminant levels in groundwater, in general, slightly        values, and food web modeling for upper trophic level
exceed the groundwater standards. For example,                 predators was completed to determine the potential for
benzene (with relatively higher solubility and mobility        adverse effects to ecological receptors. A complete
compared to other site contaminants) was detected in           summary of all exposure scenarios can be found in the
exceedance of the NJ Class IIA standard of 1 part per          baseline level ecological risk assessment (BERA).
billion (ppb) in groundwater in only 4 wells where
                                                               Surface Soil
LNAPL source material is present in the RTAs (Area
A, Figure 2). The large majority of wells had no               Although animals using the site do not distinguish
exceedances of VOC criteria, or had just one                   boundaries, soil was evaluated using two different
exceedance for only one VOC during the three                   exposure areas, exposure to site-wide soil and exposure
sampling rounds, and were observed in wells that               to berm soil. This was done to identify if there are
contained LNAPL source material. LNAPL has not                 different risks associated with different areas of the site.
                                                               Soil concentrations were compared with screening
been observed in any deep monitoring wells                     values that are protective for soil invertebrates. Based
(monitoring wells screened beneath the clay and peat           on the evaluation, there is a potential for adverse effects
layers) in any of the monitoring events conducted.             to soil invertebrates from exposure to surface soil in
Based on the low level of contaminants in groundwater,         both the site-wide soil and the berm soil. The risk from
the low solubility of SVOCs, dioxins/furans and PCBs,          exposure to berm soil was less than the risk for site-
and the removal of LNAPL source material, there                wide soil. The surface soil screening criteria for soil
                                                               invertebrates were exceeded for 38 compounds
would be limited potential for remaining soil
                                                               consisting of metals, pesticides, SVOCs and PCBs in
contaminants to migrate to groundwater and thus levels         the site-wide soil, which resulted in hazard quotients
of groundwater contaminants would be expected to               (HQs) greater than the acceptable value of 1. The soil
decrease over time and not require active treatment.           screening criteria for soil invertebrates were exceeded

                                                          10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

for 30 compounds consisting of metals, pesticides,                comparison. Muskrat had an HQ greater than 1 for the
SVOCs, a VOC and dioxin in berm soil, which resulted              LOAEL comparison due to lead, and belted kingfisher
in HQs greater than the acceptable value of 1.                    had an HQ greater than 1 for the LOAEL comparison
                                                                  due to mercury. The rest of rest of the aquatic receptors
Surface Water                                                     had HQs less than 1. Additionally, mummichogs in the
                                                                  drainage ditch had HQs greater than 1 for 9 compounds
Surface water concentrations were compared to                     consisting of metals, pesticides, and PCBs.
ecological screening values. There is a potential for
adverse effects to water column aquatic communities               Based on the results of the ecological risk assessment
from exposure to surface water in the drainage ditch.             remedial action is necessary for site-wide soils and the
The surface water screening criteria were exceeded for            drainage ditch to protect the environment from actual
9 compounds consisting of metals and pesticides, which            or threatened releases of hazardous substances.
resulted in HQs greater than the acceptable value of 1.
                                                                  REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES
Sediment
                                                                  The remedial action objectives (RAOs) describe what
Sediment concentrations from the drainage ditch and               the proposed site cleanup is expected to accomplish.
Frank’s Creek were compared to ecological screening               These objectives are based on available information and
values. There is a potential for adverse effects to               standards, such as Applicable or Relevant and
benthic invertebrates from exposure to sediment in the            Appropriate Requirements (ARARs), to-be-considered
drainage ditch leading to Frank’s Creek. The sediment             standards and guidance, and site-specific risk based
screening criteria were exceeded for 54 compounds                 levels.
consisting of metals, pesticides, SVOCs and VOCs,
                                                                  OU1 RAOs from the 2009 OU1 ROD
which resulted in HQs greater than the acceptable value
of 1.
                                                                         Remove or treat principal threats, consistent
                                                                          with the NCP, to the extent practicable;
Food Web Modeling

Exposure to compounds in the soil and prey items                         Prevent current and future migration of LNAPL
(small mammals) was evaluated for upper trophic level                     and associated chemical contaminants to the
terrestrial animals, including short-tailed shrew, white-                 various media at the Site, including
footed mouse, mourning dove, barred owl, American                         groundwater and seeps to surface water; and,
woodcock and red fox. All of the terrestrial receptors
exposed to site-wide soil had HQs greater than 1 due to                  Prevent human exposure through direct contact
metals, PCBs and dioxin for both No Observed Adverse                      with the principal threat LNAPL.
Exposure Levels (NOAELs) and Lowest Observed
Adverse Exposure Levels (LOAELs) comparisons.                     OU2 RAOs
Short-tailed shrew, white-footed mouse and American
                                                                  EPA established the OU2 RAOs to prevent/minimize
woodcock exposed to berm soil had HQs greater than 1
                                                                  potential receptor exposures that present unacceptable
for LOAEL comparisons due to a combination of either
                                                                  risk as a result of contact, ingestion, or inhalation
metals, PCBs, and/or dioxin, and all terrestrial receptors
                                                                  (dust).
had HQs above 1 for NOAEL comparisons due to
metals, PCBs and/or dioxin.
                                                                  Surface water on the Site appears only as surficial
Exposure to compounds in the surface water, sediment              flooding, areas of standing water during wet seasons or
and prey items (fish) was evaluated for upper trophic             flooding events, and in delineated wetlands. An RAO
level aquatic animals, including mink, muskrat, raccoon           for surface water has therefore not been developed, as
and belted kingfisher. All of the aquatic receptors               soils are the contributing source of contamination to
evaluated had HQs greater than 1 due to a combination             surface water, and any risks presented by surface water
of metals, PCBs and/or dioxin for the NOAEL                       will be addressed through attainment of the soil RAO.

                                                             11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Soil:                                                               THE OU1 LNAPL SOURCE AREA REMEDY

       Prevent/minimize potential ecological receptor              After a ROD is signed, new information may be
        exposures and human receptor exposures                      received or generated that could affect the
        through contact, ingestion, and inhalation of               implementation of the remedy selected in the ROD, or
        contaminated soils.                                         could prompt the reassessment of the remedy.

Sediment:                                                           Original Remedy

       Prevent/minimize potential ecological receptor              Capital Cost:                    $16,080,000
        exposures and human receptor exposures to                   Annual O&M Cost:                 $0
        contaminated sediment in the drainage ditch.                Present Worth Cost:              $17,340,000
                                                                    Construction Time Frame:         1 year

After the concurrent implementation of the OU1 and                  In 2009, EPA signed a ROD for OU1 to address the
OU2 remedies, OU3 will evaluate changes in                          principal threat LNAPL waste. The original remedy
groundwater concentrations over time.                               called for the off-site disposal of the LNAPL principal
                                                                    threat source material, and construction of an on-site
To achieve the RAOs for OU2, EPA is proposing soil                  biocell for the treatment of low-level threat source
and sediment cleanup preliminary remediation goals                  material.
(PRGs) for the COCs based on NJDEP’s NRDCSRS
and EPA risk-based values. The PRGs are as follows:                 The major components of the Original Remedy
                                                                    included:
Soil:
       Chromium: 20 ppm                                                   Isolation of the remedial target areas with cut-
       Dioxin: 730 ppt                                                     off walls, and excavation of the principal threat
                                                                            LNAPL source material, a total of
       PCBs: 1 ppm
                                                                            approximately 46,000 cubic yards of material;
       Aldrin: 0.2 ppm
       Lead: 800 ppm
                                                                           Transportation and off-site disposal to a facility
       Thallium: 79 ppm
                                                                            (with treatment as required to meet land
       Benzo[a]pyrene: 0.2 ppm                                             disposal requirements) for the principal threat
                                                                            LNAPL portion of the excavated material that
Sediment:                                                                   is not amenable to on-site treatment;
    Lead: 800 ppm4
                                                                           For the low-level threat LNAPL material
                                                                            amenable to on-site treatment, construction of a
DESCRIPTION OF PROPOSED CHANGES TO                                          biocell within the excavated area to facilitate
                                                                            biodegradation of the LNAPL wastes,
4 The resulting PRG value using the latest information from                 including the installation of piping for air and
NHANEs (2009-2014) is 784 ppm incorporating the Region                      nutrient distribution and a collection system for
2 proposed adjusted adult soil and dust ingestion rate and a                air and water that may accumulate in the
target blood level of 5 ug/dl. This value was rounded to 800                biocell;
ppm which is also the NJDEP’s NRDCSRS value. This value
will be used as the PRG for both soil and sediment cleanup,
as sediments found in the drainage ditch function more like                Introduction of nutrients and bulking agents to
soils (compacted and vegetated), and are only underwater                    the low-level threat LNAPL material to
during flooding events. There are no ecological receptors                   enhance permeability and the conditions for
associated with the sediments in the drainage ditch, and                    biological activity, followed by placement of
therefore the cleanup goal should be protective for both                    the augmented LNAPL material in the biocell
human health and the environment.                                           for treatment and capping;

                                                               12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                  remediation goals by providing protection to human
       Operation of the aeration, nutrient distribution,         health and the environment through the removal, and
        and water collection systems for the biocell for          therefore prevention of direct contact with the entire
        an estimated five-year period; and,                       LNAPL source area.

       Performance sampling and final confirmation               2. Compliance with Applicable or Relevant and
        sampling to demonstrate that the LNAPL                    Appropriate Requirements (ARARs)
        wastes have been destroyed through biological
        degradation, at which time the biocell                    The Preferred Alternative would remove the entire
        components will be dismantled.                            LNAPL source area, while the Original Remedy would
                                                                  only remove the principal threat LNAPL waste. Bench
                                                                  scale testing performed on the low-level threat waste
Preferred Alternative for OU1, Excavation and Off-                indicated that the biocell treatment technology was not
Site Treatment/Disposal                                           effective and therefore the waste cannot be treated.
                                                                  EPA has developed site-specific remediation goals that
Capital Cost:                    $13,733,000                      are consistent with the expectations of the New Jersey
Annual O&M Cost:                 $0                               Technical Requirements for the remediation of free
Present Worth Cost:              $13,733,000                      product (N.J.A.C 7:26E-1). The Resource Conservation
Construction Time Frame:         1 year                           and Recovery Act (RCRA), 40 CFR 261, is applicable
                                                                  for assessing the disposal requirements of potentially
EPA’s Preferred Alternative, Excavation and Off-site              hazardous solid wastes, such as the LNAPL-
Treatment/Disposal was evaluated in the OU1 Phase 2               contaminated soils. Based upon the available
Focused RI/FS and presented as Alternative 4 in the               documentation, EPA has concluded that the LNAPL
2009 OU1 ROD. This original alternative called for the            wastes are not listed hazardous waste, but will require
excavation of only principal threat LNAPL, and is now             treatment to meet RCRA Land Disposal Restrictions.
being modified to also include low-level threat LNAPL,            Both remedies can be designed to meet location- and
as well as utilizing the I-280 ROW berm soils as fill for         action-specific ARARs, and would also require a
the excavated RTAs. Under this alternative, all                   reliance on ICs indefinitely to prevent damage of the
LNAPL source material will be excavated from the                  soil cover and any intrusive activities into the residual
RTA, which is approximately 49,000 cubic yards                    contamination. The Original Remedy would not meet
(Figure 2). The excavated material will then be                   the RAOs, except for preventing direct contact with
stabilized on site to allow for transportation for offsite        principal threat LNAPL waste at the surface, while the
treatment and disposal. The excavated areas will then             Preferred Alternative would meet all RAOs at the end
be backfilled with the non-hazardous I-280 ROW berm               of the estimated 1-year construction timeframe.
soil, and clean fill that will be added to grade. Any
hazardous wastes will be transported to an appropriate            3. Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence
disposal facility. This alternative will be conducted
concurrently with the OU2 remedial action.                        The Preferred Alternative would remove all potential
                                                                  risks associated with the presence of LNAPL source
A Comparative Analysis between the Original Remedy                material, providing reliable controls to prevent future
and the Preferred Alternative is presented below.                 contact. Use of a soil cover addressed under OU2
                                                                  would be adequate and reliable in preventing direct
EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES FOR OU1                                contact with, and erosional transport of, berm materials
                                                                  used as backfill. Any remaining contamination present
1. Overall Protection of Human Health and the                     in the I-280 ROW berm soil would still present
   Environment                                                    potential risks, however the concentration would be
                                                                  comparable to the concentration found in the residual
The Original Remedy will not meet RAOs or                         soils around the RTA. Any potential risks associated
remediation goals outlined in the OU1 2009 ROD. The               with the I-280 berm soil would be addressed by the
Preferred Alternative would achieve the RAOs and                  placement of the soil cover as part of the OU2 remedy.

                                                             13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The Original Remedy would keep the low-level threat               6. Implementability
LNAPL within a biocell onsite, and provide a cover to
control the potential risks associated with direct contact        The     Original    Remedy       is   technically    and
and erosional transport of the low-level threat LNAPL             administratively feasible, and necessary engineering
at the Site, which would be adequate and reliable.                services and materials are readily available to design,
Since the biocell was shown to be ineffective at treating         construct, and operate the biocell, but the technology
the low-level threat LNAPL, the waste would remain                has proved ineffective for the treatment of the principal
unchanged. The preferred alternative would achieve                threat LNAPL waste at this Site. The Preferred
remediation goals that are protective for the LNAPL               Alternative is technically and administratively feasible,
source material, but a subsequent decision is still               the necessary engineering services, equipment, and
necessary to address the residual contaminated soil.              materials are readily available, and excavation and
Thus, the need for institutional controls, such as a deed         disposal are well proven technologies. Both the
notice, would be determined as part of OU2.                       Original and Preferred Remedy would require ICs to
                                                                  prevent intrusive activities into remaining residual
                                                                  contamination. ICs for both alternatives are readily
4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume                     implementable.
   through Treatment
                                                                  7. Cost
In the Preferred Alternative, the toxicity and volume of
the LNAPL source material would remain unchanged,                 The Original Remedy has a present worth cost of
as the Preferred Alternative does not implement                   $17,340,0005 based on the Phase 2 Focused RI/FS,
treatment, rather the source material would be                    while the Preferred Alternative has a present worth cost
transferred from the Site to a disposal facility. The             of $13,733,000.
mobility of contaminants in surface soil berm materials
used as backfill in the RTAs would be reduced through             SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES
the use of a soil cover as part of OU2 to control                 FOR OU2
potential releases by water and wind erosion. In the
                                                                  CERCLA requires that each selected remedy be
Original Remedy, the toxicity and volume of the
                                                                  protective of human health and the environment, be
principal threat LNAPL waste would remain
                                                                  cost effective, comply with other statutory laws, and
unchanged, as it would be transferred off-site for
                                                                  utilize permanent solutions and alternative treatment
disposal, but the toxicity, mobility, and volume of the
                                                                  technologies and resource recovery alternatives to the
remaining low-level threat LNAPL waste placed inside
                                                                  maximum extent practical. In addition, the statute
the biocell would remain unchanged, since the
                                                                  includes a preference for the use of treatment as a
proposed treatment was found to be ineffective.
                                                                  principal element for the reduction of toxicity, mobility,
                                                                  or volume of the hazardous substances.
5. Short-Term Effectiveness
                                                                  Potential technologies applicable to soil remediation
Both the Original Remedy and the Preferred Alternative            were identified and screened by effectiveness,
would mitigate potential risks to workers through                 implementability, and cost, with emphasis on
adherence to site-specific health and safety plans, to            effectiveness. Those technologies that passed the initial
communities through the use of engineering controls,              screening were then assembled into remedial
and would have minimal potential risks to the                     alternatives.
environment during construction. Short-term risks
associated with the Preferred Alternative would be                Full descriptions of each proposed alternative can be
greater than those associated the Original Alternative            found in the FS which is part of the Administrative
because of the larger transportation component that is            Record. Table 1 provides a summary of the components
involved, while the short-term risks associated with the          for each alternative.
Original Alternative would be the lowest for
construction and operation.                                       5
                                                                   The present worth costs for the Biocell remedy were not updated
                                                                  because the biocell treatment is not technically feasible.


                                                             14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The time frames below are for construction and do not           Approximately 440 cubic yards of TSCA/RCRA
include the time to design a remedy, or the time to             contaminated soil, and 800 cubic yards of sediment,
procure necessary contracts. Five-year reviews will be          will be removed under this alternative and transported
conducted as a component of the three alternatives              to an appropriate disposal facility (i.e RCRA Subtitle C
(Alternative 2, Alternative 3, and Alternative 4) that          or TSCA disposal facility).
leave contamination in place. The present worth cost
for all alternatives includes the periodic present worth        For cost estimation purposes, EPA has assumed that
cost of five-year reviews.                                      approximately 500 cubic yards of soil contaminated
                                                                with dioxin greater than 7,300 ppt will be disposed of at
Alternative 1 - No Action                                       a Subtitle C facility.

Capital Cost:                   $0                              Institutional controls, such as a deed notice will be used
Annual O&M Cost:                $0                              to prevent contact with residual contaminated soil and
Present Worth Cost:             $0                              ensure that future use of the site does not damage the
Timeframe:                       0 years                        soil covers.       Since this alternative results in
                                                                contaminants remaining on site above acceptable levels,
The NCP requires that a “No Action” alternative be              five-year reviews are required.
evaluated to establish a baseline for comparison with
other remedial alternatives. Under this alternative, no         Alternative 3 – Excavation of Soils in Areas A, B,
action would be taken to control or remove low-level            and C and offsite disposal; Vegetated Soil Cover;
contamination or to prevent exposure at the Site.               Institutional Controls; and Excavation of Sediments

Alternative 2 – Excavation of Soils in Areas B and              Capital Cost:                    $18,750,000
C; Vegetated Soil Cover in Areas A, B, and C;                   Annual O&M Cost:                 $67,000
Institutional Controls; and Excavation of Sediments             Present Worth Cost:              $20,337,000
                                                                Construction Time Frame:         Less than 1 year
Capital Cost:                   $8,461,000
Annual O&M Cost:                $67,000                         This alternative consists of construction of a two-foot
Present Worth Cost:             $10,048,000                     soil cover as the primary measure to prevent exposure
Construction Time Frame:        Less than 1 year                to residual contamination in the underlying soil. Soils
                                                                in Areas A, B, and C will be excavated to a depth of
This alternative consists of construction of a two-foot         two feet, except for the landfill, totaling 70,600 cubic
soil cover as the primary measure to prevent exposure           yards. A two-foot soil cover will be added, and the
to residual contamination in the underlying soil. In            wetlands in Area A will be restored. The soil cover for
Areas B and C (Figure 2), up to two feet of surface soil        Areas A, B, and C will consist of 18 inches of clean fill
will be excavated, totaling 31,300 cubic yards, before          and six inches of topsoil.
placing a cover to maintain the current drainage
patterns.   Excavated soils from Areas B and C                  Sediment in the drainage ditch along I-280 will be
containing non-hazardous materials will be placed               excavated to an approximate depth of 18 inches, and 18
within Area A, and graded to facilitate cover placement.        inches of stone bedding will be added.
The soil cover for Areas A, B, and C will consist of 18
inches of clean fill and six inches of topsoil. The             Approximately 107,470 cubic yards of TSCA/RCRA
wetland areas within Area A will also be excavated to a         contaminated soil, and 800 cubic yards of sediment,
depth of two feet to accommodate the soil cover and             will be removed under this alternative and transported
wetland restoration, but no other locations within Area         offsite to an appropriate disposal facility (i.e. RCRA
A will be excavated.                                            Subtitle C or TSCA disposal facility).

Sediment in the drainage ditch along I-280 will be              For cost estimation purposes, EPA has assumed that
excavated to an approximate depth of 18 inches, and 18          approximately 500 cubic yards of soil contaminated
inches of stone bedding will be added.

                                                           15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

with dioxin greater than 7,300 ppt will be disposed of at
a Subtitle C facility.                                                  THE NINE SUPERFUND EVALUATION
                                                                                   CRITERIA
Institutional controls, such as a deed notice will be used          1. Overall Protectiveness of Human Health and the
to prevent contact with contaminated soil and ensure                Environment evaluates whether and how an alternative
that future use of the site does not damage the soil                eliminates, reduces, or controls threats to public health
covers. Since this alternative results in contaminants              and the environment through institutional controls,
                                                                    engineering controls, or treatment.
remaining on site above acceptable levels, five-year
reviews are required.                                               2. Compliance with Applicable or Relevant and
                                                                    Appropriate Requirements (ARARs) evaluates whether
Alternative 4 – Excavation of Soils in Areas A, B,                  the alternative meets federal and state environmental
                                                                    statutes, regulations, and other requirements that pertain
and C; Onsite Stabilization and Consolidation of
                                                                    to the site, or whether a waiver is justified.
soils and sediments in Area A; Vegetated Soil
Cover; Institutional Controls; and Excavation of                    3. Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence
Sediments                                                           considers the ability of an alternative to maintain
                                                                    protection of human health and the environment over
                                                                    time.
Capital Cost:                    $10,561,000
Annual O&M Cost:                 $67,000                            4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume (TMV) of
Present Worth Cost:              $12,148,                           Contaminants through Treatment evaluates an
Construction Timeframe:          2 years                            alternative's use of treatment to reduce the harmful
                                                                    effects of principal contaminants, their ability to move in
                                                                    the environment, and the amount of contamination
This alternative consists of construction of a two-foot             present.
soil cover as the primary measure to prevent exposure
to residual contamination in the underlying soil. Soils             5. Short-term Effectiveness considers the length of time
in Areas A, B, and C will be excavated to a depth of                needed to implement an alternative and the risks the
                                                                    alternative poses to workers, the community, and the
two feet, except for the landfill, totaling 70,600 cubic            environment during implementation.
yards. Excavated soil from Areas A, B, and C will then
be stabilized and placed in Area A, and a six-inch                  6. Implementability considers the technical and
topsoil cover will be added. Wetlands in Area A will be             administrative feasibility of implementing the alternative,
                                                                    including factors such as the relative availability of goods
restored. The soil cover placed in Areas B and C will
                                                                    and services.
consist of 18 inches of clean fill and six inches of
topsoil.                                                            7. Cost includes estimated capital and annual operations
                                                                    and maintenance costs, as well as present worth cost.
Sediment in the drainage ditch along I-280 will be                  Present worth cost is the total cost of an alternative over
                                                                    time in terms of today's dollar value. Cost estimates are
excavated to an approximate depth of 18 inches, and 18              expected to be accurate within a range of +50 to -30
inches of stone bedding will be added. The excavated                percent.
sediment will be transported to Area A for stabilization.
                                                                    8. State/Support Agency Acceptance considers
                                                                    whether the State agrees with the EPA's analyses and
Approximately 94,200 cubic yards of soil will be
                                                                    recommendations, as described in the RI/FS and
removed, stabilized, and put back in place.                         Proposed Plan.
Approximately 5,250 cubic yards of TSCA/RCRA
contaminated soil, and 800 cubic yards of sediment,                 9. Community Acceptance considers whether the local
will be removed and transported offsite to an                       community agrees with EPA's analyses and preferred
                                                                    alternative. Comments received on the Proposed Plan
appropriate disposal facility (i.e. RCRA Subtitle C or              are an important indicator of community acceptance.
TSCA disposal facility).

For cost estimation purposes, EPA has assumed that
approximately 500 cubic yards of soil contaminated                Institutional controls, such as a deed notice will be used
with dioxin greater than 7,300 ppt will be disposed of at         to prevent contact with contaminated soil and ensure
a Subtitle C facility.                                            that future use of the site does not damage the covers.

                                                             16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Since this alternative results in contaminants remaining          Remediation Standards while developing alternatives
on site above acceptable levels, five-year reviews are            for the Site. New Jersey relies on a series of guidance
required.                                                         documents to provide a basis for developing site-
                                                                  specific impact-to-groundwater soil cleanup goals,
EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES FOR OU2
                                                                  however, the methodologies for developing the site-
EPA uses nine criteria to evaluate the remedial                   specific numbers have not been promulgated, and are
alternatives individually and against each other to select        therefore not Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate
a remedy. This section of the Proposed Plan presents              Requirements (ARARs), but are “to be considered”.
the relative performance of each alternative against the
nine criteria, noting how each alternative compares to            Alternative 1 is the only alternative that would not
the other alternatives under consideration. The nine              comply with chemical-, action-, or location-specific
evaluation criteria are discussed below. A detailed               ARARs, since no action will be taken, leaving soils and
analysis of each of the alternatives appears in the FS            sediments in place that exceed New Jersey Non-
report.                                                           Residential Direct Contact Remediation Standards
                                                                  (NJNRDCSRS), posing an unacceptable risk to human
1. Overall Protection of Human Health and the                     health and the environment.
   Environment
                                                                  Alternatives 2, 3, and 4 comply with chemical‐specific
Alternative 1, No Action, would not be protective of              ARARs, such as the NJNRDCSRS, which establish
human health or the environment since it does not                 minimum direct contact soil remediation levels.
include measures to prevent exposure to contaminated              Alternatives 2 and 3 accomplish this by removing soils
soils or sediments.                                               and sediment that exceed ARARs, while Alternative 4
                                                                  accomplishes this by treating soils and sediment
Alternatives 2, 3 and 4 are protective, and prevent               through stabilization. Location- and action-specific
unacceptable human health and ecological risk by                  ARARs can be met through design and implementation
eliminating exposure pathways through containment,                for Alternatives 2, 3, and 4. Action-specific ARARs,
removal, or treatment.                                            such as the Toxic Substances Control Act will be met
                                                                  through the proper management of PCB remediation
Each alternative includes varying degrees of removal or           wastes, while location-specific ARARs, such as the
cover, and institutional controls to prevent exposure             Flood Hazard Area Control Act Regulations, will be
and address the risk at the site. Alternative 4 includes          met by ensuring that measures for excavating, grading,
treatment (stabilization) of soil and incorporation of            and fill do not impede overland flow of stormwater.
stabilized soil into the Area A cover, while Alternatives
2 and 3 use clean fill for the soil cover.           The          3. Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence
stabilization under Alternative 4 would aim to achieve
the New Jersey Non-Residential Direct Contact                     Alternative 1 provides no controls and does not
Remediation Standards for industrial use. Treatability            maintain protection of human health and the
testing would be needed to determine the effectiveness            environment over the long-term because there is no
of stabilization under Alternative 4 to achieve these             mechanism to prevent exposure to contaminated soils
standards.                                                        or sediment.

2. Compliance with Applicable or Relevant and                     With regard to soil cover, Alternatives 2 and 3 would
Appropriate Requirements (ARARs)                                  have equal reliability of controls since the cover
                                                                  thickness is the same under both alternatives and the
Actions taken at any Superfund site must meet all                 cover material would meet New Jersey’s Residential
applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements               Direct Contact Remediation Standards (NJRDCRS).
                                                                  Under Alternative 4, surface soils that are excavated
under federal and state laws or provide grounds for
                                                                  from Areas B and C to accommodate soil cover would
invoking a waiver of those requirements. EPA                      be stabilized and incorporated into the soil cover
evaluated NJDEP’s Impact to Groundwater Soil                      material in Area A.
                                                             17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 4 would have lower reliability than                    intrusive when compared to Alternatives 3 and 4.
Alternatives 2 and 3 because stabilized material would             Alternative 2 also has the lowest potential risks to the
be used as part of the cover. The stabilized material              community due to the short construction duration and
would be used as part of the 2-foot cover, except in the           the fewest impacts to traffic. The potential for
wetlands areas and in Areas B and C, where soils with              additional risks to the environment is minimal for
concentrations below New Jersey’s Residential Direct               Alternative 2, and RAOs are expected to be met within
Contact Remediation Standards would be used for                    1 year.
cover.
                                                                   Alternative 3 has a longer construction duration than
Under Alternatives 2, 3, and 4, institutional controls,            Alternative 2, and a shorter construction duration than
such as a deed notice, would be used to prevent contact            Alternative 4. Alternative 3 would produce more truck
with contaminated soil and ensure that future use of the           traffic when compared to Alternatives 2 and 4, and
site does not damage the covers.                                   would have the greatest traffic impact to the community
                                                                   resulting from the volume of material transported
4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume                      offsite for disposal, and the importing of backfill
   through Treatment                                               material. The potential for additional risks to the
                                                                   environment is minimal for Alternative 3, and RAOs
Alternative 1 does not implement any treatment                     are expected to be met within 2 years.
processes, and therefore does not provide for a
reduction in the toxicity, mobility, or volume of                  Alternative 4 would have the longest construction
contaminants. Alternative 1 also does not generate any             duration, and more construction related activities than
treatment residuals, and it does not meet the statutory            Alternatives 2 and 3. Alternative 4 would present the
preference for treatment.                                          highest potential risks to workers, but have less traffic
                                                                   impacts that Alternative 3. Alternative 4 would also
Alternative 2 does not implement any treatment                     present the highest potential risks to the community
processes, and the toxicity, mobility, and volume of               resulting from a longer construction duration, including
contaminants remains unchanged.                                    additional noise, odor, and dust. Additional emission
                                                                   control techniques would need to be implemented under
Alternative 3 does not implement any treatment                     Alternative 4. The potential for additional risks to the
processes, and the toxicity, mobility, and volume of               environment is minimal for Alternative 4, and RAOs
contaminants remains unchanged.                                    are expected to be met within 2 years.

Alternative 4 is the only remedial alternative that                6. Implementability
includes a treatment component (stabilization), which
provides a greater reduction of toxicity and mobility              Alternative 1 is implementable and feasible because no
than Alternatives 2 and 3. The stabilization component             action would be taken.
of Alternative 4 results in a reduction in the toxicity and
mobility, but it would be expected to result in an                 Alternative 2 is the most technically feasible, and is
increase in volume due to the addition of stabilization            administratively feasible, and materials and services for
materials.                                                         Alternative 2 are readily available.

5. Short-Term Effectiveness                                        Alternative 3 is technically feasible, but would require
                                                                   additional soil management and traffic management
Alternative 1 involves no action, so there is no risk to           when compared to Alternative 2. Alternative 3 is
workers, no additional risks to the community or the               administratively feasible, and materials and services are
environment, and the Alternative will not achieve                  readily available, however it may require increased
RAOs.                                                              transport distances due to the larger quantity of backfill
                                                                   materials needed for this alternative.
Alternative 2 has the lowest potential risks for workers,
the shortest construction duration, and is the least

                                                              18

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 4 is the least technically feasible, and
requires additional soil management to stabilize the                    Disposal of any RCRA or TSCA hazardous
soils, when compared to Alternatives 2 and 3.                            waste at an appropriate offsite facility (i.e.
Alternative 4 is administratively feasible, and materials                RCRA Subtitle C or TSCA disposal facility);
and services are readily available. Alternative 4 would
require treatability testing to determine the                           Distribution of excavated soils from Areas B
effectiveness of the technology to select the appropriate                and C, and wetland areas, across Area A for
stabilizing agent(s).                                                    regrading;

For Alternatives 2, 3, and 4, access requirements would                 Disposal of excavated sediments           at   an
have to be addressed with property owners for each                       appropriate offsite facility;
alternative, as well as institutional controls, such as
deed notices.                                                           Installation of a 2-foot vegetated clean soil
                                                                         cover as an engineering control;
7. Cost
                                                                        Wetland restoration; and
The total estimated present worth costs of Alternatives
1, 2, 3, and 4 are $0, $10,048,000, $20,337,000, and                    Implementation of a deed notice as an
$12,148,000, respectively. Alternative 3 is the most                     institutional control.
expensive and Alternative 1 is the least expensive.
                                                                 A two-foot soil cover will be constructed as the primary
SUMMARY OF PREFERRED ALTERNATIVES                                measure to prevent exposure to contaminants in the
                                                                 underlying soil. In Areas B and C, up to two feet of
OU1 Preferred Alternative                                        surface soil, approximately 31,300 cubic yards, will be
                                                                 excavated before placing a cover to maintain the current
The Preferred Alternative for OU1 is Alternative 4 –             drainage patterns. For cost estimation purposes, EPA
Excavation and Off-site Treatment/Off-site Disposal.             has assumed that approximately 500 cubic yards of soil
The major components of this alternative include:                contaminated with dioxin greater than 7,300 ppt will be
                                                                 disposed of at a Subtitle C facility. In addition, EPA has
         Excavation and offsite disposal of entire RTA          estimated that approximately 440 cubic yards of
          of LNAPL source material                               TSCA/RCRA contaminated soil will be disposed of
                                                                 offsite at an appropriate disposal facility (i.e. RCRA
         Backfilling of excavated areas with I-280 ROW          Subtitle C or TSCA disposal facility).
          berm soil containing non-hazardous soil, and
          additional clean fill to grade; and,                   Based on groundwater data to date, EPA does not
                                                                 believe that soil remaining onsite will contribute to
         Supplementing backfill with clean soil as              groundwater contamination. To confirm this, Synthetic
          needed.                                                Precipitation Leaching Procedure (SPLP), or a
                                                                 comparable test, will be performed during the design
OU2 Preferred Alternative                                        phase. For soils that fail SPLP, or a comparable test,
                                                                 additional actions will be taken to prevent the migration
The Preferred Alternative for OU2 is Alternative 2 –             of contaminants to groundwater. Excavated soils from
Excavation of Soil in Areas B and C; Vegetated Soil              Areas B and C will be placed within Area A, and
Cover in Areas A, B, and C; Institutional Controls; and          graded to facilitate cover placement. The wetland areas
Excavation of Sediments. The major components of                 within Area A will also be excavated to a depth of two
this alternative include:                                        feet, to accommodate the soil cover, and restored, but
                                                                 no other locations within Area A will be excavated.
         Excavation of 2 feet of surface soil from Area
          B and C, and wetland areas located in Area A,
          totaling 31,300 cubic yards;

                                                            19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Sediment in the drainage ditch along I-280 will be
excavated to an approximate depth of 18 inches, and 18           COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
inches of stone bedding will be added.
                                                                 EPA provided information regarding the cleanup of the
The Preferred Alternative was selected over other                Site through meetings, the Administrative Record file
alternatives because it reduces the risk within a                for the Site, and announcements published in the local
reasonable time frame, and at a lower cost than other            newspaper. EPA encourages the public to gain a more
alternatives. The Preferred Alternative will meet                comprehensive understanding of the OUs and the
chemical-specific ARARs and can be designed to meet              remedial investigation activities that have been
action- and location-specific ARARs. It poses the                conducted at them.
lowest potential risks to onsite workers and the
community because it would have the shortest                     The dates for the public comment period, the date,
construction duration, and the fewest impacts to traffic.        location, and time of the public meeting, and the
                                                                 locations of the Administrative Record file, are
The Preferred Alternative is technically feasible, and is        provided on the front page of this Proposed Plan.
administratively feasible, and materials and services are
readily available for its implementation. The potential          For further information on EPA’s Preferred Alternative
for additional risks to the environment are minimal, and         for the Diamond Head Oil Refinery Superfund Site
RAOs are expected to be met within 1 year.                       contact:

The Preferred Alternative would achieve PRGs that are
                                                                    Brittany Hotzler               Wanda Ayala
protective for non-residential use, but would not
                                                                 Remedial Project Manager       Community Relations
achieve levels that would allow for unrestricted use and
                                                                     (212) 637-4337               (212) 637-3676
therefore, institutional controls, such as a deed notice
would be required. Five-year reviews would be                                         U.S. EPA
conducted since contamination would remain above                              290 Broadway, 19th Floor
levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted                       New York, New York 10007-1866
exposure.
                                                                                    On the Web at:
State Acceptance                                                    https://www.epa.gov/superfund/diamond-head-oil

The State of New Jersey concurs with the EPA’s
Preferred Alternatives presented in this Proposed Plan.

Community Acceptance

The Preferred Alternatives are believed to provide the
best balance of tradeoffs among the alternatives based
on the information available to EPA at this time. EPA
believes the Preferred Alternatives would be protective
of human health and the environment, would comply
with ARARs, would be cost-effective, and would
utilize permanent solutions. The selected alternatives
may change in response to public comment or new
information.

Consistent with EPA Region 2’s Clean and Green
policy, EPA will evaluate the use of sustainable
technologies and practices with respect to
implementation of a selected remedy.

                                                            20

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

21

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Frank’s Creek

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Attachment B – Public Notice published in the June 19, 2017
                 edition of The Observer

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                       Tta:OIHDYDIWUMCIOAY.JUNl.21.2017                         17
                                                                                                                played on my home field. f ve                Canino will play college
VIEWfrom lljl                                                                                                   played there my whole life.                football for the Red Hawks of
chance to play with the best                                                                                    given that the place has artifi.           Montclair State.
o f the best. I made friends                                                                                    ciaJ turf.•                                  "'It's great to be playing
with ever)'one ."                                                                                                 Of course, hning the turf in             with Schnoll. but it's a little
     Schnoll said that he wasn't                                                                                their own backyard ga~·e the               sad that this was my last game
too disappointed about his                                                                                      South a fighting chance. But it            with the others; Carrino
team's loss.                                                                                                    wasn't meant to be.                        said. • t was pretty close with
   -We all came together for                                                                                      "'It was pretty tough, not               James. too. By being selected
o ne team: Schnoll said. -We                                                                                    hning played football for a                and playing in the game, it's a
had fun out there. I wanted to     ....                                                                         while," Carrino said.                      great feeling.. I had one of the
show everyone what we were                                                                                        Lyndhurst played Manches-                most awesome times with the
all about. It realty made me                                                                                    ter Regjonal to a 10- 10 tie in            All-Stan."
feel proud to be a part o f it                                                                                  the consolation game.                        Just like in life, there's a
In the second haJf. 1 made it                                                                                     •t felt good running." Car-              time to mo~·e on. For the
like we vrere playing without                                                                                   rino said. "'It felt good. Even            Lyndhurst kids, the rest of
a scoreboard. So we couldn't                                                                                    with the lack of running. it               their lives has now fully be-
give up."                                                                                                       felt good:'                                gun.   Q
   Canino just loved the                                 ~ ' - ' JSfft~

ch.a.nee. a regular Colden Bear
reunion.
                                   Lyndhi.lst long tine friends Matt
                                   Sdinol QJ ~ndMIChael CJtMo (rJ                              WE HAVE RELOCATED!
   "'It was great to be a part
o f it," Carrino said. "I got
                                   ..,get the~          ., play together
                                   11 the fall lotuontdal'srare after               512 Kearny Ave., Kearny, NJ
a chance to p]ay one more          pla)9'1g for rhe SovrhAN-Sta~ mday
game and the game was              n,gf,t                                     PREMIER CARE ASSOCIATES
                                                                                                       o{nfut Hu"5o-n
     [!s /theobservernj                                                                                For All Medical Urgencies
                                                                                                  Preventive and Primary Medical Care

                                                                            HJIJ. •im He-lcome-           201. 998 •7 4 7 4                                               \fost "-1.Jjor
                                                                           A/$0 b; Appointment             /l'Jffi.ins lot Jnd entr,mc'I:' on Ce!'tth St.           lmurJn~s A«'t',ptt'<i



                                                                                             EPA Inritlt!f Pu.blk CobdnieQt ob Ptopo.i toA.b»w,d Rcm.ediadoo ofOperabk
                                                                                             Utait I (OUt) - Ught Nooaqueo.._ Pbue-Uqv.id (LHAPIJ ldld a.Q..bOv.b«' the
                                                                                             Ptdim-ed Rdacdy for OU2 - Re.id.lad Coownioatiou lo SoU. aodSed.l.m,eot
                                                                                             at the Oiamood Head OUSapctfv.bd Site: tce.n.y. NJ


                                                                             The U.S. Ulvitonmentid lwt«tion ¼;fflq h.u i"5tle'd a Propc-1 l'lan IO amend W tcmediation orLNAM.
                                                                             .$0UIO: amt -lormer oil rq,m«ssint .-ction ofW llitc and tcm1ut1u ofW O il lake and announoe the iand
                                                                             the prmTl:d ttmedy DfOU2 - Soil -mdSedimmt Conumiiw:ion • the Diamond Head Oil Superfund site
                                                                             in Kc.ni New Jet1e7- A 30.d.iiy public comment period on the rrop,:.,d Pb:n. which identi:6cs t.he EPA',:
                                                                             p«femd dcurap plan ;and other dea:nup optiom dw: were c:umidcn-d hr ,be EPA. beii.. on June 19 and
                                                                             ends on July 19, 2017.
                                                                             The EPA',: prcfem.d demup plan consi,u of. for OUl-aavmCln ;and of&itc dispoul of,be LNAM.. sowu
                                                                             1Nterial; bd:fiflinc ofe,::a.va «I ucu: wit.h non-luxudoos berm soil; iand .supplemcntint had:60 rib dcm
                                                                             611.u no:ded. For OU2 - disposal or com:amimtcd -,ils containine PC& Ol'CI' 50 ppm -.-1 dioxins ;and
                                                                             futans O'oU 7,30(l ppc at iWI appm,priatc off'..site l"adlity b h.-ardous: W.Ul.e,; aa'fation of2 rttt of$urfaor
                                                                             .soi'.! &om ~ area iand 1-280 d:rt'ffldarea. aa'fation of 18 inc:bc.: or ..dimcn.ts and di,posal at ofl"w:
                                                                             bcility fur no~.-ardous: w;ut.e,; inmllation or ',I 2-looc ~ dean ,oil COWff .u an mfinoerint conuol;
                                                                             walmd fCSIOration; and implementation or ',I deed rlOQu .U VI institutioiul 0>nttoJ.

                                                                             Olft!lt the public commenc period, W EPA will bolcl a pub~c mcai:nf in K.camy, NJ to ROeive comments:
                                                                             on W prdcrttd cleanup plan iand other opaons that wue con,idered. The meetint wiD be bclcl on June 29,
                                                                             2017 at &00 pm in the rlWn c:ut11d chambcn at Town H._ 402 Kcuny A'llC!IUC. Keuny. New jcn,ey.

                                                                             The t'mpm«l rbn is.,_TailabJc ,u - -~ v/ superfund/clunond-head.oil or byal5:nt w.mcb Ayai.1. EPA:$
                                                                             Community ln¥0f.rcmenc CooedilWOf, at (212) 6:37-3676 and tcqQClll'.i:nf .,_ a,py by ma!.

                                                                             Writtm comments on the Propo$C'ICI rlan. pmamarkcd no later than J-', 19, 2017. may be mailed to Ridwd
                                                                             Ho. ErA rro;«t.Mm.-ett. U.S. EPA.290Broldway, 19d, lloor, Ncw\bll.NY 100CJ7.1866orenw'kd .,
                                                                             ho.ri~ v no luerthanJ11l7 I?. 2017.

                                                                             The Ackn..inutt.ui-.e Rtcord file amtainint the documents used or sdi«I on in dt-rdopinc W altemativo: iand
                                                                             p«fffl'ed dcurap plan i, a.vaibl,k b pul,lit ttYicw at the loUowint information rq,mi:loricc

                                                                             Keuny Pub~c Library loc:ated at 318 Kumy hffluc, Kearny. New Jeney

                                                                             ErA Rq;on 2 Stlf)ffllmCI Records Ccnt:tt loc:ated at 290 Broldway, 1Stb Floor. New York. New )b,i

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Attachment C – Transcript of the June 29, 2017 Public Meeting

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          1



 1              U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

 2                           Region II

 3

 4

 5   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x

 6   DIAMOND HEAD OIL REFINERY     :     STENOGRAPHIC

 7   Superfund Site                :      TRANSCRIPT

 8   Kearny Township, New Jersey :            OF

 9   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x       PUBLIC MEETING

10
                                 Town Hall
11                               402 Kearny Avenue
                                 Kearny, New Jersey
12                               Thursday, June 29, 2017
                                 Commencing 6:07 p.m.
13

14   PRESENT:

15

16   PAT SEPPI, Community Liaison, Public Affairs

17   Division

18   BRITTANY HOTZLER, Remedial Project Manager,

19   NJ Remediation Branch

20   RICH PUVOGEL, Remedial Project Manager

21   RICHARD HO, Remedial Project Manager

22   ELIAS RODRIGUEZ, M.P.A., Press Officer,

23   Public Affairs Division

24   CHUCK NACE, Environmental Toxicologist,

25   Emergency and Remedial Response Division

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        2



 1   ALSO PRESENT:

 2

 3   ANDREW B. JUDD, Hydrogeologist, Project Manager,

 4   CH2M Hill

 5

 6

 7

 8

 9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 3



 1                      I N D E X

 2                                        PAGE

 3   INTRODUCTION BY MS. SEPPI............   4

 4

 5   PRESENTATION BY MS. HOTZLER..........   5

 6

 7   QUESTIONING BY THE PUBLIC

 8            Mr. Bruno................... 21

 9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            4



 1                   MS. SEPPI:   Okay.    When you're ready

 2   we'll get started.    I don't think we need

 3   microphones.    I thank you for coming out tonight.

 4   We appreciate you taking the time to come here to

 5   talk about the Diamond Head proposed plan.

 6                  Just a couple of things.     Hopefully,

 7   you've read the proposed plan.       If not, there are

 8   some copies out there, and they're also online,

 9   which the comment period if you know will end on

10   July 19th.    This is a little bit different type

11   of meeting for E.P.A., much more formal.

12                  We have a stenographer who will be

13   taking down all comments and all of the

14   presentation, any questions, and then we will

15   have a transcript of that at the end.       And when

16   the Record of Decision's final legally binding

17   document is written, the answers to the questions

18   that people ask tonight will be a part of that

19   document.    It's called a Responsiveness Summary.

20   So you'll see that at that time.

21                  And, also, if you leave here tonight

22   and you decide, oh, you know, there are a couple

23   things I didn't ask, you can certainly send that

24   information to Brittany online.       So I'd like to

25   have other people who are here from E.P.A. and

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              5



 1   our contractor introduce themselves.        First,

 2   Brittany.

 3                   MS. HOTZLER:    Brittany Hotzler, I'm

 4   one of the Remedial project managers for the

 5   Diamond Head Oil site.

 6                   MR. PUVOGEL:    I'm Rich Puvogel.

 7                   MS. SEPPI:    Two Riches in a row,

 8   right?

 9                   MR. PUVOGEL:    I'm Rich Puvogel.      I'm

10   the section chief of the central New Jersey

11   remediation section.

12                   MR. HO:   I am Richard Ho.     I am the

13   other remedial project manager on the Diamond

14   Head Oil site.

15                   MS. SEPPI:    Chuck.

16                   MR. NACE:    I'm Chuck Nace, I'm an

17   environmental toxicologist with E.P.A.        I did the

18   human health and ecological risk assessments for

19   the site.

20                   MS. SEPPI:    Elias.

21                   MR. RODRIGUEZ:    Elias Rodriguez,

22   press officer for the E.P.A.

23                   MR. JUDD:    I'm Andy Judd with CH2M

24   Hill.    I'm a consultant for E.P.A. at the site.

25                   MS. SEPPI:    Okay.    So the reason

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            6



 1   we're here tonight is talk about E.P.A.'s

 2   proposed remedy, which you've already read, and

 3   give you the opportunity to ask questions.

 4   Brittany has a presentation and then after that

 5   presentation we'll certainly open the floor up to

 6   any questions you might have.

 7                 One thing I would like to ask, and I

 8   know sometimes it's difficult, if it's possible

 9   if you could hold your answers until the end.      A

10   lot of times what happens is, you know, your

11   question will be like the next slide or something

12   like that.   So this way we'll get right through

13   it and then get to your questions, which is the

14   most important for us here tonight.    So I think

15   with that I'll let Brittany do her presentation.

16                  MS. HOTZLER:   Thank you, Pat.   As I

17   said, my name is Brittany Hotzler.    I'm one of

18   the remedial project managers for the Diamond

19   Head Oil site.   Tonight I'll be giving you an

20   overview of the Superfund process, the history of

21   the site and E.P.A.'s activities at the site, a

22   discussion of the remedial alternatives, which

23   are the different cleanup options, and we'll end

24   with a discussion of our preferred cleanup plan

25   before we open it up to questions.    The

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          7



 1   presentation should be about 15 minutes.

 2                   So the Superfund process starts when

 3   someone alerts state or federal officials to a

 4   site and a preliminary assessment and site

 5   investigation are conducted.     The site is then

 6   added to the National Priorities List and this is

 7   a really important step in the process.     Once a

 8   site is listed it officially becomes a Superfund

 9   site and that releases federal funding for us to

10   do a study of the site.

11                  From here, we conduct a Remedial

12   Investigation, and this is to find out the nature

13   and the extent of the contamination or what

14   contaminants are at the site, where they're

15   located and who might be effected by it, be it

16   adults, children, animals or the local

17   environment.

18                  Then we perform a Feasibility Study.

19   This is to evaluate the different methods that

20   could be used to clean up the site.     And this now

21   looking at various technologies and using

22   E.P.A.'s nine criteria and I'll be -- -

23                   (Discussion off the record.)

24                   MS. HOTZLER:   A Feasibility Study is

25   then performed to evaluate the different methods

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 108 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        8



 1   that could be used to cleanup the site.   This

 2   involves looking at various technologies and

 3   comparing them to E.P.A.'s nine criteria, and

 4   I'll be discussing what those criteria are later

 5   in the presentation.

 6                 So based on the results of the

 7   Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study,

 8   E.P.A. proposes a remedy and that's where we are

 9   now, as shown by the box highlighted in red.

10                E.P.A. does this by releasing a

11   proposed plan for the preferred alternative, and

12   we seek input from the community during a 30-day

13   public comment period.   The public comment

14   period, as Pat said, for Diamond Head started on

15   June 19th and will conclude on July 19th.

16                So at the start of the public comment

17   period -- I'm sorry, at the end of public comment

18   period we use the information from the proposed

19   plan and community input to create the Record of

20   Decision for what we call the ROD, and that

21   documents the selected remedy and initiates the

22   start of the remedial design and remedial action

23   phase.

24                During the remedial design and

25   remedial action phase, the remedy is engineered

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 109 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          9



 1   and the construction and implementation of the

 2   remedy is carried out.

 3                  So this concludes the Superfund

 4   process portion of the presentation, and next

 5   I'll be giving you a brief history of the Diamond

 6   Head Oil site.

 7                   This image shows the general

 8   location of the site.    It's located at 1401

 9   Harrison Avenue in Kearny, New Jersey.    It's in

10   the red box.    So the site is comprised of a 30.5

11   acres in total, and it's comprised of three areas

12   that we refer to as Areas A, B and C.

13                  Area A is a 20.2 acre unoccupied

14   parcel that includes wetland areas, a drainage

15   ditch, a vegetative landfill and the remnants of

16   the former Diamond Head Oil refinery.

17                  Areas B and C consist of a 10.32 acre

18   portion of the I 280 interchange cloverleaf and

19   they're located east of the 20.2 acre parcel.

20                  The site was a location of an oil

21   reprocessing facility operated under several

22   different names from approximately 1946 until

23   1979.   The facility used multiple aboveground

24   storage tanks, drum storage areas and subsurface

25   pits to store oily wastes that were then

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 110 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         10



 1   discharged to the property.

 2                  In this image from 1976, the Diamond

 3   Head facility is circled in red, and inside the

 4   circle you can see vertical and horizontal

 5   storage tanks as well as some drums.    To the

 6   south and east of the facility is a large oil

 7   lake, which is approximately 6 to 7 acres in

 8   size.

 9                   So in 1976, while the facility was

10   still in operation, the New Jersey Department of

11   Transportation began construction of Interstate

12   280.    During construction N.J.D.O.T. removed over

13   10 million gallons of oil and oil contaminated

14   liquid, as well as 230,000 cubic yards of oily

15   sludge from the vicinity of the oil lake, and at

16   this time they also noticed an underground lake

17   of oil.

18                  The facility was abandoned in 1979

19   and lie dormant until the New Jersey Department

20   of Environment Protection requested that E.P.A.

21   evaluate the site in 1999.

22                  The site was then added to the

23   National Priorities List in September of 2002,

24   and as I said previously, this was an important

25   step because it released federal funding for

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 111 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         11



 1   E.P.A. to conduct studies at the site.

 2                  In this image you can see Harrison

 3   Avenue to the north and the Diamond Head facility

 4   is again circled in red.    The construction

 5   activities at this point have changed the

 6   landscape.    Ramp M and the I 280 Interchange

 7   cloverleaf can be seen in the central portion of

 8   the site.    And the outline for the I 280

 9   right-of-way soil berms can also be seen in the

10   center of the image, and there's also visible

11   staining in the soil from the remnants of the oil

12   lake.

13                   So here is an aerial view of the

14   Diamond Head Oil site today with some overlays.

15   We have Harrison Avenue to the north, Entrance

16   ramp M of Interstate 280 in the central portion

17   of the site and I 280 running along the South.

18                  In this image we can see the location

19   of the former oil reprocessing facility near

20   Harrison Avenue located in Area A.

21                  The New Jersey Department of

22   Transportation right-of-way soil berms are

23   outlined in red and they follow along Entrance

24   ramp M and I 280, along with the drainage ditch,

25   which is shown in light blue.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 112 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        12



 1                 Outlined in green is the footprint of

 2   the former oil lake and that extends out into the

 3   I 280 cloverleaf area, which we refer to as Areas

 4   B and C.

 5                  So from 2003 to 2008, E.P.A.

 6   conducted a Remedial Investigation and

 7   Feasibility Study at the site.   Sampling during

 8   these studies revealed LNAPL source material or

 9   light non aqueous phase liquid containing PCBs,

10   heavy metals and petroleum compounds such as

11   Benzene.   LNAPL are liquids are less dense than

12   water, so oil is a good example of this because

13   it floats on top of the water.

14                  E.P.A. made the decision to divide

15   the site into three separate phases or what we

16   call "operable" units, and this was to address

17   source material, residual contamination and

18   ground water at the site.

19                 The 2009 Record of Decision addressed

20   the source material at the site through

21   excavation and construction of an onsite biocell

22   for the treatment of the LNAPL waste.    The

23   biocell technology that was chosen in the Record

24   of Decision involved using bio remediation or

25   microbes to break down the LNAPL material.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 113 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        13



 1                From 2009 to 2015, pre design

 2   investigations were conducted for Phase 1 and a

 3   Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study was

 4   also conducted for Phase 2.   The Phase 2 study

 5   focused on the residual contamination found in

 6   the soil, sediment and surface water at the site.

 7                So this concludes the site history

 8   portion of the presentation, and next I'll be

 9   discussing E.P.A.'s findings at the site from the

10   Phase 2 investigation.

11                 So the results of the pre design

12   investigation determined that the onsite biocell

13   treatment technology would not attain the

14   remedial action objectives and the remediation

15   goals that were outlined in the Record of

16   Decision for the LNAPL source material.

17                So the investigation also helped to

18   refine the criteria used for measuring the extent

19   of the source material and it also increased the

20   volume from approximately 46,000 cubic yards to

21   49,000 cubic yards.   It also helped to identify

22   the remedial target area for the source material.

23                 E.P.A. collected additional soil,

24   sediment and surface water samples from the site

25   over the course of the Phase 2 Remedial

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 114 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         14



 1   Investigation.    The Remedial Investigation

 2   revealed multiple contaminants including

 3   chromium, dioxin, PCBs, lead, aldrin, thallium

 4   and benzo[a]pyrene, and these are the

 5   contaminants at the site that drive the risk.

 6                  The highest level of contaminants are

 7   found in the area of the former refining

 8   operation and within the footprints of the former

 9   oil lake.

10                   As part of the investigation for

11   Phase 2 a Baseline Human Health Risk Assessment

12   was conducted.    The results of the risk

13   assessment are provided in Tables 1 through 3 in

14   the proposed plan.    The Human Health Risk

15   Assessment evaluates cancer risks and non cancer

16   hazards under current and future land use

17   scenarios.    This means looking at the toxicity of

18   the chemicals found in various media, such as

19   soil or sediment, and the ways in which people

20   may be exposed to these chemicals.

21                  The risk assessment revealed risks

22   from exposure to residual contamination at the

23   site through ingestion, dermal contact and

24   inhalation.    The potentially effected population

25   includes adult site maintenance workers, child

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 115 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       15



 1   and adult trespassers, adult highway workers,

 2   adult industrial workers and adult construction

 3   workers.

 4                   A Baseline Ecological Risk

 5   Assessment was also conducted.    This, the

 6   potential risks to the ecological community

 7   include potential risks to soil invertebrate,

 8   water column aquatic communities and benthic

 9   invertebrates from exposure to surface soil,

10   surface water and sediment.

11                 So next I'll be discussing E.P.A.'s

12   nine criteria and the proposed cleanup plans for

13   the source material and residual contamination at

14   the site.   So these are the nine criteria that

15   E.P.A. uses to evaluate each potential

16   alternative and ultimately select a preferred

17   remedial alternative.

18                 Alternatives must meet the first

19   two criteria.    These are the threshold

20   criteria.   The next five are the balancing

21   criteria, and these are used to evaluate and

22   compare the possible alternatives and select the

23   preferred alternative.

24                 The final two are modifying criteria

25   because based on new information or input from

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 116 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         16



 1   the community E.P.A. may modify the preferred

 2   alternative.

 3                  Next I'll discuss E.P.A.'s proposed

 4   changes to the Phase 1 cleanup of the source

 5   material at the site.

 6                   The original Phase 1 remedy

 7   addressed the source material at the site through

 8   off-site disposal of source material that pose a

 9   principal threat, and construction of an on-site

10   biocell for the treatment of source material that

11   posed a low-level threat.

12                   After a Record of Decision is

13   signed, new information may be received or

14   generated that could effect the implementation of

15   the selected remedy, or could prompt the

16   reassessment of the remedy, and an amendment to

17   the Record of Decision may be issued.

18                  E.P.A. has selected excavation and

19   off-site disposal as a preferred alternative for

20   the LNAPL source material.    This alternative has

21   a cost of $13.7 million.

22                   Under E.P.A.'s preferred alternative

23   for the source material at the site, all LNAPL

24   source material, principal threat and low-level

25   threat, will be excavated from the remedial

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 117 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         17



 1   target area, which is approximately 49,000 cubic

 2   yards.    The excavated material will then be taken

 3   off-site for disposal.

 4                  Excavated areas will be backfilled

 5   with non hazardous soil from the I 280

 6   right-of-way soil berm and clean fill will be

 7   added to grade.

 8                  Under this alternative all hazardous

 9   wastes will be transported off-site to an

10   appropriate disposal facility.    This alternative

11   will be conducted concurrently with the Phase 2

12   remedial action.

13                   This image depicts the remedial

14   target area of the LNAPL source material that

15   will be excavated under the preferred alternative

16   for Phase 1.    The areas that we have outlined in

17   orange represent approximately 49,000 cubic cards

18   of LNAPL source material and these will be

19   excavated from Area A.

20                   Now I'll be discussing the preferred

21   alternative for the residual contamination at the

22   site.    So we're moving on from Phase 1 into Phase

23   2.   E.P.A. evaluated four different alternatives

24   for cleaning up the residual contamination at the

25   site.    The No Action alternative is always

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 118 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       18



 1   included as an alternative.    It shows what would

 2   happen if the E.P.A. did not perform a cleanup at

 3   the site.   Alternatives 2, 3 and 4 all include an

 4   excavation component and placement of a vegetated

 5   soil cover, but each of these alternatives include

 6   varying degrees of consolidation, off-site

 7   disposal or stabilization.

 8                  There are several common elements to

 9   the proposed alternatives, which include the

10   construction of a clean soil cover as the primary

11   measure to prevent exposure to the residual

12   contamination in the underlying soil, the

13   excavation of sediments in the drainage ditch

14   along I 280, the restoration of wetland areas at

15   the site, and the implementation of institutional

16   controls such as a Deed notice to prevent contact

17   with contaminated soil.

18                  E.P.A. has selected Alternative 2,

19   excavation of soil in Areas B and C, vegetated

20   cover in Areas A, B and C, institutional

21   controls, and excavation of sediment as the

22   preferred alternative for addressing residual

23   contamination at the site.    This alternative has

24   a cost of approximately $10 million.

25                 When compared to the other active

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 119 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       19



 1   alternatives, Alternative 2 is the most cost

 2   effective, has the lowest potential risks for

 3   site workers and the community, has the shortest

 4   construction duration and the fewest impacts to

 5   traffic, and is the least intrusive alternative.

 6                   Under this alternative, two feet of

 7   surface soil in Areas B and C, and wetland areas

 8   located in Area A would be excavated.

 9                Any hazardous wastes that are found

10   will be disposed of at an appropriate offsite

11   facility before the excavated soils are then

12   consolidated and placed into Area A.

13                2 feet of clean soil would then be

14   placed as a cover in Areas A, B and C.

15                Sediment in the drainage ditch would

16   be excavated to approximately 18 inches to allow

17   for the placement of 18 inches of stone bedding.

18                The excavated sediments would be

19   disposed of at an appropriate off-site facility,

20   and wetlands area in Area A would also be

21   restored.

22                This alternative would also include

23   the placement of Deed notices as institutional

24   controls, and this concludes this evening's

25   presentation.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 120 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          20



 1                   MS. SEPPI:   Okay.    Thank you,

 2   Brittany.

 3                   MS. HOTZLER:   Thank you.

 4                   MS. SEPPI:   So I just wanted to

 5   remind everybody who just came in, if you didn't

 6   sign in I would appreciate it if you do.       And if

 7   you don't have a copy of the proposed plan there

 8   are some copies and you're certainly welcome to

 9   take.   You might have already seen them online.

10                   AUDIENCE MEMBER:     Will these slides

11   be available?

12                   MS. SEPPI:   Well, you know what

13   we'll do, Brittany will send them to me --

14                   AUDIENCE MEMBER:     Okay.

15                   MS. SEPPI:   -- and we'll post them

16   on the web page.

17                   AUDIENCE MEMBER:     Okay.

18                   MS. SEPPI:   I would say give it

19   maybe until Monday because sometimes it takes a

20   day to get posted.    So Brittany will just send

21   those to me and I'll do that.

22                 So if anybody has questions, that's

23   fine, this is the time for it.       I would just like

24   to remind you if you have a question if you would

25   just state your name first for our stenographer,

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 121 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           21



 1   and spell it if it's difficult.      I know she has a

 2   lot of the cards, so that will help also.      So

 3   are, are there any questions?

 4                  Oh, no, this cannot be this easy.

 5   Anything?

 6                   MR. BRUNO:    Jim Bruno, B-r-u-n-o.

 7   What is the time frame?

 8                   MS. HOTZLER:    The time frame should

 9   be, I believe it's one year completion, correct

10   me if I am wrong, Rich.

11                   MR. PUVOGEL:    It's one year to

12   construct a remedy, but before that it's about a

13   year and a half to do the design of the remedy.

14                   MS. SEPPI:    I can't believe there's

15   not any more questions.      That's because your

16   presentation was just so good it answered

17   everybody's questions.

18                  Yeah, I mean, if there aren't any

19   more questions, you know, that's really it for us

20   tonight.    We appreciate you coming.

21                  And remember you have until July

22   19th.   If you have any more comments you can

23   certainly send them to Brittany via e-mail or by

24   snail mail whatever's easier for you.

25                  Okay.   That's it.   Thanks very much

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 122 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   22



 1   for coming.

 2                 AUDIENCE MEMBER:   Thank you.

 3                 (Time noted at 6:30 p.m.)

 4

 5

 6

 7

 8

 9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 123 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       23



 1                 C E R T I F I C A T E

 2

 3               I CERTIFY that the foregoing is a

 4   true and accurate transcript of the testimony as

 5   taken by and before me stenographically at the

 6   time and place aforementioned.

 7               I FURTHER CERTIFY that I am neither

 8   attorney for nor counsel to any of the parties;

 9   parties of any of the attorneys in this action;

10   and that I am not financially interested in the

11   outcome of this case.

12

13

14

15

16               RENEE RUSSO, CCR, CRCR, RPR, CRR

17               Certificate No. XI00143700

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 124 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX IV – ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 125 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                                  FINAL
                                                                                               06/19/2017                                                      REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: DIAMOND HEAD OIL REFINERY DIV
          CERCLIS ID: NJD092226000
               OUID: 01
                SSID: 02KK
              Action:


                                                                                     Image
DocID:   Doc Date:    Title:                                                         Count:     Doc Type:                   Addressee Name/Organization:                  Author Name/Organization:
336023   6/19/2017    COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX FOR                      4 Administrative Record                                               (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)
                      OU1 FOR THE DIAMOND HEAD OIL REFINERY DIVISION                              Index
                      SITE

103741    Undated     DIAMOND HEAD OIL REFINERY DIV. SITE, OPERABLE UNIT                 4       List/Index                                                    (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)
                      ONE, ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD FILE, INDEX OF
                      DOCUMENTS.

105191    Undated     DIAMOND HEAD OIL REFINERY DIV. SITE, OPERABLE UNIT                 1       List/Index                                                    (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)
                      ONE, ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD FILE UPDATE, INDEX OF
                      DOCUMENTS.
107966   6/19/1981    Letter of Transmittal to Mr. James A. Landon, Architect,          23        Letter           Landon, James, A (NONE)                     Mahle, Jr, John, C (JOHNSON SOILS ENGINEERING
                      from Mr. John C. Mahle, Jr., P.E., Johnson Soils Engineering                                                                             COMPANY)
                      Company, re: Proposed Hotel Development, Harrison
                      Avenue, Kearny, New Jersey, June 19, 1981. (Attachment: .
                      ..
107967   10/1/1988    Report: Site Characterization Plan for the Former Diamond         34        Report           (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)        (KILLAM ASSOCIATES)
                      Head Oil Refinery Site, Hudson Meadows Urban Renewal
                      Development Corporation, Kearny, New Jersey, prepared
                      by Killam Associates, Inc., Consulting Engineers, October,
                      1988.

107968    9/1/1990    Report: Report for Harbor Consultants, Inc. to Conduct a          43        Report           (HARBOR CONSULTANTS INCORPORATED)           (NOVA CONSULTANTS LTD)
                      Non-Tidal Wetland Delineation on, a Track Designated as:
                      Block 294, Lots 3, 15 and 14, Kearny, New Jersey, prepared
                      by Nova Consultants LTD., John F. Szczepanski, PHD.,
                      Principal Investigator/ . . .
107969   11/12/1991   Letter to Ms. Jeryl Turco-Maglio, Hudson Meadows Urban            12        Letter           Turco-maglio, Jeryl (HUDSON MEADOWS URBAN   Zelley, Robert, L (CONVERSE CONSULTANTS EAST),
                      Renewal Corp., from R. Brian Ellwood, Ph.D., Vice                                            RENEWAL CORPORATION)                        Ellwood, R. Brian (CONVERSE CONSULTANTS EAST)
                      President, and Mr. Robert L,. Zelley, CPG, Project
                      Hydrogeologist, Converse Consultants East, re: Aerial
                      Photograph Analysis, . . .

107965    7/1/2000    Report: Hazard Ranking System Documentation Package,              38        Report           (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)        (ROY F. WESTON INCORPORATED)
                      Diamond Head Oil Refinery Div., Kearny, Hudson County,
                      New Jersey, Cerclis Id No. NJD092226000, Volume 1 of 1,
                      prepared by Region 2 Superfund Technical Assessment and
                      Response . . .




                                                                                                        Page 1 of 4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 126 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                                FINAL
                                                                                             06/19/2017                                                       REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: DIAMOND HEAD OIL REFINERY DIV
          CERCLIS ID: NJD092226000
               OUID: 01
                SSID: 02KK
              Action:


                                                                                    Image
DocID:   Doc Date:    Title:                                                        Count:    Doc Type:               Addressee Name/Organization:                          Author Name/Organization:
107982   10/2/2002    Memorandum to Ms. Grisell Diaz-Cotto, ERRD/NJRB, U.S.            36    Memorandum      Diaz - Cotto, Grisell (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION Block, Arthur (DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN
                      Environmental Protection Agency, Region 2, from Mr.                                    AGENCY)                                            SERVICES)
                      Arthur Block, Sr. Regional Representative, Department of
                      Health & Human Services, Public Health Service, Agency
                      for Toxic Substances and Disease ...


107970   12/11/2002   Report: Response Action Contract, United States                 162      Report        (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)             (CH2M HILL)
                      Environmental Protection Agency, Region 6, Contract No.
                      68-W6-0036, Work Assignment No. 112- RICO-02KK DCN
                      02-4664, Revised Work Plan, Diamond Head Oil, Remedial
                      Investigation/Feasibility Study, . . .

107976    6/1/2004    Report: Draft Phase 1 Remedial Investigation Technical         1070      Report        (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)             (CH2M HILL)
                      Memorandum, Volume 2 Appendices, for the Diamond
                      Head Oil Superfund Site, Kearny, New Jersey, prepared by
                      CH2MHILL, prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection . . .


107977    2/1/2005    Report: Final Phase 1 Remedial Investigation Technical          710      Report        (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)             (CH2M HILL)
                      Memorandum, Volume 1, for the Diamond Head Oil
                      Superfund Site, Kearny, New Jersey, prepared by
                      CH2MHILL, prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection
                      Agency . . .
107971   12/1/2007    Report: Final Phase 2 Focused Remedial                           43      Report        (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)             (CH2M HILL)
                      Investigation/Feasibility Study, Contractor Quality Control
                      Plan for the Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site, Kearny,
                      New Jersey, prepared by CH2MHILL, prepared for U.S.
                      Environmental . . .

107972   12/1/2007    Report: Final Phase 2 Focused Remedial Investigation            208      Report        (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)             (CH2M HILL)
                      Uniform Federal Policy, Quality Assurance Project Plan
                      (UFP - QAPP) for the Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site,
                      Kearny, New Jersey, prepared by CH2MHILL, prepared for
                      U.S. Environmental . . .

107973   12/1/2007    Report: Final Phase 2 Focused Remedial                           98      Report        (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)             (CH2M HILL)
                      Investigation/Feasibility Study Health and Safety Plan for
                      the Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site, Kearny, New Jersey,
                      prepared by CH2MHILL, prepared for U.S. Environmental
                      Protection Agency, . . .




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 127 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                              FINAL
                                                                                           06/19/2017                                             REGION ID: 02
         Site Name: DIAMOND HEAD OIL REFINERY DIV
         CERCLIS ID: NJD092226000
              OUID: 01
               SSID: 02KK
             Action:


                                                                                  Image
DocID:   Doc Date:   Title:                                                       Count:    Doc Type:              Addressee Name/Organization:                 Author Name/Organization:
107974   12/1/2007   Report: Final Phase 2 Focused Remedial Investigation           156      Report        (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)   (CH2M HILL)
                     Sampling and Analysis Plan Addendum 1 for the Diamond
                     Head Oil Superfund Site, Kearny, New Jersey, prepared by
                     CH2MHILL, prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection . . .


107975   12/1/2007   Report: Final Attachment A, Phase 2 Remedial                    23      Report        (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)   (CH2M HILL)
                     Investigation Site Management Plan for the Diamond Head
                     Oil Superfund Site, Kearny, New Jersey, prepared by
                     CH2MHILL, prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection . . .


107978   7/1/2008    Report: Draft Phase 2 Focused Remedial Investigation           637      Report        (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)   (CH2M HILL)
                     Technical Memorandum, Volume 2 Appendices, for the
                     Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site, Kearny, New Jersey,
                     prepared by CH2MHILL, prepared for U.S. Environmental
                     Protection . . .

107979   2/1/2009    Report: Final Phase 2 Focused Remedial Investigation           190      Report        (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)   (CH2M HILL)
                     Technical Memorandum, Volume 1, for the Diamond Head
                     Oil Superfund Site, Kearny, New Jersey, prepared by
                     CH2MHILL, prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection
                     Agency . . .

107980   2/1/2009    Report: Revised Draft Phase 2 Focused Feasibility Study         45      Report        (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)   (CH2M HILL)
                     Technical Memorandum, LNAPL Interim Remedial
                     Measure Technology Screening and Evaluation for the
                     Diamond Head Oil Superfund Site, Kearny, New Jersey,
                     prepared by CH2MHILL, . . .

107981   6/1/2009    Report: Draft Final Operable Unit 1 Focused Feasibility        159      Report        (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)   (CH2M HILL)
                     Study for the LNAPL Source Area for the Diamond Head Oil
                     Superfund Site, Kearny, New Jersey, prepared by
                     CH2MHILL, prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection
                     Agency, . . .

107983   7/1/2009    Report: Superfund Program Proposed Plan, Diamond Head           17      Report                                               (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)
                     Oil Refinery Superfund Site, Kearny, New Jersey, prepared
                     by U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 2, July
                     2009.




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 128 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                    FINAL
                                                                                 06/19/2017                                                      REGION ID: 02
         Site Name: DIAMOND HEAD OIL REFINERY DIV
         CERCLIS ID: NJD092226000
              OUID: 01
               SSID: 02KK
             Action:


                                                                        Image
DocID:   Doc Date:   Title:                                             Count:    Doc Type:               Addressee Name/Organization:                         Author Name/Organization:
105100   9/25/2009   RECORD OF DECISION, OPERABLE UNIT 1 - LIGHT          128       Report                                                       (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)
                     NONAQUEOUS PHASE LIQUID SOURCE AREA, DIAMOND
                     HEAD OIL REFINERY SITE, KEARNY TOWNSHIP, HUDSON
                     COUNTY, NEW JERSEY

510343   1/1/2002    AERIAL PHOTOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS - TS-PIC-                52       Report                                                       (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)
                     20102331S/20202331S FOR THE DIAMOND HEAD OIL
                     REFINERY DIVISION SITE

451928   5/30/2017   COMPREHENSIVE REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION REPORT FOR     3941       Report        (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY), (US ARMY (CH2M HILL)
                     OU1 AND OU2 FOR THE DIAMOND HEAD OIL SITE                                    CORPS OF ENGINEERS)

451949   5/30/2017   FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT FOR OU1 AND OU2 FOR THE     256       Report        (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY), (US ARMY (CH2M HILL)
                     DIAMOND HEAD OIL SITE                                                        CORPS OF ENGINEERS)

510579   6/14/2017   PROPOSED PLAN FOR OU1 - ROD AMENDMENT AND OU2         23     Publication                                                    (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)
                     FOR THE DIAMOND HEAD OIL REFINERY DIVISION SITE




                                                                                         Page 4 of 4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 129 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                       ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                               FINAL
                                                                                            06/19/2017                                                                REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: DIAMOND HEAD OIL REFINERY DIV
          CERCLIS ID: NJD092226000
               OUID: 02
                SSID: 02KK
              Action:


                                                                                 Image
DocID:   Doc Date:   Title:                                                      Count:       Doc Type:                    Addressee Name/Organization:                           Author Name/Organization:
510505   6/19/2017   ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX FOR OU2 FOR THE DIAMOND              1   ARI / Administrative                                                       R02: (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)
                     HEAD OIL REFINERY DIVISION SITE                                         Record Index


510343   1/1/2002    AERIAL PHOTOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS - TS-PIC-20102331S/20202331S       52      RPT / Report                                                            R02: (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)
                     FOR THE DIAMOND HEAD OIL REFINERY DIVISION SITE



472626   2/24/2017   CORRESPONDENCE REGARDING TRW LEAD CONSULTATION                   4 MEMO / Memorandum R02: Hotzler, Brittany (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION        R02: Burgess, Michele (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                     REVIEW OF THE SOIL-DUST INGESTION RATE AND TARGET BLOOD                              AGENCY)                                                    AGENCY)
                     LEAD LEVEL OF CONCERN IN THE ADULT LEAD METHODOLOGY
                     FOR OU2 FOR THE DIAMOND HEAD OIL REFINERY DIVISION SITE


472625   3/1/2017    CORRESPONDENCE REGARDING HEADQUARTERS LEAD                       3 MEMO / Memorandum R02: Hotzler, Brittany (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION        R02: Stalcup, Dana (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                     CONSULTATION OSRTI REVIEW OF THE PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE                               AGENCY)                                                    AGENCY)
                     FOR OU2 FOR THE DIAMOND HEAD OIL REFINERY DIVISION SITE


472624   3/13/2017   CORRESPONDENCE REGARDING LEAD TRW AND HEADQUARTERS               2 MEMO / Memorandum R02: Hotzler, Brittany (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION        R02: Nace, Charles (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                     CONSULTATION COMMENTS FOR THE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD                                  AGENCY)                                                    AGENCY)
                     FOR OU2 FOR THE DIAMOND HEAD OIL REFINERY DIVISION SITE


451928   5/30/2017   COMPREHENSIVE REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION REPORT FOR OU1           3941      RPT / Report        R02: (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY), R02: (US R02: (CH2M HILL)
                     AND OU2 FOR THE DIAMOND HEAD OIL REFINERY DIVISION SITE                                     ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS)


451949   5/30/2017   FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT FOR OU1 AND OU2 FOR THE DIAMOND       256      RPT / Report        R02: (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY), R02: (US R02: (CH2M HILL)
                     HEAD OIL REFINERY DIVISION SITE                                                             ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS)


510579   6/14/2017   PROPOSED PLAN FOR OU2 FOR THE DIAMOND HEAD OIL                  23    PUB / Publication                                                         R02: (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)
                     REFINERY DIVISION SITE




                                                                                                            Page 1 of 1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 130 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX V – STATE LETTER OF CONCURRENCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 131 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   ~hd.e .of ~.efu Jf.ers.ell
                                               DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
Cl IRIS CHRISTIE                           SITE REMEDJATION & WASTE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM                                 BOB MARTIN
Governor                                                      Mail Code 401 -06                                        Commissioner
                                                               P. 0. Box420
KIM GUADAGNO                                          Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0420
Lt. Governor                                                Tel.#: 609-292- 1250
                                                            Fax.#: 609-777-191 4


                                                           September 13, 20 l 7


        Mr. John Prince, Acting Director
        Emergency and Remedial Res ponse Division
        U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
        Region II
        290 Broadway
        New York, NY 10007-1866

        Re:        Diamond Head O il Refinery Superfund Site
                   Record of Decision Amendment Operable Unit 1
                   Record of Decision O perable Un it 2
                   EPA ID# NJD092226000
                   DEP Pl# G000003964

        Dear Mr. Pri nce:

        T he New Jersey Depa11ment of Environmental Protection (DEP) completed its review of the "Record of
        Decision, Operable Unit 2 - Soil and Sediments, Record of Decision Amendment, Operable Unit 1 - Light
        Non-Aqueous Phase Liqu id Source Area, Diamond I-lead Oil Refinery Superfund Site, Kearny Townsh ip,
        Hudson County, New Jersey" prepared by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Region II in
        September 2017 and concurs with the selected remedies to address principal threat waste and other soil
        and sediment contamination.

        DEP appreciates that its concerns for appropriate excavation and out of state off-site d isposal of
        hazardous wastes and e levated dioxin levels have been addressed through the remedies selected, as well
        as incorporating DEP' s concerns for potential impacts to groundwater from material capped on site. The
        selected remedies include an amendment to the Light Non-Aqueous Phase Liquid (LNAPL) source area
        remedy selected in the Operable Unit l (OU l) September 25, 2009 Record of Decision (ROD), and a
        selected cleanup for other contaminated soil and sediments as part of the Operable Un it 2 (OU2).

        T he amended remedy described in this document modifies a component of the LNAPL source area
        remedy selected in the 2009 ROD, and now calls for the entirety of the LNAPL source areas that
        primarily address princ ipal threat waste to be excavated and disposed off site.

        In add ition, the response action described in the document selects the remedy for OU2, which is planned
        to be implemented in conjunction with the amended remedy for OU 1, and involves the disposal of
        contaminated soils; installation of a vegetative soi l cover in Areas A, B, and C; institutional controls; and
        excavation of sediments in the drainage ditch .




                             New Jersey is an Equal Opportuniry t,:mployer, Printed on Recycled Paper and Recyclable

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 132 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The major components of the OU l amended remedy includes:

     •   Excavation and off-site disposal of the ent ire Remediation Target Area of LNAPL source
         material;
     •   Backfilling of excavated areas with I-280 berm soil containing non-hazardous soil, and additional
         clean fill to grade; and,
     •   Supplementing backfill with clean soil as needed.

The major components of the OU2 remedy include:

     •   Excavation of two feet of surface soil from Areas Band C, and wetland areas located in Area A,
         totaling 3 1,300 cubic yards;
     •   Disposal of any RCRA or TSCA hazardous waste at an appropriate offsite fac ility (i.e., RCRA
         Subtitle C or TSCA disposal facility);
     •   Distribution of excavated soils from Areas B and C, and wetland areas, across Area A for
         regrading;
     •   Disposal of excavated sediments from the drainage ditch at an appropriate offsite facility;
     •   Installation of a two-foot vegetated soil cover as an engineering control;
     •   Wetland restoration; and,
     •   Implementation of a deed notice as an institutional control.

Operable Unit 3 groundwater investigations have been conducted at the Site a nd gro undwater conditions
will be re-assessed after implementation of the OU l and OU2 soil remedies to determine the appropriate
response action for groundwater.

DEP appreciates the opporiunity to paiticipate in the decision-making process to select an appropriate
remedy for this site. Further, DEP is looking forward to future cooperation with EPA during remedial
actions for all three Operable Units to ensure appropriate cleanup and further monitoring at this site.

If you have any questions, please call me at 609-292-1250.




                                                  Assis nt Commissioner
                                                  Site emediation & Waste Management Program


C:       Kenneth J. Kloo, Director, Division of Remediation Management, DEP
         Edward Putnam, Assistant Director, Publicly Funded Response Element, DEP
         Carole Petersen, Chief, New Jersey Remediation Branch, EPA Region II




                                                     2
