LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: RECORD OF DECISION FOR THE MATLACK INCORPORATED SITE
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/528296
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 0d2110b6c772e9c678eac9ccb93795288d5d185b73ef16c732143fe8dfb49245
Source PDF pages: 125
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

            RECORD OF DECISION

          Matlack, Inc., Superfund Site
Woolwich Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey




  United States Environmental Protection Agency
                     Region 2
               New York, New York
                 September 2017




                                                   *528296*
                                                     528296

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            DECLARATION STATEMENT
                              RECORD OF DECISION


SITE NAME AND LOCATION

Matlack, Inc., Superfund Site
Woolwich Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey

EPA Superfund Site Identification Number NJD043584101

STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

This Record of Decision (ROD) documents the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s
(EPA’s) selection of a remedy to remediate contaminated soil, groundwater, seep water, surface
water and sediment associated with the Matlack, Inc., Superfund Site located in Woolwich
Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey (the Site), which was chosen in accordance with the
requirements of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act
(CERCLA), as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601-9675, and the National Oil and Hazardous
Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 CFR Part 300. This decision document
explains the factual and legal basis for selecting the remedy. The Administrative Record Index
(see Appendix 3) identifies the items that comprise the Administrative Record upon which the
selected remedy is based.

The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) was consulted on the proposed
remedy in accordance with CERCLA Section 121(f), 42 U.S.C § 9621(f), and concurs with the
selected remedy (see Appendix 4).

ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE

Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from the Site, if not addressed by
implementing the response action selected in this ROD, may present an imminent and
substantial endangerment to public health, welfare or the environment.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY

The selected remedy described in this document addresses the entire Site and is the first and
only planned remedial phase or operable unit for the Site. The selected remedy addresses
contaminated soil, groundwater, seep water, surface water and sediment. The major
components of the remedy selected for the Site include the following:

   •   Installation of two permeable reactive barriers (PRBs) to provide passive treatment of
       aromatic and chlorinated volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and the semi-volatile
       organic compound (SVOC) 4-chloroanaline in groundwater;
   •   Excavation and off-site disposal of contaminated soil and sediment which acts as a source
       of further contamination to groundwater, seep water, surface water and sediment;

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   •   Long-term monitoring to assure the effectiveness of the remedy over time; and
   •   Institutional controls until remedial action objectives (RAOs) are met, which may include
       establishment of a New Jersey Ground Water Classification Exception Area that restricts
       the use of the contaminated aquifer, along with deed notices that restrict development of
       the affected areas until the RAOs are met.

By remediating the groundwater and removing ongoing sources of contamination, the remedy
also addresses contamination resulting from the discharge of groundwater to seeps, which has
impacted seep water, surface water and sediment. In addition, by remediating the groundwater,
potential future risks associated with inhalation of indoor air through vapor intrusion if a building
or structure were to be built over the contaminated plumes will be addressed.

A pre-design investigation (PDI) will be needed to determine the horizontal and vertical extent of
aromatic and chlorinated VOC impacts in soil, sediment and groundwater. Sampling will be
conducted to the clay layer, and if additional soil and/or sediment excavation beyond that
anticipated is needed, it will be conducted, as appropriate. In addition, while not anticipated
based on the existing data, if dense non-aqueous phase liquid is found, it would be addressed in a
future decision document. Furthermore, while not anticipated, reactive material within the PRB
may need to be replaced after a period of time to fully remediate the groundwater. For purposes
of costing, replacement of the PRB material is included five years after installation of the initial
wall, and then, as a contingency, a second replacement is included 10 years after initial
installation.

These actions are considered the final remedy for the Site. The estimated present-worth cost of the
selected remedy is $4,020,000.

The environmental benefits of the selected remedy may be enhanced by consideration, during
remedy design or implementation, of technologies and practices that are sustainable in accordance
with EPA Region 2’s Clean and Green Energy Policy.

DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

The selected remedy meets the requirements for remedial actions set forth in CERCLA Section
121, 42 U.S.C. § 9621, because it: 1) is protective of human health and the environment; 2)
meets a level or standard of control of the hazardous substances, pollutants and contaminants
which at least attains the legally applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements under
federal and state laws; 3) is cost-effective; and 4) utilizes permanent solutions and alternative
treatments (or resource recovery) technologies to the maximum extent practicable.

Because this remedy will not result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants
remaining on Site above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, but it
will take more than five years to attain the remediation goals, EPA will conduct a review
within five years of construction completion for the Site to ensure that the remedy is, or will
be, protective of human health and the environment.



                                                 ii

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ROD DATA CERTIFICATION             CHECKLIST

The ROD contains the remedy selection information noted below. More details may be
found in the attached Decision Summary and the Administrative Record file for this Site.

   •   Chemicals of concern and their respective concentrations   may be found in the
       "Results of Remedial Investigation" section.

   •   Current and reasonably anticipated future land use assumptions and current and
       potential future beneficial uses of groundwater are discussed in the "Current and
       Potential Future Site and Resource Uses" section.

   •   Baseline risks represented by the chemicals of concern may be found in the
       "Summary of Site Risks" section.

   •   Cleanup levels established for chemicals of concern and the basis for these levels may
       be found in the "Remedial Action Objectives" section.

   •   A discussion of principal threat waste may be found in the "Principal Threat Waste"
       section.

   •   Estimated capital, annual operation and maintenance, and total present-worth     costs
       are discussed in the "Description of Remedial Alternatives" section.

   •   Key factors used in selecting the remedy (i.e., how the selected remedy provides the
       best balance of tradeoffs with respect to the balancing and modifying criteria,
       highlighting criteria key to the decision) may be found in the "Selected Remedy" and
       "Statutory Determinations" sections.


AUTHORIZING        SIGNATURE




                                                                     Date
Emergency & Remedial Response Division




                                               111

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

            DECISION SUMMARY
          Matlack, Inc., Superfund Site
Woolwich Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey




  United States Environmental Protection Agency
                     Region 2
               New York, New York
                 September 2017

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              TABLE OF CONTENTS



 SECTION                                                                                                               PAGE


SITE NAME AND LOCATION ............................................................................................... 1
SITE DESCRIPTION AND HISTORY...................................................................................... 1
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION ............................................................................................. 2
SCOPE AND ROLE OF RESPONSE ACTION........................................................................ 2
PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS AND EARLY RESPONSE ACTIONS...................... 2
RESULTS OF THE REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION.............................................................. 3
CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE LAND AND RESOURCE USES ......................... 7
SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS...................................................................................................... 8
REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES ..................................................................................... 14
SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES ................................................................... 15
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES ........................................................... 19
PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE ............................................................................................... 23
SELECTED REMEDY .............................................................................................................. 24
STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS ....................................................................................... 25
DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES ........................................................... 27




 APPENDICES

      1         FIGURES
      2         TABLES
      3         ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX
      4         STATE LETTER
      5         RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE NAME AND LOCATION

The Matlack, Inc., Site (Matlack, or the Site), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Superfund Site Identification Number NJD043584101, is located along Route 322 East in
Woolwich Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey (see Appendix 1, Figure 1). The selected
remedy described herein addresses the entire Site and is the first and only planned remedial
phase or operable unit for the Site. The selected remedy addresses contaminated soil,
groundwater, seep water and sediment.

EPA is the lead agency and the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) is
the support agency.


SITE DESCRIPTION AND HISTORY

The Site is bounded by Route 322 to the north, by woodlands to the east and west, and by a field
leading down to Raccoon Creek to the south. Grand Sprute Run, about 600 feet west of former
Matlack, Inc., property’s western boundary, drains into Raccoon Creek. The Site includes
Matlack, Inc.’s former Swedesboro Terminal that occupied the northern portion of a 72-acre
parcel, as well as a portion of a parcel located immediately west and down-gradient of the former
terminal.

A one-story building (formerly known as the terminal building with an attached tank-cleaning
facility), is located in the northeast quadrant of the Site, and is surrounded on the north, east, and
west by a paved parking lot and driveway. A former wastewater lagoon is located south of the
former terminal building, and is presently in a field with various shrubs. The land use
surrounding the Site is mixed use consisting of agricultural, commercial and residential.
Matlack, Inc., transported chemicals, petrochemicals, and food-grade liquid in bulk using tank
trailers (tankers) from 1962 until 2001. In 2001, the company submitted a petition for Chapter
11 bankruptcy and ceased operations.

The primary source of waste generation at the Site was the cleaning of tankers that had
previously held a variety of substances including petroleum products, xylenes, benzene, toluene,
glycol, styrene, wax, alum, resins, acids, naphthalene, various organic solvents, flammable
substances, coal tar, and hazardous wastes.

From 1962 until 1976, Matlack, Inc., discharged the wastewater into an unlined surface
impoundment (lagoon) located southwest of the terminal building. The lagoon and Site layout
are shown on Appendix 1, Figure 2. After discontinuing the use of the surface impoundment in
1976, Matlack, Inc., began collecting its wastewater in multiple open-top, in-ground concrete
tanks for temporary storage.

During the operating period, approximately 16 to 20 tank trailers per day were cleaned at the
Swedesboro Terminal. Matlack, Inc., used various solvents, including tetrachloroethylene
(PCE), methylene chloride, toluene, trichloroethylene (TCE), acetone, methanol, and ethanol, to

                                                  1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

clean the tankers. The tanker cleaning operations generated from 5,000 to 15,000 gallons of
wastewater per day, which was hauled off-site for treatment and disposal.
Matlack, Inc., discontinued tanker cleaning operations at the Site in November 1997, but
continued to service and store its vehicles at the Swedesboro Terminal. The Site is currently
operated by Liberty Kenworth, a medium and heavy duty truck sales and service center.


COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

EPA has worked closely with local residents, public officials and other interested members of the
community since it became involved with the Site in 2012. The Proposed Plan for the Site was
released for public comment on August 23, 2017. The Proposed Plan and other Site-related
documents were made available to the public in the administrative record file maintained by the
Director for Community Affairs for the Township of Woolwich, 120 Village Green Drive,
Woolwich Township, New Jersey, and at the EPA Region 2 Superfund Records Center located at
290 Broadway, New York, New York (see Appendix 3). The administrative record file is also
available online at http://www.epa/gov/superfund/matlack.

The notice of availability of these documents was published in the Star-Ledger newspaper on
August 23, 2017. The public comment period lasted 30 days and closed on September 22, 2017.

A public meeting was held on September 14, 2017, at the Woolwich Township Municipal
Courtroom, 120 Village Green Drive, Woolwich, New Jersey, to discuss the findings of the
Remedial Investigation (RI) and the Feasibility Study (FS) and to present EPA’s plan to the
community. At this meeting, EPA representatives answered questions about the RI/FS and the
remedial alternatives. Comments that were received by EPA at the public meeting and in writing
during the public comment period are addressed in the Responsiveness Summary (see Appendix
5).


SCOPE AND ROLE OF RESPONSE ACTION

The Site is being addressed in its entirety as a single operable unit. The RI/FS was conducted for
all contaminants, environmental media, and exposure pathways of concern. The selected remedy
addresses contaminated soil, groundwater, seep water, surface water and sediment.


PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS AND EARLY RESPONSE ACTIONS

NJDEP began investigating potential groundwater contamination at the Site in December 1982 in
response to potable water well contamination in the area surrounding the facility. Investigations
included sampling of groundwater, soil, surface water and sediment associated with identified
areas of concern.

In May 1987, NJDEP and Matlack, Inc., entered into an Administrative Consent Order (ACO).
Between 1990 and 2001, Matlack, Inc., conducted a two-phased investigation and
remedial/removal actions to address source areas identified from previous investigations. One
                                                2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

such action included installation of a groundwater treatment system that consisted of extraction
wells, an infiltration trench and an aeration system to address groundwater contamination. This
system operated from November 1995 to May 1997, and then again from June 2006 through
2011, under NJDEP operation. Additional actions included the removal of aboveground and
underground storage tanks (ASTs and USTs) used for waste and petroleum, and the excavation
and off-site disposal of contaminated soil.

NJDEP conducted additional investigation and sampling activities between 2002 and 2009. In
September 2011, at the request of EPA, it completed a Site Reassessment (NJDEP 2011) to
determine whether additional actions were necessary under CERCLA. The reassessment
concluded that sources requiring further action under CERCLA were still present at the Site.
EPA began Site assessment activities at the Site in 2012 and the Site was placed on the National
Priorities List in 2013.


RESULTS OF THE REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION

RI activities were conducted by EPA in three phases: Phase 1 was conducted during July 2015,
Phase 2 was conducted during March, April, and May 2016, and Phase 3 was conducted during
July and August 2016. RI activities involved sampling surface water, seeps, sediment, soil, and
existing and newly installed groundwater monitoring wells to further characterize the nature and
extent of contamination.

Geology and Hydrogeology

Gloucester County is located within the Atlantic Coastal Plain physiographic province and is
underlain by a wedge of unconsolidated sedimentary deposits that are Cretaceous to Recent in
age. These deposits dip to the southeast and lie unconformably on bedrock. The unconsolidated
sedimentary deposits consist of clay, silt, sand, and gravel of both marine and non-marine origin.
In descending order, the stratigraphic units in the vicinity of the Matlack Site are the Pennsauken
Formation, the Woodbury Clay, the Merchantville Formation, and the undifferentiated Magothy-
Raritan Formations.

The Pennsauken Formation is a glacial terrace deposit of Pleistocene age and consists of a
medium to coarse grained quartzose sand, with some gravel and clay. In some localized areas,
the sands and gravels are indurated by ferruginous cement to form "ironstone." The formation
can obtain a thickness of as much as 33 feet in the vicinity of the terminal. Underlying the
Pennsauken Formation in the vicinity of the terminal is the Woodbury Clay of Cretaceous age.
The Woodbury Clay generally consists of a dark blue to black blocky clay with occasional thin
white sand streaks and late Cretaceous fossils of marine origin. The formation dips between 38
and 44 feet per mile to the southeast, and ranges in thickness from a few feet at the outcrop area
to 80 feet elsewhere in Gloucester County, with an average thickness of about 50 feet.
Underlying the Woodbury Clay, within the study area, is the Cretaceous Merchantville
Formation. This formation consists of green to black glauconitic and micaceous silt and clay or
quartzose or glauconitic sandy clay. In general, the formation dips to the southeast at about 43
feet per mile, and ranges in thickness from 45 to 70 feet, with an average thickness of between

                                                 3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

50 and 60 feet. In Site borings advanced during prior investigations, the combined Woodbury
Merchantville silt and clay ranged from 54 feet to 62 feet in thickness.

The Merchantville Formation overlies the Potomac-Raritan-Magothy Formations. The Raritan
Formation consists of light-colored quartzose sand, clay, and some gravel, while the Magothy
Formation is composed of beds of dark gray or black clay, commonly lignitic, alternating with
white, micaceous, fine sand. The combined thickness of the two formations may be as much as
500 feet within Gloucester County. The Magothy Formation dips to the southeast towards the
Atlantic Ocean at a rate of about 40 to 45 feet per mile, while the basal unit of the Raritan
Formation dips about 60 feet or more per mile.

Grand Sprute Run, located approximately 600 feet west of the of the western boundary of the
former Matlack, Inc., property, has incised through the Pennsauken Formation and is flowing on
top of the Woodbury Clay. All of the groundwater in the Pennsauken Formation is therefore
intercepted by Grand Sprute Run. The stream is approximately 1.25 miles long and discharges
into Raccoon Creek. The lower third of the stream is mainly swamp, with negligible flow and
many small, interconnected branches. The stream meanders greatly throughout its entire length,
splitting and rejoining numerous times. The bottom is sandy to gravelly, with pockets of
extremely soft mud and decaying organic debris away from the main channels. The total stream
gradient is approximately 20 feet per mile, although most of this relief occurs in the upper half.

Measurements collected during Matlack, Inc.’s 1990 investigation indicated a maximum velocity
of 0.22 to 0.76 feet per second. Channel depth ranges from a few inches to nearly 3 feet, while
channel width varies from 2 feet to 10 feet or more. Much of the flow through the channel
depends on the amount of organic debris, most notably fallen trees and branches, which block
the channel and dams up the water behind it.

Site Characterization Summary and Results

Work conducted during the RI included the installation of soil borings and monitoring wells; the
collection of groundwater samples from new and existing monitoring wells; and the collection of
surface water samples, seep samples, and sediment samples from Grand Sprute Run. A well
condition survey and land surveys (topographic and well/piezometer horizontal and vertical
locations) were undertaken in support of the field investigation activities

Soil

Surface soil samples were collected to a depth of 0 to 2 feet below the ground surface. No VOCs
were detected at concentrations above New Jersey Residential Direct Contact Soil Remediation
Standards (NJRDCSRS). Semi-volatile organic compounds (SVOCs) and polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs) were identified at concentrations slightly above the NJRDCSRS at isolated
locations within the former lagoon area. Specifically, elevated concentrations were found at Soil
Borings SB-4, SB-5 and B-16 (See Appendix 1, Figure 3).

The results of subsurface soil sampling (depth greater than 2 feet) indicated that the SVOCs
benzyl butyl phthalate, bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate and napthalene were present in subsurface

                                                4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

soil at concentrations above New Jersey Impact to Groundwater Soil Screening Levels
(NJIGWSSL), based on sampling conducted during 2016.

The VOCs benzene, PCE, TCE, and total xylenes were identified during 2016 sampling at
numerous locations at concentrations above the NJIGWSSL. Benzene, PCE, TCE and total
xylenes were also identified during 2014 sampling at two locations at concentrations above
IGWSSL. The SVOCs benzyl butyl phthalate, bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate, di-n-octylphthalate
and naphthalene were also identified at concentrations above IGWSSL during 2014 at the same
two locations.

Groundwater

The groundwater sampling locations for the RI are shown on Appendix 1, Figure 3. Results of
groundwater sampling conducted at the Site indicate that impacts to groundwater from VOCs
extend from the former lagoon area downgradient to monitoring wells MW-25, MW-26, and
MW-27, located just east of Grand Sprute Run. To better evaluate the lateral extent of
groundwater impacts, VOCs were grouped into those constituents primarily associated with
potential impacts associated with petroleum hydrocarbon-related aromatic VOCs (such as
benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene, commonly referred to as BTEX compounds) and
those primarily associated with chlorinated VOCs (such as PCE, TCE, cis-1,2-dichlorethene, 1,1-
dichloroethance, 1,2-dichloroethane and vinyl chloride).

The upgradient boundary of impacted groundwater is in the vicinity of monitoring well MW-06,
with impacted groundwater generally following two paths downgradient to Grand Sprute Run.
BTEX compounds, potentially present due to releases of diesel fuel-related compounds,
generally flow to the west/northwest, beginning at MW-06 and travelling downgradient to
monitoring wells PZ-01, MW-13, and MW-25. The highest concentration of total BTEX
compounds was detected in the most downgradient well, which would indicate that the center of
the impacted groundwater plume is now moving downgradient toward its discharge point in
Grand Sprute Run.

Chlorinated VOCs were also identified in monitoring well MW-06 but generally flow in a more
westerly direction, as defined by detections in monitoring wells PZ-02, MW-24, and MW-26.
The highest concentration of chlorinated compounds was identified in monitoring well MW-24,
which would indicate that the center of impacted groundwater for this plume is also moving
toward its discharge point in Grand Sprute Run.

Vinyl chloride was also detected in monitoring wells MW-06, MW-13, MW-17, and MW-25 at
concentrations both below and above relevant standards. The presence of this compound in
monitoring wells where BTEX compounds have been identified is an indication that co-
metabolic processes may be degrading chlorinated organics in the presence of the aromatic
volatile organics where the two plumes overlap. The highest concentrations of chlorinated
volatile organics (1,800 μg/l) were reported in monitoring well MW-24, with elevated
concentrations extending to monitoring well MW-26 adjacent to Grand Sprute Run.




                                              5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The exception to this pattern is methylene chloride, a chlorinated VOC, which was identified in
monitoring well MW-06, but also identified in monitoring wells MW-13 and MW-25, which are
otherwise associated with the BTEX plume. Since methylene chloride results obtained during the
first round of sampling were not replicated during the second round of sampling, it is possible
that this result is reflective of laboratory contamination rather than related to Site conditions.

VOCs were not detected in deep monitoring wells MW-01B, MW-02B, and MW-07B, which is
an indication that the Woodbury Clay is serving as an effective barrier to the downward
migration of VOC-impacted groundwater, with impacts isolated to the shallow Pennsauken
Formation.

SVOC impacts were more limited in nature than those for VOCs, with 4-chloroanaline being the
only SVOC that was identified within a particular pattern at the Site. The plume of groundwater
impacted by 4-chloroanaline is narrow, being detected only in monitoring wells MW-06, MW-13
and MW-25 at elevated concentrations. The highest concentration of 4-chloroanaline was
identified in the most upgradient well (MW-06), with decreasing concentrations observed within
downgradient monitoring wells MW-13 and MW-25. The high concentration of 4-chloroanaline
detected at monitoring well MW-06 supports the assumption that any source area remaining for
groundwater impacts is located in the vicinity of this well. The SVOC 1,4-dioxane was also
identified in groundwater across the Site but it does not appear to be Site-related. Unlike the
VOCs or other SVOCs, 1,4-dioxane was identified in both shallow and two of three deep
groundwater monitoring wells (MW-01B and MW-02B).

Impacts from inorganics appeared to be widespread at the Site, with Aluminum, arsenic, iron,
and manganese being detected in a majority of the wells at concentrations above New Jersey
groundwater quality standards (NJ GWQSs). These metals were also identified in each of the
deep wells (MW-01B, MW-02B, and MW-07B) and in upgradient wells MW-01, MW-04, MW-
10, MW-18, MW-22, and L-01 at concentrations close to or above their respective NJ GWQS,
which is indicative of an upgradient off-site source or local background rather than an on-site
source.

In summary, the results of groundwater sampling indicated that volatile and semi-volatile
organic compounds are present in two distinct plumes at elevated concentrations. These plumes
are shown as Group 1 (BTEX compounds) and Group 2 (chlorinated VOCs plus 4-chloroanaline)
on Appendix 1, Figure 4.

Surface Water/Seep Sediment

The results of surface water sampling conducted during the 2016 RI indicate that chlorinated
VOCs were identified in seep sampling location SW-03, which is located directly downgradient
from monitoring wells MW-24 and MW-26. Chlorinated VOCs were also identified in nearby
surface water samples SW-09, SW-10, and SW-11, obtained from within Grand Sprute Run. The
highest concentration of chlorinated VOCs at the Site was identified in monitoring well MW-26;
the presence of chlorinated VOCs in both seep and surface water samples downgradient from
monitoring wells MW-24 and MW-26 is an indication that impacted groundwater from the Site
is discharging to Grand Sprute Run.

                                                6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The results of sediment sampling indicate that several chlorinated VOCs were identified at
elevated concentrations in surface water and sediment samples located downgradient from the
Site (primarily at seep sample location SW-03 and sediment sample location SED-3). The
identification of chlorinated VOCs in downgradient sediment samples further supports the
conclusion that a completed pathway exists for migration of these compounds from the Site to
Grand Sprute Run.

SVOCs and inorganics were also identified in several sediment samples. However, these
contaminants were not considered to be Site-related.

Contaminants Fate and Transport Summary

Site-related contaminants include VOCs and the SVOC 4-chloroanaline. These contaminants
have been discharged at the ground surface and within the unsaturated zone soils through direct
discharge, or through releases occurring from underground storage tanks and/or fuel transfer
lines. Releases to vadose zone soils have migrated to the shallow, unconfined aquifer beneath the
Site, and migrated through advection with the groundwater to its discharge point within Grand
Sprute Run, located approximately 600 feet to the west of the Site. Groundwater samples
collected from wells completed within the deeper aquifer below the Woodbury Clay did not
indicate that COPCs identified within the shallow, unconfined aquifer had migrated vertically to
the deeper aquifer.

Contamination present in surface soil, subsurface soil and sediment is providing an ongoing
source of groundwater, seep water, surface water and sediment contamination.


CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE LAND AND RESOURCE USES

Land Uses

The former Matlack, Inc., property is situated in a semi-rural area of Woolwich Township, New
Jersey, with farmland located on the neighboring properties and residential and commercial uses
on Route 322, approximately 800 feet from contaminated areas. The Liberty Kenworth facility
occupies the majority of the former Matlack, Inc., property, though it is separated from the
former lagoon by a fence. Farming and agriculture are a significant land use within the general
vicinity. EPA expects that the land-use pattern at and surrounding the Site will not change.

Groundwater and Surface Water Use

Aquifers beneath the site serve as sources of drinking water for the area. Residential drinking
water wells are in use within a quarter mile of the Site; however, as discussed below, the
groundwater problems identified at the Site only affect the shallowest groundwater unit and not
deeper units used for potable water. The direction of groundwater flow in the area is to the
west‐northwest toward Grand Sprute Run. Given its location, Grand Sprute Run is accessible for
recreational uses.

                                                7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS

As part of the RI/FS for the Site, a baseline risk assessment was conducted to estimate the
current and future effects of contaminants on human health and the environment. A baseline risk
assessment is an analysis of the potential adverse human health and ecological effects of releases
of hazardous substances from a site if no actions or controls to mitigate such releases are taken,
under current and future land and groundwater uses. The baseline risk assessment includes a
human health risk assessment (HHRA) and a screening-level ecological risk assessment. It
provides the basis for taking action and identifies the contaminants and exposure pathways that
need to be addressed by the remedial action. This section of the risk document summarizes the
results of the baseline risk assessment for the Site.

Human Health Risk Assessment
A four-step process is utilized for assessing site-related human health risks for a reasonable
maximum exposure scenario:
       Hazard Identification – uses the analytical data collected to identify the contaminants of
       potential concern (COPCs) at the site for each medium, with consideration of a number
       of factors explained below;
       Exposure Assessment - estimates the magnitude of actual and/or potential human
       exposures, the frequency and duration of these exposures, and the pathways (e.g.,
       ingesting contaminated well-water) by which humans are potentially exposed;
       Toxicity Assessment - determines the types of adverse health effects associated with
       chemical exposures, and the relationship between magnitude of exposure (dose) and
       severity of adverse effects (response); and
       Risk Characterization - summarizes and combines outputs of the exposure and toxicity
       assessments to provide a quantitative assessment of site-related risks. The risk
       characterization also identifies contamination with concentrations which exceed
       benchmark levels, defined by the NCP as an excess lifetime cancer risk greater than 1 x
       10-6 to 1 x 10-4 (also commonly expressed as: 1E-06 to 1E-04) or a noncancer Hazard
       Index (HI) greater than 1; contaminants at these concentrations are considered chemicals
       of concern (COCs) and are typically those that will require remediation at the site. Also
       included in this section is a discussion of the uncertainties associated with these risks.
Hazard Identification
In this step, the COPCs in each medium were identified based on such factors as toxicity,
frequency of detection, fate and transport of the contaminants in the environment, concentration,
mobility, persistence and bioaccumulation.
The HHRA characterized the risk to human health from exposure to groundwater, soil, seep
water, seep sediment and surface water at the Site. The COPCs were determined for each
medium by comparing the available Site analytical data to appropriate risked-based screening

                                                 8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

criteria. As a result, 47 chemicals, including VOCs, SVOCs, pesticides, PCBs and inorganics,
were retained as COPCs to be carried through to the remainder of the HHRA.
Only the COCs, or those chemicals requiring a response, are listed in Appendix 2, Table 1.
However, a full list of all COPCs identified in the HHRA (which can be found in the Final RI
Appendix M: Human Health Risk Assessment Report, dated July 20, 2017), is available in the
administrative record for the Site.
Exposure Assessment
Consistent with Superfund guidance and policy, the HHRA is a baseline human health risk
assessment and therefore assumes no remediation or institutional nor engineering controls to
mitigate or remove hazardous substance releases are in place. Cancer risks and noncancer hazard
indices were calculated based on an estimate of the reasonable maximum exposure (RME)
expected to occur under current and future land use conditions at the Site. The RME is defined as
the greatest exposure that is reasonably expected to occur at a site.
The identification and selection of potential receptor populations was based on both current and
potential future land uses of the Site. The Site is located within a portion of Woolwich Township
zoned as RC-1 (Regional Center), and is currently being used as a medium and heavy truck sales
and service facility operated by Liberty Kenworth. The land use surrounding the Site is mixed,
consisting of agricultural, commercial and residential uses. As such, the following receptor
populations were evaluated in the HHRA: future on-site worker, future on-site construction
worker, future on-site resident (child and adult), current/future off-site resident (adult and child)
and a current/future off-site recreator (adult and child).
The potential exposure pathways considered in the HHRA included inhalation of soil particulates
and vapors; incidental ingestion of and dermal contact with soil particulates; groundwater
ingestion, dermal contact and inhalation of groundwater; and incidental ingestion and dermal
contact with seep water and sediment, along with surface water. In addition, for overall
completeness, a screening evaluation was conducted to determine if the potential for vapor
intrusion (VI) into indoor air from subsurface vapor sources exists. The VI screening evaluation
consisted of comparing the maximum groundwater concentration of COPCs to both residential
and commercial based Vapor Intrusion Screening Levels (VISLs) through the use of EPA’s
VISL Calculator.
A summary of all the exposure pathways considered in the HHRA can be found in Appendix 2,
Table 2. Typically, exposures are evaluated using a statistical estimate of the exposure point
concentration (EPC) in each media of interest, which is usually an upper-bound estimate of the
average concentration for each contaminant, but in some cases may be the maximum detected
concentration. A summary of the exposure point concentrations for in each medium can be
found in Appendix 2, Table 1. A comprehensive list of exposure point concentrations for all
COPCs evaluated in the HHRA can be found in the Table 3 series of the HHRA document
(HDR, 2017).



                                                  9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Toxicity Assessment
In this step, the types of adverse health effects associated with contaminant exposures and the
relationship between magnitude of exposure and severity of adverse health effects were
determined. Potential health effects are contaminant-specific and may include the risk of
developing cancer over a lifetime or other noncancer health effects, such as changes in the
normal functions of organs within the body (e.g., changes in the effectiveness of the immune
system). Some contaminants are capable of causing both cancer and noncancer health effects.
Under current EPA guidelines, the likelihood of carcinogenic risks and noncancer hazards due to
exposure to site chemicals are considered separately. In addition, consistent with current EPA
policy, it was assumed that the toxic effects of site-related chemicals would be additive. Thus,
cancer and noncancer risks associated with exposures to individual COPCs were summed to
indicate the potential risks and hazards associated with mixtures of potential carcinogens and
noncarcinogens, respectively.
Toxicity data for the HHRA were provided by the Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS)
database, the Provisional Peer Reviewed Toxicity Database (PPRTV), or another source that is
identified as an appropriate reference for toxicity values consistent with EPA guidance
(http://www.epa.gov/oswer/riskassessment/pdf/tier3-toxicityvalue-whitepaper.pdf). This
information is presented in Appendix 2, Table 3 (“Noncancer Toxicity Data Summary”) and
Table 4 (“Cancer Toxicity Data Summary”). Additional toxicity information for all COPCs is
presented in the HHRA for the Site.
Risk Characterization
This step summarized and combined outputs of the exposure and toxicity assessments to provide
a quantitative assessment of Site risks. Exposures were evaluated based on the potential risk of
developing cancer and the potential for noncancer health hazards.
Noncarcinogenic risks were assessed using a hazard index (HI) approach, based on a comparison
of expected contaminant intakes and benchmark comparison levels of intake (reference doses,
reference concentrations). Reference doses (RfDs) and reference concentrations (RfCs) are
estimates of daily exposure levels for humans (including sensitive individuals) which are thought
to be safe over a lifetime of exposure. The key concept for a noncancer HI is that a “threshold
level” (measured as an HI of less than or equal to 1) exists at which noncancer health effects are
not expected to occur. The estimated intake of chemicals identified in environmental media
(e.g., the amount of a chemical ingested from contaminated soil) is compared to the RfD or the
RfC to derive the hazard quotient (HQ) for the contaminant in the particular medium. The HI is
obtained by adding the hazard quotients for all compounds within a particular medium that
impacts a particular receptor population.
The HQ for oral and dermal exposures is calculated as below. The HQ for inhalation exposures
is calculated using a similar model that incorporates the RfC, rather than the RfD.




                                               10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

HQ = Intake/RfD
Where:         HQ = hazard quotient
               Intake = estimated intake for a chemical (mg/kg-day)
               RfD = reference dose (mg/kg-day)
The intake and the RfD will represent the same exposure period (i.e., chronic, subchronic, or
acute).
As previously stated, the HI is calculated by summing the HQs for all chemicals for likely
exposure scenarios for a specific population. An HI greater than 1 indicates that the potential
exists for noncarcinogenic health effects to occur as a result of site-related exposures, with the
potential for health effects increasing as the HI increases. When the HI calculated for all
chemicals for a specific population exceeds 1, separate HI values are then calculated for those
chemicals which are known to act on the same target organ or effect. These discrete HI values
are then compared to the threshold limit of 1 to evaluate the potential for noncancer health
effects on a specific target organ or effect. The HI provides a useful reference point for gauging
the potential significance of multiple contaminant exposures within a single medium or across
media. A summary of the noncarcinogenic risks associated with these chemicals for each
exposure pathway is contained in Appendix 2, Table 5.
As summarized in Appendix 2, Table 5, the noncancer hazard estimates exceeded EPA’s
threshold value of 1 for the future on-site construction worker, future on-site child resident,
future on-site adult resident and a current/future off-site child recreator. The total HI for the
construction worker of 25, was primarily attributable to PCE, TCE, biphenyl and naphthalene in
groundwater. The HI for an on-site child and adult resident were 59 and 46 respectively;
exposure to PCE, TCE and 4-chloroaniline in groundwater drove the majority of the hazard
exceedance. As for the child recreator, exposure to tetrachloroethylene, trichloroethylene and
manganese in seeps was associated with a hazard index of 2. However, since manganese, a
metal, is not considered to be Site-related, it was not retained as a COC.
For carcinogens, risks are generally expressed as the incremental probability of an individual
developing cancer over a lifetime as a result of exposure to a carcinogen under the conditions
described in the Exposure Assessment, using the cancer slope factor (SF) for oral and dermal
exposures and the inhalation unit risk (IUR) for inhalation exposures. Excess lifetime cancer
risk for oral and dermal exposures is calculated from the following equation, while the equation
for inhalation exposures uses the IUR, rather than the SF:
Risk = LADD x SF
Where:         Risk = a unit-less probability (1 x 10-6) of an individual developing cancer
               LADD = lifetime average daily dose averaged over 70 years (mg/kg-day)
               SF = cancer slope factor, expressed as [1/(mg/kg-day)]


                                                11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

These risks are probabilities that are usually expressed in scientific notation (such as 1 x 10-4).
An excess lifetime cancer risk of 1 x 10-4 indicates that one additional incidence of cancer may
occur in a population of 10,000 people who are exposed under the conditions identified in the
Exposure Assessment. Current Superfund guidance identify the threshold for determining
whether a remedial action is necessary as being an individual lifetime excess cancer risk in
exceedance of 10-4 to 10-6 (corresponding to a one-in-ten-thousand to a one-in-a-million excess
cancer risk), with 10-6 being the point of departure.
As summarized in Appendix 2, Table 6, results of the baseline HHRA indicated the total cancer
risk estimate of 4.4 x 10-3 for the future on-site resident (child and adult) exceeded EPA’s
threshold criteria. Ethylbenzene, vinyl chloride and 4-chloraniline in groundwater were the
primary COCs.
The potential for subsurface vapor intrusion (VI) into indoor air is evaluated when Site soils
and/or groundwater are known or suspected to contain chemicals that are considered to be
volatile. A comparison of maximum detected concentrations of volatile chemicals found in Site-
wide groundwater to EPA’s chemical-specific, risk-based groundwater vapor intrusion screening
levels (VISL) was conducted as part of the HHRA. The VISLs provide groundwater levels
associated with an indoor air concentration that represents a cancer risk ranging from 1 x 10-4
and 1 x 10-6 or a noncancer hazard quotient of 1. Concentrations exceeding these screening
values indicate the potential for vapor intrusion exists. Results of the screening evaluation
identified the following 9 chemicals at concentrations greater than residential and commercial
VISLs: 1,2-dichloroethane, 1,4-dichlorobenzene, benzene, ethylbenzene, PCE, TCE, vinyl
chloride, naphthalene and cyanide. Based on the results of the screening evaluation, the potential
for vapor intrusion exists in the future timeframe if buildings were to be constructed overlying
the plume. In summary, results of the HHRA for the Matlack Site found that exposure to VOCs
and SVOCs in groundwater beneath the Site were associated with cancer and noncancer risk
estimates that exceeded EPA’s threshold criteria. The presence of volatile COCs were also
found at levels that could be of concern for the future VI pathway. Furthermore, exposure to
PCE, TCE and manganese present in seep water samples collected from Grand Sprute Run was
associated with a noncancer hazard that slightly exceeded EPA’s hazard index of 1 for the child
recreator. However, as is noted above, manganese is not considered to be Site-related, and is
therefore not retained as a COC.

Uncertainties

The procedures and inputs used to assess risks in this evaluation, as in all such assessments, are
subject to a wide variety of uncertainties. In general, the main sources of uncertainty include:
   • environmental chemistry sampling and analysis
   • environmental parameter measurement
   • fate and transport modeling
   • exposure parameter estimation
   • toxicological data.


                                                 12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Uncertainty in environmental sampling arises in part from the potentially uneven distribution of
chemicals in the media sampled. Consequently, there is significant uncertainty as to the actual
levels present. Environmental chemistry-analysis error can stem from several sources including
the errors inherent in the analytical methods and characteristics of the matrix being sampled.
Uncertainties in the exposure assessment are related to estimates of how often an individual
would actually come in contact with the chemicals of concern, the period of time over which
such exposure would occur, and in the models used to estimate the concentrations of the
chemicals of concern at the point of exposure.
Uncertainties in toxicological data occur in extrapolating both from animals to humans and from
high to low doses of exposure, as well as from the difficulties in assessing the toxicity of a
mixture of chemicals. These uncertainties are addressed by making conservative assumptions
concerning risk and exposure parameters throughout the assessment. As a result, the risk
assessment provides upper-bound estimates of the risks to populations near the Site, and is
highly unlikely to underestimate actual risks related to the Site.
A noteworthy source of uncertainty in the HHRA conducted for the Site deals with the fact that
speciation data of total chromium into hexavalent and trivalent forms were not conducted as part
of the RI sampling. Total chromium was identified as a COPC for soils, groundwater, seep
sediment and surface water at the Site. To provide a conservative (i.e., health-protective)
assessment of potential risk, the more conservative hexavalent toxicity values were used for
evaluation of risk and hazard stemming from exposure to total chromium in this HHRA. The
risk characterization indicated that total chromium concentrations detected at the Site, while
varying by media, result in cancer risks that were within EPA’s risk range of 10-6 to 10-4. Use of
the hexavalent chromium cancer toxicity values for total chromium may not accurately reflect
the dominant form of chromium species in the environment and therefore likely results in the
overestimation of the cancer risks in Site media.
More detailed information concerning public health risks, including a quantitative evaluation of
the degree of risk associated with various exposure pathways, is presented in the comprehensive
human health risk assessment report for the Site.

Ecological Risk Assessment Summary

A Screening Level Ecological Risk Assessment (SLERA) was conducted that focused on
evaluating the potential for impacts to sensitive ecological receptors to Site-related constituents
of concern through exposure to surface soil, surface water, sediment, and seep surface water and
sediment. Compounds detected in these media were compared to ecological screening values to
determine the potential for adverse effects to ecological receptors. A complete summary of the
all exposure scenarios can be found in the Screening Level Ecological Risk
Assessment in the administrative record.

The SLERA evaluated risk to ecological receptors using two different analyses, a standard
SLERA evaluation and a refined SLERA evaluation that included less stringent assumptions and
parameters. The initial evaluation used the maximum concentration of all detected compounds

                                                13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

and the evaluation indicated that there is a potential ecological risk in surface soil, seep water,
seep sediment and surface water of Grand Sprute Run due to exposure to VOCs, SVOCs and
metals. Fifty-nine compounds were identified as COPCs in the initial SLERA evaluation. The
SVOCs and metals were detected throughout the Site, while VOCs were associated with
groundwater discharges originating from groundwater under the former lagoon that migrated to
seeps and surface water through seep sediment. The historical description of activities that
occurred at the Site indicate the discharge of VOCs into the former lagoon and soil resulted in
contaminated groundwater, which then flowed towards Grand Sprute Run.

The second evaluation, identified as Step 3A, evaluated risks to ecological receptors exposed to
the 95% upper-confidence limit (UCL) concentrations of COPCs as well as other refinements,
such as compounds being associated with former Site activities (i.e., Site-related compounds).
The refined evaluation reduced the COPC list from 59 COPCs to 30. This analysis also resulted
in a finding of unacceptable risk for ecological receptors exposed to VOCs in surface soil, seep
water, seep sediment and surface water. This indicates that a remedial action is needed to address
the presence of contamination in surface soil, seep water, seep sediment and surface water to
prevent or eliminate exposure to ecological receptors.

Although SLERAs that identify unacceptable risk usually proceed to a BERA, where additional
data and revised toxicity values are used to further evaluate the potential for ecological impacts,
it is evident from the results of this SLERA, combined with the fate and transport of the
groundwater, that the primary ecological issue is groundwater contamination discharging to the
seeps and creek. The SLERA evaluations also identified impacts from surface soils, mainly from
inorganic compounds. Given that the proposed remedial alternatives will address the soil in the
former lagoon area, as well as the contaminated groundwater discharge to the seeps and creek,
no additional ecological investigation is needed since the completed ecological exposure
pathways will be eliminated with the implementation of the remedial actions.

Basis for Taking Action

Based on the results of the quantitative human health and ecological risk assessments, EPA has
determined that actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances at and from the Site, if not
addressed by the response action selected in this ROD, may present a current or potential threat
to human health and the environment.


REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES

RAOs are specific goals to protect human health and the environment. These objectives are
based on available information and standards, such as applicable or relevant and appropriate
requirements (ARARs), to-be-considered (TBC) guidance, and site-specific risk-based levels and
background (i.e., reference area) concentrations.




                                                 14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The following RAOs were established for the Site:

   •   Control or remove source areas to prevent or minimize further impacts to groundwater,
       seep water, surface water and sediment.

   •   Prevent current and potential future unacceptable risks to human receptors through
       ingestion, dermal contact with and inhalation of contaminated groundwater.

   •   Prevent potential future unacceptable inhalation risks to human receptors through
       subsurface vapor intrusion into indoor air.

   •   Restore groundwater to its expected beneficial use to the extent practicable by reducing
       contaminant concentrations below the more stringent of federal maximum contaminant
       levels (MCLs), state MCLs and NJ GWQS.

   •   Prevent or minimize current and potential future unacceptable risks to ecological
       receptors through direct contact with or ingestion of contaminated soil, sediment and
       surface water.

Remediation Goals

EPA has adopted the preliminary remediation goals identified in the Proposed Plan as the final
Remediation Goals (RGs) for Site-related COCs. The New Jersey Residential Direct Contact
Soil Remediation Standards (NJDCSRSs) were selected as RGs for surface soil (top two feet)
and the NJIGWSSLs for subsurface soil. For sediment, the lower of New Jersey’s Freshwater
Sediment Quality Criteria Lowest Effect Level and the Saline Water Effects Range Low criteria
were selected as RGs. The lower of Federal MCLs, State MCLs and NJ GWQSs were selected as
RGs for groundwater.

Achievement of these cleanup goals will also effectively address elevated concentrations in the
seep and surface water. As such, no specific cleanup goals are selected for seep or surface water.
Similarly, achievement of these cleanup goals will effectively address potential future
unacceptable inhalation risks through subsurface vapor intrusion into indoor air.

A summary of all RGs for the Site is presented in Appendix 2, Table 7.


SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

CERCLA Section 121(b)(1), 42 U.S.C. § 9621(b)(1), mandates that remedial actions be
protective of human health and the environment, be cost effective, and use permanent solutions,
alternative treatment technologies, and resource recovery alternatives to the maximum extent
practicable. Section 121(b)(1) also establishes a preference for remedial actions which employ,
as a principal element, treatment to reduce the volume, toxicity, or mobility of the hazardous
substances, pollutants, and contaminants at a site permanently and significantly. CERCLA
Section 121(d), 42 § 9621(d), further specifies that a remedial action must attain a level or

                                                15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

standard of control of the hazardous substances, pollutants and contaminants, which at least
attains ARARs under federal and state laws, unless a waiver can be justified.

Remedial alternatives for the Site are summarized below. Capital costs are those expenditures
that are required to construct a remedial alternative. Operation and maintenance (O&M) costs are
those post-construction costs necessary to ensure or verify the continued effectiveness of a
remedial alternative and are estimated on an annual basis. Present worth is the amount of
money which, if invested in the current year, would be sufficient to cover all the costs over time
associated with a project, calculated using a discount rate of seven percent and up to a 30-year
time interval. Construction time is the time required to construct and implement the alternative
and does not include the time required to design the remedy, negotiate performance of the
remedy with the responsible parties, or procure contracts for design and construction. Detailed
information regarding the alternatives can be found in the 2017 Feasibility Study Report (FS
Report).

Three remedial alternatives were evaluated in the FS:

   •   No action
   •   Permeable reactive barriers with soil and sediment excavation, and institutional controls
   •   Air sparging/ventilation for soil and groundwater, with sediment excavation and
       instituational controls

These are alternatives are described in greater detail below.

Alternative 1: No Action

The NCP requires that a “No Action” alternative be evaluated to establish a baseline for
comparison with other remedial alternatives. If no active remedial action is taken, contaminants
already present in the soil, groundwater, seep water, surface water and sediment will remain and
RAOs for the Site will not be met. It is assumed that land and groundwater resource use will not
change over time, any existing institutional controls will remain in place and be enforced by
other regulatory programs long-term, and human health and environmental risks for the Site
essentially would be the same as those identified in the human health and ecological risk
assessments.

Total Capital Cost:           $0
Total O&M:                    $0
Total Periodic Cost:          $0
Total Present Net Worth:      $0
Timeframe:                    0 years

Alternative 2: Permeable reactive barriers with soil and sediment excavation; institutional
controls
This remedial alternative consists of installing two PRB trenches to provide passive treatment of
the two groundwater plumes described previously. One wall would address the BTEX plume and


                                                16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

the other would address the chlorinated VOCs plus the SVOC 4-chloranaline plume. (see
Appendix 1, Figure 4).

Ongoing sources of this groundwater contamination will be addressed through excavation. Soil
within the former unlined lagoon area will be excavated to the water table, an estimated depth of
10 feet below grade. Contaminated sediment will be excavated from impacted sediment/seep
locations along Grand Sprute Run and disposed of off-site. The estimated volume of material to
be excavated is 3,000 cubic yards of soil and 5 cubic yards of sediment.

By remediating the groundwater and removing ongoing sources of contamination, the remedy
also addresses contamination resulting from the discharge of groundwater to seeps, which has
impacted seep water, surface water and seep sediment. In addition, by remediating the
groundwater, potential future risks associated with inhalation of indoor air were a
building/structure to be built over the contaminated plumes will be addressed.

A PDI will be needed to determine the horizontal and vertical extent of contaminant impacts in
soil, sediment and groundwater. Sampling will be conducted to the clay layer, and if additional
soil and/or sediment excavation beyond that anticipated is needed for the action to meet RGs, it
will be conducted, as appropriate. In addition, while not anticipated based on the existing data, if
dense non-aqueous phase liquid is found, it would be addressed in a future decision document.

Long-term monitoring outside of the PRB capture zones will be needed to assure the
effectiveness of the remedy over time, and institutional controls will assure the remedy remains
protective while RAOs are being met. The institutional controls may include a New Jersey
Ground Water Classification Exception Area that restricts the use of the contaminated aquifer,
along with deed notices that restrict development of the affected areas.

While not anticipated, reactive material within the PRB may need to be replaced after a period of
time to fully remediate the groundwater. For purposes of costing, replacement of the PRB
material is included five years after installation of the initial wall, and then, as a contingency, a
second replacement is included 10 years after initial installation. These costs are identified as
“periodic costs,” below. After removal of the source area (the former lagoon), the PRB will
address the residual groundwater contamination through passive treatment. It is uncertain how
long the PRB will need to remain in place. For purposes of costing, 30 years was assumed.

Total Capital Cost:            $2,240,000
Total O&M:                     $580,000
Total Periodic Costs:          $1,200,000
Total Present Net Worth:       $4,020,000
Implementation Timeframe:      1 year
Remediation Timeframe:         30 years




                                                 17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 3: Air Sparging/Ventilation for soil and groundwater with sediment
excavation; Institutional controls

This remedial alternative consists of the installation of an air sparging system to remediate the
shallow aquifer groundwater contamination at the Site. Long Term Monitoring would also be
needed as part of this alternative.

An air sparging system consists of a network of air injection (“sparging”) wells installed into the
saturated zone. The network of injection wells is designed so that all of the area requiring
treatment is effectively aerated. This typically involves establishing overlapping radii of
influence for the sparging well network. Air compressors are used to deliver oxygen under
pressure. An aboveground process control system is used to monitor and adjust the air delivery
equipment. Flow rates and pressures of injected air are based on Site conditions characterized
during the PDI phase of the project and refined during pilot scale testing. These rates can be
adjusted during full-scale remediation to accommodate observed results and increase remediation
efficiency.

Impacted soil within the former unlined lagoon area will be addressed by installing a soil vapor
extraction (SVE) system in conjunction with the air sparging system within the former lagoon
area to address impacted vadose zone soil. Vacuum pumps will be used to remove VOCs from
the subsurface for treatment via carbon adsorption. Additional testing will be needed to
determine the effectiveness of this approach at addressing the SVOC (4-chloroanaline) portion of
the groundwater plume.

Impacted sediment will be addressed through the excavation and off-site disposal of impacted
sediment/seep locations along Grand Sprute Run. The estimated volume of sediment to be
excavated is 5 cubic yards. Institutional controls similar to those described for Alternative 2 will
assure the remedy remains protective while RAOs are being met.

Also similar to Alternative 2, a PDI will be needed to determine the horizontal and vertical
extent of contaminant impacts in soil, sediment and groundwater. Sampling will be conducted to
the clay layer, and if additional soil and/or sediment excavation beyond that anticipated is needed
for the action to meet RGs, it will be conducted, as appropriate. In addition, while not anticipated
based on the existing data, if dense non-aqueous phase liquid is found, it would be addressed in a
future decision document.

For cost-estimating purposes, the air sparging and SVE systems are expected to take less than a
year to install, and would then be operated for a period of approximately one year. Based upon
experience at other sites, EPA expects that the effectiveness of these systems would begin to
diminish after about one year of active remediation; therefore, bi-annual monitoring is
anticipated for the first five years after initial installation, and then annual monitoring would
continue until the RGs are reached, conservatively assumed to be 30 years.

Total Capital Cost:            $3,088,000
Total O&M:                     $581,267
Total Periodic Cost:           $25,000

                                                 18

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Total Present Net Worth:  $3,694,267
Implementation Timeframe: 1 year
Remediation Timeframe:    30 years



COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES

In selecting a remedy for a site, EPA considers the factors set forth in Section 121 of CERCLA
42 U.S.C. § 9621, and conducts a detailed analysis of the viable remedial alternatives pursuant to
Section 300.430(e)(9) of the NCP, 40 C.F.R § 300.430(e)(9), EPA’s Guidance for Conducting
Remedial Investigations and Feasibility Studies, OSWER Directive 9355.3-01, and EPA’s A
Guide to Preparing Superfund Proposed Plans, Records of Decision, and Other Remedy
Selection Decision Documents, OSWER 9200.1-23.P. The detailed analysis consists of an
assessment of the individual alternatives against each of the nine evaluation criteria at 40 C.F.R.
§ 300.430(e)(9)(iii) and a comparative analysis focusing upon the relative performance of each
alternative against those criteria.

A comparative analysis of these alternatives based upon the nine evaluation criteria noted below
follows.

Threshold Criteria – The first two criteria are known as “threshold criteria” because they are
the minimum requirements that each response measure must meet in order to be eligible for
selection as a remedy.

1. Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment
Overall protection of human health and the environment determines whether an alternative
eliminates, reduces, or controls threats to public health and the environment through
institutional controls, engineering controls, or treatment.

Alternative 1, the no action alternative, is not protective of human health and the environment
because it does not eliminate, reduce, or control risk of exposure to contaminated soil,
groundwater, seep water, surface water and sediment through off-site disposal, other engineering
controls, treatment or institutional controls.

The “no action” alternative was eliminated from further consideration under the remaining eight
criteria because it is not protective of human health and the environment.

Alternative 2 would provide protection to current and potential future human and ecological
receptors through the treatment of contaminated groundwater, excavation and off-site disposal of
contaminated soil and sediment, monitoring to assure effectiveness and institutional controls.

Alternative 3 would also likely provide protection to current and potential future human and
ecological receptors through the in-situ treatment of contaminated groundwater and of soil in the
former lagoon, excavation and off-site disposal of contaminated sediment, monitoring to assure
effectiveness, and institutional controls.

                                                19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

2. Compliance with applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs)
Section 121 (d) of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. § 9621(d), and Section 300.430(f)(1)(ii)(B) of the NCP,
40 CFR §300.430(f)(1)(ii)(B), require that remedial actions at CERCLA sites at least attain
legally applicable or relevant and appropriate Federal and State requirements, standards,
criteria and limitations which are collectively referred to as “ARARs,” unless such ARARs are
waived under Section 121(d)(4) of CERCLA.

Compliance with ARARs addresses whether a remedy will meet all of the applicable or relevant
and appropriate requirements of other Federal and State environmental statutes or provides a
basis for invoking a waiver.

A complete list of ARARs can be found in Appendix 2, Table 8.

Both Alternative 2 and Alternative 3 should provide compliance with chemical-specific ARARs,
because the contamination would either be treated or removed. However, bench-scale testing will
be necessary to confirm that Alternative 3 can effectively achieve ARARs for 4-chloroanaline.

Location-specific ARARs and Action-specific ARARs would be met for both alternatives by
proper design and implementation of the respective components of the remedy. The Location-
specific and Action-specific ARARs for the disposal phase would be met with proper on-site
waste management and selection of the disposal facility.


Primary Balancing Criteria – The next five criteria, criteria 3 through 7, are known as
“primary balancing criteria”. These criteria are factors by which tradeoffs between response
measures are assessed so that the best options will be chosen, given site-specific data and
conditions.


3. Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence
Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence considers the ability of an alternative to maintain
protection of human health and the environment over time.

Alternative 2 is expected to permanently remove VOCs and the SVOC 4-chloroanaline from
impacted groundwater within the active treatment area through treatment. The PRBs would treat
Site contaminants through permanent and irreversible processes, and would be effective in
achieving RAOs and preventing further impacts to seep water, surface water and sediment.

Alternative 3 is expected to permanently remove VOCs from soil and groundwater within the
active remedial area through treatment; however, treatment efficacy for the removal of the Site-
related SVOC 4-chloroanaline is expected to be more moderate and bench-scale testing will be
required bench-scale to evaluate this. Thus, Alternative 3 has a higher likelihood of leaving
residues in the source areas that could potentially act as a continuing source to the groundwater,
seep water, surface water and sediment.




                                                20

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 3 is likely to reduce VOC concentrations in groundwater more quickly than
Alternative 2; however, the ability for this alternative to fully address VOCs in the soils is less
certain, and the capability of SVE to reduce 4-chloroanaline concentrations as quickly as the
other COCs will require bench-scale testing to confirm efficacy.

Soil and sediment excavation under Alternative 2 and sediment excavation under Alternative 3
would remove the sources of ongoing contamination from these impacted areas, thus providing
long-term effectiveness and permanence. Institutional controls under Alternatives 2 and 3 would
contribute to the protection of human health when properly implemented and maintained.

4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume through Treatment
Reduction in Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume of Contaminants through Treatment evaluates an
alternative's use of treatment to reduce the harmful effects of principal contaminants, their
ability to move in the environment and the amount of contamination present.

Both Alternative 2 and Alternative 3 would provide reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume of
contamination through treatment.

PRBs under Alternative 2 permanently remove contaminants from the aquifer by adsorption and
biogeochemical processes. The toxicity, mobility, and volume of contaminants in groundwater
are reduced as contaminated groundwater passes through the PRBs located at the downgradient
edges of both plumes.

Alternative 3 permanently removes VOCs from the aquifer within the active remedial area. Vapor-
phase VOCs generated under Alternative 3 will be collected and treated with granular activated
carbon, if necessary, and discharged to the atmosphere. Regeneration of the activated carbon will
transform contaminants to harmless compounds, thereby reducing the toxicity of contaminants
removed from the Site groundwater. Air sparging also serves to enhance the aerobic
biodegradation of compounds, which may prove effective in reducing concentrations of 4-
chloroanaline and other less volatile aromatic compounds in this portion of the plume.

5. Short-Term Effectiveness
Short-term Effectiveness considers the length of time needed to implement an alternative and the
risks the alternative poses to workers, residents and the environment during implementation.

Both Alternative 2 and Alternative 3 would be effective in the short term. The extent of excavation
of soil and sediment required is relatively small and excavation activities would likely be
completed in less than one year.

For Alternative 2, installation of the PRB would require minimal impacts to soil during installation.
The timeframe for initial installation is expected to be approximately one month.

Short-term impacts for Alternative 3 are greater since it would require the installation of piping
over the entire ground surface associated with the groundwater plume and soil remediation area,
and the operation of blowers and vacuum pumps for the full duration of active remediation, which
is estimated to be one year.

                                                 21

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Both Alternatives 2 and 3 would result in some short-term impacts to the community, in the form
of vehicular (truck) traffic and noise and dust from construction/excavation activities, although
Alternative 2 would generate less truck traffic in the short term than Alternative 3 since the
active work of installing the PRBs would be less intensive than installation and operation of the
air sparging and SVE system.

Perimeter air monitoring and dust control measures would be required to address concerns over
exposure to dust during activities.

6. Implementability
Implementability addresses the technical and administrative feasibility of a remedy from design
through construction and operation. Factors such as availability of services and materials,
administrative feasibility, and coordination with other governmental entities are also considered.

Alternative 2 can be easily implemented and requires a shorter duration to complete installation
than Alternative 3. The PRBs are a passive treatment technology and will require little
maintenance during the active life of the remediation. The PRB trench excavation under
Alternative 2 can be performed using either standard excavation or one-pass trenching equipment.
Due to the relatively steep slopes within the proposed location of the Area 1 PRB, Site preparation
and re-grading may be required in selected locations prior to installation of the PRB.

The installation of air sparge/SVE system under Alternative 3 is a well-established technology
and can be readily implemented at this Site; however, the air sparging system will require the
installation of a significant number of air sparge/SVE well points (~500) as well as supporting
piping, equipment and electric utilities both on and off the Site. Alternative 3 is also an active
technology that will require ongoing operation and maintenance over the short duration (~1 year)
anticipated for active remediation. The ability for this alternative to reduce the SVOC 4-
chloroanaline concentrations as quickly as the other COCs will require bench-scale testing to
confirm efficacy. Thus, the effectiveness of the in-situ SVE system to fully remediate the soils is
uncertain, and the effectiveness of air sparging is dependent upon the ability of SVE to address
the source area. As a result, Alternative 2 is considered more implementable than Alternative 3.

7. Cost
Cost includes estimated capital and annual operation and maintenance costs, as well as present
worth cost. Present worth cost is the total cost of an alternative over time in terms of today's
dollar value. Cost estimates are expected to be accurate within a range of +50 to -30 percent
(This is a standard assumption in accordance with EPA guidance).

The estimated capital cost, operation and maintenance (O&M), and present worth costs for each
alternative are discussed in detail in EPA’s FS. The cost estimates are based on the best available
information. The present-worth cost for Alternative 2 assumes a 30 year timeframe, while the
present-worth cost for Alternative 3 assumes a 1-year timeframe to implement, but a 30 year
timeframe to reach RGs. While not anticipated, additional installations of the PRB under
Alternative 2 may be needed to fully remediate the groundwater; therefore, for purposes of


                                                22

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

costing, a second installation is included five years after installation of the initial wall, and then,
as a contingency, a third installation is included 10 years after initial installation.

The estimated total capital cost, O&M cost, periodic cost and total present-worth costs for each
of the alternatives are as follows:

  Alternative         Capital Cost              O&M             Periodic Cost        Present Worth
                                                                                          Cost
       2               $2,240,000              $582,000           $1,198,000           $4,020,000
       3               $3,090,000              $259,000            $62,000             $3,410,000



Modifying Criteria – The final two evaluation criteria, criteria 8 and 9, are called “modifying
criteria” because new information or comments from the state or the community on the
Proposed Plan may modify the preferred response measure or cause another response measure
to be considered.


8. State Acceptance
State Agency acceptance considers whether the State and/or Support Agency agrees with EPA’s
analyses and recommendations.

NJDEP concurs with the selected remedy. A letter of concurrence is attached in Appendix IV.

9. Community Acceptance

Community Acceptance considers whether the local community agrees with EPA's analyses and
preferred alternative. Comments received on the Proposed Plan are an important indicator of
community acceptance.

On September 14, 2017, EPA held a formal public meeting on the proposed plan for this Site. All
written and oral comments are addressed in detail in Appendix V, which is the Responsiveness
Summary for this ROD. No comments received during the comment period for the proposed plan
expressed disagreement with EPA’s preferred alternative for the Site.


PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE

The NCP establishes an expectation that EPA will use treatment to address the principal threats
posed by a site wherever practicable (40 CFR §300.430(a)(1)(iii)(A)). Identifying principal
threat wastes combines concepts of both hazard and risk. In general, principal threat wastes are
those source materials considered to be highly toxic or highly mobile which generally cannot be
contained in a reliable manner or would present a significant risk to human health or the
environment should exposure occur. Non-principal threat wastes are those source materials that


                                                  23

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

generally can be reliably contained and that would present only a low risk in the event of
exposure.

Although VOCs in soil and sediment at the Site are a source of contamination to groundwater,
seep water, surface water and sediment, these sources are not considered principal threat wastes
at the Site. The primary media contaminated at the Site is groundwater.

SELECTED REMEDY

Based upon consideration of the requirements of CERCLA, the results of Site investigations, the
detailed analysis of the alternatives and the public comments, EPA’s selected remedy to address
contaminated soil, groundwater, seep water, surface water and sediment at the Site is Alternative
2. The selected remedy addresses the entire Site and is the first and only planned remedial phase
or operable unit for the Site. This alternative includes the following components:

    •   Installation of two PRBs to provide passive treatment of aromatic and VOCs and the
        SVOC 4-chloroanaline in groundwater;
    •   Excavation and off-site disposal of contaminated soil and sediment which acts as a source
        of further contamination to groundwater, seep water, surface water and sediment;
    •   Long-term monitoring to assure the effectiveness of the remedy over time; and
    •   Institutional controls until RAOs are met; the institutional controls may include a New
        Jersey Ground Water Classification Exception Area that restricts the use of the
        contaminated aquifer, along with deed notices that restrict development of the affected
        areas.

By remediating the groundwater and removing ongoing sources of contamination, the remedy
also addresses contamination resulting from the discharge of groundwater to seeps, which has
impacted seep water, surface water and sediment. In addition, by remediating the groundwater,
potential future risks associated with inhalation of indoor air through vapor intrusion if a
building/structure were to be built over the contaminated plumes will be addressed.

A PDI will be needed to determine the horizontal and vertical extent of contaminant impacts in
soil, sediment and groundwater. Sampling will be conducted to the clay layer, and if additional
soil and/or sediment excavation beyond that anticipated is needed, it will be conducted, as
appropriate. In addition, while not anticipated based on the existing data, if dense non-aqueous
phase liquid is found, it would be addressed in a future decision document.

The total estimated present-worth cost for the selected remedy is $4,020,000. For purposes of
costing, a second installation of the PRBs is included five years after installation of the initial
walls, and then, as a contingency, a third installation is included 10 years after initial installation.
A more detailed, itemized list of costs for the selected remedy may be found in FS. The cost
estimates, which are based on available information, are order of magnitude engineering cost
estimates that are expected to be within +50 to -30 percent of the actual cost of the project.

These actions are considered the final remedy for the Site.


                                                  24

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Expected Outcomes of the Selected Remedy

Implementation of Alternative 2 will eliminate current and potential future exposure to
contaminants in soil, groundwater, seep water, surface water and sediment, and prevent further
migration of contamination to groundwater, seep water, surface water and sediment.


Summary of the Rationale for the Selected Remedy

The selection of Alternative 2 provides the best balance of trade-offs among the alternatives with
respect to the evaluation criteria. The selected alternative will be protective of human health and
the environment, complies with Federal and State requirements that are legally applicable or
relevant and appropriate to the remedial action, is cost-effective, and will utilize permanent
solutions and treatment technologies to the maximum extent practicable.

NJDEP concurs with the selected remedy.

The preferred alternative satisfies the two threshold criteria and achieves the best combination of
the five balancing criteria of the comparative analysis. This alternative is preferred for the
following primary reasons:

   •   It will achieve the RAOs and cleanup goals in the most effective way;
   •   It will reduce the toxicity, mobility or volume of contamination through treatment for all
       COCs; bench-scale studies should not be needed to evaluate the effectiveness of the
       alternative at reducing COC concentrations;
   •   It is faster and easier to implement;
   •   It is expected to be more implementable than the other active alternative, with fewer
       short-term effectiveness issues; and
   •   It is a permanent remedy that will not require the implementation of permanent
       institutional controls once RAOs are achieved.

The implementation of this selected remedy will employ engineering controls and safe work
practices to mitigate exposure to dust and to protect workers and the local community.

The environmental benefits of the selected remedy may be enhanced by consideration, during the
design, of technologies and practices that are sustainable in accordance with EPA Region 2’s
Clean and Green Energy Policy. This will include consideration of green remediation
technologies and practices.

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

EPA has determined that the selected remedy complies with the CERCLA and NCP provisions
for remedy selection, meets the threshold criteria, and provides the best balance of tradeoffs
among the alternatives with respect to the balancing and modifying criteria. These provisions
require the selection of remedies that are protective of human health and the environment,
comply with ARARs (or justify a waiver from such requirements), are cost-effective, and utilize

                                                25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery technologies to
the maximum extent practicable. In addition, CERCLA includes a preference for remedies that
employ treatment that permanently and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity, or mobility of
hazardous substances as a principal element. The following sections discuss how the selected
remedy meets these statutory requirements.

Protection of Human Health and the Environment

The selected remedy, Alternative 2, will protect human health and the environment through
removal, treatment and institutional controls. The selected remedy will eliminate exposure
associated with contaminated soil, groundwater, seep water, surface water and sediment at the
Site through removal and treatment. Soil excavation will eliminate the source of groundwater
contamination and the installation of permeable reactive barrier walls will prevent future
contamination of seep water, surface water and sediment. This action will result in the reduction
of exposure levels to acceptable risk levels within EPA’s generally acceptable risk range of 10-4
to 10-6 for carcinogens and below a HI of 1.0 for noncarcinogens. Implementation of the selected
remedy will not pose unacceptable short-term risks.

Compliance with ARARs

The selected remedy complies with chemical-specific, location-specific and action-specific
ARARs. A complete list of the ARARs and other guidance that concern the selected remedy is
presented in Appendix II, Table 8.

Cost-Effectiveness

EPA has determined that the selected remedy is cost-effective and represents reasonable value
for the money to be spent. A cost-effective remedy is one whose costs are proportional to its
overall effectiveness (NCP § 300.4309f)(1)(ii)(D)). EPA evaluated the “overall effectiveness” of
those alternatives that satisfied the threshold criteria (i.e., were both protective of human health
and ARAR-compliant). Overall effectiveness is based on the evaluations of long-term
effectiveness and permanence; reduction in toxicity, mobility, and volume through treatment;
and short-term effectiveness. Overall effectiveness was then compared to costs to determine
cost-effectiveness.

Each of the alternatives was subjected to a detailed cost analysis. In that analysis, capital and
annual O&M costs were estimated and used to develop present-worth costs. The estimated
present worth cost of the selected remedy for the Site is $4,020,000. Although Alternative 3 is
less expensive than the selected remedy, EPA concluded that the short-term and long-term
effectiveness, and the implementability of the selected remedy is superior to Alternative 3. The
selected remedy is cost-effective as it has been determined to provide the greatest overall
protectiveness for its present-worth cost.




                                                 26

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment Technologies (or Resource
Recovery) Technologies to Maximum Extent Practicable

EPA has determined that the selected remedy represents the maximum extent to which
permanent solutions and treatment technologies can be utilized in a practicable manner for this
Site. Of those alternatives that are protective of human health and the environment and comply
with ARARs (or provide a basis for invoking an ARAR waiver), EPA has determined that the
selected remedy provides the best balance of trade-offs in terms of the five balancing criteria,
while also considering the statutory preference for treatment as a principal element, the bias
against off-site disposal without treatment, and State/support agency and community acceptance.
Implementation of the selected remedy will eliminate current human and ecological receptors’
exposure to contaminated soil, groundwater, seep water, surface water and sediment, will prevent
future exposure to contaminated media and will utilize treatment as a principal element.

Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element

Treatment of groundwater is a principal component of the selected remedy. As such, the
statutory preference for treatment is satisfied.

Five-Year Review Requirements

Because this remedy will not result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants remaining
on Site above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, but it will take more
than five years to attain the RGs, EPA will conduct a review within five years of construction
completion for the Site to ensure that the remedy is, or will be, protective of human health and
the environment.


DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES

The Proposed Plan for the Matlack Site was released for a public comment period of 30 days on
August 23, 2017. The public comment period ran until September 22, 2017. The Proposed Plan
identified Alternative 2 (permeable reactive barriers with soil and sediment excavation, and
institutional controls) as the preferred alternative for Site. EPA reviewed all written (including
electronic formats such as e-mail) and verbal comments submitted during the public comment
period and has determined that no significant changes to the remedy, as it was originally
identified in the Proposed Plan, are necessary or appropriate.




                                                27

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX 1


 FIGURES

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Figure 1




     0                       0.5                                                                            2
                                                                                                                Miles
Source: United States Geological Survey Top;:igraphic Map. For more infon:nation on this map, visit http:llgoto.arcgisonline.comfmaµ;!NGS _ Top::i_US _2D

                                                        Site Location Map                                                                                   Job No.    Date        Figure No.
      1-)~                                          Matlack Inc. Superfund Site
                                          Woolwich Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey                                                                  10021567   JULY 2017        1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                      ! .,.,..., __
                                                                                      •               1




                                                       /
          /
      /                                                    t··

  I
1-)~I=~.      []~   UNITEDS1ATESEIIVIRONIIE"1AL
                         PROTI C flON AGE NCY

                      COIHAAC1 110 . EP W.ll!.oa9
                       WOIIII.ASSIGfOll~lll NO.
                           ozt~ IC O.Q2P,
                                                    MATLACK INC SUPERFlJND SITE
                                                        FEAS1BLITY STUD't'        I   sm~•

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Figure 3      1                       2                                 3                                    4                                5                             6                                7                                                      8


          I
      I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t       O(ISTINGSIW.l.OW MONITOlll>IGWELL

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D: ISTING DEEP ,.ONlTORING Wa..l.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       D


                  /
  /




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B




      .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NOT::~C KED MONITOR ING WELLS WERE NOT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SAMPLED .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ALL MONITORING
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SURVEYED BY MAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            wf/t- c~~s~~~I~~ ~~:EON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MAY 9, 20 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A




                           ~-~
                             ~ =
                                                                                              E. ZIMMERMAN


                                                                                                                                                      MATLACK INC. SUPERFUND SITE                                          SAMPLING LOCATIONS

                               =~
                                -==~===~=~=~=~=
                                              ~=~
                                                                                                                 UNITED STATESIOENN~:~~~iNTAL
                                                                                                                      PROTECT
                                                                                                                                                           FEASIBILITY STUDY
L___ _ _i_ _
           _                                                                =~===
                                                                                ~l =
                                                                                   ~
                                                                                   PROJE
                                                                                       :~CT=~
                                                                                           MANA~OER~ ~===          CONTRACT NO, EP-W.09.009       WOOLWICH TOWNSHIP, GLOUCESTER COUNTY, NEW JERSEY


                      I-)~'~  APRIL 2017
                              JJULY_ioi,
                                 ~20,~7
                              ISSUE
                                            ;==~::~=~:~========-1i,ii,....,i,,i,cr;;.,N.iiee,
                                          DATE
                                                 DRAFT FS REPORT
                                                                                         ., ,•,., -
                                                                                              147 - 240662
                                                                                                                    WORK ASSIGNMENT NO.
                                                                                                                        029-RICO.02P9
                                                                                                                                                                                                     !'!'li i il"'!'li i if'""""'='oo '"=:I
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           "'"'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I FIGURE J

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Figure 4
                       1                                                2                                            3                                     4                                5                            6                             7                                                          8


            I
        I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .;.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [ KISTINO SHAU.OW MONITOR•~

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O:ISTINGDE£Plol()NITOR1NGW!:U.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               WELL




I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -+        EXISTINOBLOCKED/NOT FOUNOWH L



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              +•
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TIMPORAR'f WELL POINT LOCATION (20 1')




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ~                                                               D

 '-                                     /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      •
            ~
                               /
                           /




    /
            /                                               /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         II:~( OI" W ~~ LJNE

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ~-~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          - - - CURB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ·~CTL.lNO UNI:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tS11W. llO t~!tNI Qt ..,ow,,1(; YO(,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ___ ~                     1~,~~~.;o1-'l°IOO<~J~O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [Ci'.S!<£DWl-f;Rfl'H""(Ol)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [51 .....TT:0 r;,m;Nr o• O<I.O'!iNAT[O 'IOCI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          - - - ~ '-'..~O:l~~U'::i:..[~~ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .g/~i:0<'05(0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [[)a,St,[0 fl;<"ll 1M"l:R'i!:O))
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [ST,t.lAT[0[X1'£MTO'"<-C .... O'!O,O,U.UME

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ----- ~°=~~~~"U&:1,,,..os                                            C
                               I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AFl[.01"!:~"!AC TNCBN!R,O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          - - - pe - ...C,,<11,0C Jfl!:..::H)



                                   \.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ""1U.2"£R\O.l!lEFi£AC IN[ BAAfll(R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ---(18-"<C,,"'OC ffl!:'IC")


                                                                                                      __,,.                                                                                                                                                               - - - i~:::~~NLIMIT                    <)f"   SOIL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          c:::::::::J SOL EXCAVATION AREA
                                                                                             ~~,.(-:,~,,.·,-:,~ ,•
                               ~        I   q,··~                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (g)       ~ ~~l:"~Otll.... lNt,.'flON



                HOT SPOT SE IM NT Jr
                REMOVAL LOCATION




                ..
                ~




                 ,~   $\1-10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .,                                                                               B




~ - sv-09




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ....
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A


                                                    r I,.




                                                            /
                                                      I
                                                                                                                         PROJECT MANAGER    E. ZIMMERMAN


                                                                                                                                                               UNITED ST ATES ENVIRONMENTAL         MATLACK INC. SUPERFUND SITE                        AREAS OF CONTAMINATION &SELECTED
                                                                                                                                                                    PROTECTION AGENCY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    REMEDY
                                            l - ) ~ 1 - - I~    AUGUST 2017
                                                                 APRIL 2017
                                                                                FS REPORT
                                                                               DRAFT FS REPORT
                                                                                                                                                                 CONTRACT NO. EP,W.09.009
                                                                                                                                                                  WORK ASSIGNMENT NO.
                                                                                                                                                                      029-RICO-02P9
                                                                                                                                                                                                         FEASIBILITY STUDY
                                                                                                                                                                                                WOOLWICH TOWNSHIP, GLOUCESTER COUNTY, NEW JERSEY

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           100·    200'   FILENAME

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SHEET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FIGURE   4
                                                                ISSUE   DATE   DESCRIPTION                               PROJECT NUMBER    147 - 240662

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX 2


 TABLES

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Table 1
                                                                            Summary of Chemicals of Concern and
                                                                         Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
Scenario Timeframe: Future
Medium: Groundwater
Exposure Medium: Groundwater
      Exposure             Chemical of                     Concentration Detected Concentration Frequency of                 Exposure Point   Exposure Point          Statistical
         Point              Concern                             (Qualifier)           Units      Detection                   Concentration1   Concentration           Measure
                                                             Min          Max                                                   (EPC)             Units
Tapwater                           Ethylbenzene               0.39 (J)          920               µg/L               11/47       195.8             µg/L        97.5% KM (Chebyshev) UCL

                                   4-Chloroaniline            9.9 (J)          6900               µg/L               5/46         1007             µg/L        Gamma Adjusted KM-UCL

                                   Biphenyl (diphenyl)         1 (J)            1.6               µg/L               3/46         1.6              µg/L          Maximum Concentration

                                   Naphthalene                3.2 (J)            68               µg/L               4/46        8.153             µg/L             95% KM (t) UCL

                                   Tetrachloroethylene        0.25 (J)         3000               µg/L               20/51       545.9             µg/L        97.5% KM (Chebyshev) UCL

                                   Trichloroethylene         0.081 (J)          160               µg/L               12/51       18.49             µg/L        95% KM (Chebyshev) UCL

                                   Vinyl Chloride             0.01 (J)           14               µg/L               13/37       2.566             µg/L        Gamma Adjusted KM-UCL
Scenario Timeframe: Current/Future
Medium: Seep Water
Exposure Medium: Seep Water
      Exposure            Chemical of                      Concentration Detected Concentration Frequency of                 Exposure Point   Exposure Point          Statistical
         Point              Concern                             (Qualifier)           Units      Detection                   Concentration1   Concentration           Measure
                                                             Min          Max                                                   (EPC)             Units
Seep                               Tetrachloroethylene         0.3 J           1700               µg/L               14/19        591              µg/L        Gamma Adjusted KM-UCL

                                   Trichloroethylene           0.34 J           150               µg/L               11/17         63              µg/L        Gamma Adjusted KM-UCL

                                   Manganese                   34.7            7470               µg/L                8/8         7043             µg/L        95% Adjusted Gamma UCL
Footnotes:
(1) The UCLs were calculated using EPA's ProUCL software (Version 5.1.00); when available, UCLs were used as EPCs.


Definitions:
 EPC = Exposure point concentration
 J = Estimated value (qualifier)
 µg/L = Microgram per liter
 UCL = Upper confidence limit of mean




                                                                                                     Page 1 of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                             Table 1
                                                                              Summary of Chemicals of Concern and
                                                                           Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
                                                             Summary of Chemicals of Concern and Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
This table presents the chemicals of concern (COCs) along with exposure point concentrations (EPCs) for each of the COCs detected in site media (i.e ., the concentration used to estimate the exposure and risk from each COC). The
table includes the range of concentrations detected for each COC, as well as the frequency of detection (i.e., the number of times the chemical was detected in the samples collected at the site), the EPC and how it was derived.




                                                                                                          Page 2 of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                          Table 2
                                                                             Selection of Exposure Pathways
   Scenario          Source          Receptor       Receptor       Medium/            Exposure         Exposure      Type of                        Rationale for Selection or
  Timeframe                         Population        Age          Exposure            Point            Route       Evaluation                    Exclusion of Exposure Pathway
                                                                   Medium
Future                             On-Site Worker     Adult           Soil           Surface Soil      Ingestion    Quantitative   An on-site worker (indoor and outdoor) may come into contact
                                                                                       (0-2 ft)         Dermal                     with surface soil (0-2 ft); therefore, the pathway is evaluated
                                                                                                                                   quantitatively
                                                                                     Outdoor Air       Inhalation
                                                                  Groundwater         Tapwater          Ingestion     None         An on-site potable well is used for certain tasks (e.g., cleaning
                                                                                                         Dermal     Quantitative   the floor with a hose), for hand washing and flushing toilets.
                                                                                  Indoor/Outdoor Air   Inhalation   Quantitative   Bottled water is currently supplied to employees for drinking;
                                                                                                                                   therefore, the dermal pathway is evaluated quantititiavely and
                                                                                                                                   the ingestion pathway is not evaluated. Inhalation via vapor
                                                                                                                                   intrusion using groundwater-derived vapor intrusion screening
                                                                                                                                   levels (VISLs).
Future                                On-Site         Adult           Soil                             Ingestion    Quantitative   Redevelopment of the site may occur; therefore, a future on-site
                                                                                     Soil (0-10 ft)     Dermal
                                    Construction                                                                                   construction worker's exposure to soil (0-10 ft) in a trench is
                                      Worker                                         Outdoor Air       Inhalation                  evaluated quantitatively.
                                                                  Groundwater        Trench water       Ingestion   Quantitative   Redevelopment of the site may occur; therefore, a future on-site
                                                                                                         Dermal                    construction worker's exposure to groundwater in a trench is
                                                                                                                                   evaluated quantitatively. Inhalation via vapor intrusion is also
                                                                                                       Inhalation                  evaluated using groundwater-derived VISLs.
Current/Future                        Off-Site        Adult       Groundwater          Tapwater         Ingestion   Qualitative    Exposure to groundwater by current off-site residents is
                                      Resident                                                           Dermal                    evaluated qualitatively; analytical results from a private well
                                                                                                                                   survey indicate that no COPCs or other constituent are present
                                                                                      Indoor Air       Inhalation                  above health-based standards in private wells. Groundwater flow
                                                                                                                                   is from the site to Grand Sprute Run and there are no
                                                                                                                                   intervening residences in this downgradient direction. The
                                                       Child      Groundwater          Tapwater        Ingestion
                                                                                                                                   results of the quantitative evaluation of the on-site future
                                                    (0-6 years)                                         Dermal
                                                                                                                                   resident risk from groundwater consumption are a conservative
                                                                                      Indoor Air       Inhalation                  surrogate for this pathway and will be considered in the
                                                                                                                                   qualitative evaluation for off-site residents.

Future                                On-Site         Adult       Groundwater          Tapwater         Ingestion   Quantitative   The site could potentially be redeveloped with residences using
                                      Resident                                                           Dermal                    private wells as potable water source; therefore, a future on-site
                                                                                      Indoor Air       Inhalation                  resident's exposure to groundwater and indoor air contaminants
                                                                                                                                   via showering and vapor intrusion is evaluated quantitatively.

                                                                      Soil           Surface Soil       Ingestion   Quantitative   The site could potentially be redeveloped with residences;
                                                                                       (0-2 ft)          Dermal                    therefore, a future on-site resident's exposure to surface soil is
                                                                                     Outdoor Air       Inhalation                  evaluated quantitatively.
                                                       Child      Groundwater         Tapwater          Ingestion   Quantitative   The site could potentially be redeveloped with residences using
                  Unlined Waste                     (0-6 years)                                          Dermal                    private wells as potable water source; therefore, a future on-site
                    Lagoon &                                                          Indoor Air       Inhalation                  resident's exposure to groundwater and indoor air contaminants
                 Wastewater USTs                                      Soil                              Ingestion   Quantitative   The site could potentially be redeveloped with residences;
                                                                                     Surface Soil
                                                                                                         Dermal                    therefore, a future on-site resident's exposure to surface soil is
                                                                                       (0-2 ft)
                  (Chlorinated                                                                                                     evaluated quantitatively.
                 VOCs plume &                                                        Outdoor Air       Inhalation
                 BTEX plume)

Current/Future                        Off-Site        Adult           Soil                             Ingestion    Qualitative    Recreators may come into contact with surface soil while
                                                                                     Surface Soil
                                     Recreator                                                          Dermal                     visiting Grand Sprute Run; however, an on-site worker’s and
                                                                                       (0-2 ft)
                                                                                                                                   resident’s exposure to surface soil are more conservative
                                                                                     Outdoor Air       Inhalation                  scenarios than what could reasonably be expected for a recreator
                                                                                                                                   at this site.
                                                                     Seeps        Water & Sediment     Ingestion    Quantitative   Recreators may come into contact with seep water and sediment
                                                                                                        Dermal                     that are present along the banks of Grand Sprute Run.

                                                                  Surface Water     Surface Water      Ingestion    Quantitative   Recreators may come into contact with sediment while visiting
                                                                                                        Dermal                     Grand Sprute Run, portions of which that are shallow.

                                                                                         Fish          Ingestion    Qualitative    Recreators may ingest fish caught from Grand Sprute Run (FW2-
                                                                                                                                   NT/SE2). The primary constituents of interest are volatile and
                                                                                                                                   unlikely to be present in significant concentrations in fish;
                                                                                                                                   therefore, this pathway is evaluated qualitatively.

                                                                    Sediment          Sediment         Ingestion    Quantitative   Recreators may come into contact with sediment while visiting
                                                                                                        Dermal                     Grand Sprute Run, portions of which that are shallow.

                                                       Child          Soil                             Ingestion    Qualitative    Recreators may come into contact with surface soil while
                                                    (0-6 years)                      Surface Soil       Dermal                     visiting Grand Sprute Run; however, an on-site worker’s and
                                                                                       (0-2 ft)                                    resident’s exposure to surface soil are more conservative
                                                                                     Outdoor Air       Inhalation                  scenarios than what could reasonably be expected for a recreator
                                                                                                                                   at this site.
                                                                     Seeps        Water & Sediment     Ingestion    Quantitative   Recreators may come into contact with seep water and sediment
                                                                                                        Dermal                     that are present along the banks Grand Sprute Run.

                                                                  Surface Water     Surface Water      Ingestion    Quantitative   Recreators may come into contact with surface water while
                                                                                                        Dermal                     visiting Grand Sprute Run.
                                                                                         Fish          Ingestion    Qualitative    Recreators may ingest fish caught from Grand Sprute Run (FW2-
                                                                                                                                   NT/SE2). The primary constituents of interest are volatile and
                                                                                                                                   unlikely to be present in significant concentrations in fish;
                                                                                                                                   therefore, this pathway is evaluated qualitatively.

                                                                    Sediment          Sediment         Ingestion    Quantitative   Recreators may come into contact with sediment while visiting
                                                                                                        Dermal                     Grand Sprute Run, portions of which that are shallow.




                                                                                         Page 3 of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Definitions:
 FW2-NT/SE2 = NJDEP's surface water category for Grande Sprute Run

                                                                                               Summary of Selection of Exposure Pathways
This table describes the exposure pathways associated with the varying media (soil, sediment, seeps, surface water and groundwater) that were evaluated in the risk assessment along with the rationale for the inclusion of each pathway. Exposure
media, exposure points, and characteristics of receptor populations are also included.




                                                                                                                  Page 4 of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                     Table 3
                                                                                                         Noncancer Toxicity Data Summary
Pathway: Ingestion/Dermal
      Chemicals               Chronic/            Oral RfD         Oral RfD Units          Absorp.         Adjusted RfD Adj. Dermal                      Primary                  Combined     Source of RfD Target    Dates of
      of Concern             Subchronic            Value                                  Efficiency                   1 RfD Units                        Target                 Uncertainty          Organ           RfD Source
                                                                                                            for Dermal
                                                                                          (Dermal)                                                        Organ                  /Modifying                           Publication
                                                                                                                                                                                   Factors
Ethylbenzene                    Chronic             1.0E-01            mg/kg-day               1              1.0E-01           mg/kg-day              Hepatic, renal              1000/1             IRIS             1/31/1987

4-Chloroaniline                 Chronic             4.0E-03            mg/kg-day               1              4.0E-03           mg/kg-day               Lymphatic                  3000/1             IRIS             8/22/1988

Biphenyl (diphenyl)             Chronic             5.0E-01            mg/kg-day               1              5.0E-01           mg/kg-day                  Renal                    30/10             IRIS             8/27/2013
             2
Manganese                       Chronic             2.4E-02             mg/kg-day             0.04            9.6E-04           mg/kg-day             Nervous system                 3.0              IRIS              5/1/1996

Naphthalene                     Chronic             2.0E-02             mg/kg-day               1             2.0E-02           mg/kg-day             Developmental                 3000              IRIS             9/17/1998
Tetrachloroethylene             Chronic             6.0E-03             mg/kg-day               1             6.0E-03           mg/kg-day               Nervous                     1000              IRIS             2/10/2012
                                                                                                                                                 Developmental, Hepatic,
Trichloroethylene               Chronic             5.0E-04             mg/kg-day               1             5.0E-04           mg/kg-day        Renal, Nervous System,          100/1000/10           IRIS            9/28/2011
                                                                                                                                                 Lymphatic, Reproductive
Vinyl Chloride                  Chronic             3.0E-03             mg/kg-day               1             3.0E-03           mg/kg-day                 Hepatic                    30                IRIS             8/7/2000

Pathway: Inhalation
                 Chemicals                        Chronic/             Inhalation         Inhalation         Inhalation     Inhalation                  Primary                   Combined     Source of RfC Target   Dates of RfC
                 of Concern                      Subchronic               RfC             RfC Units              RfD         RfD Units                Target Organ               Uncertainty          Organ             Source
                                                                                                            (If available) (If available)                                        /Modifying                           Publication
                                                                                                                                                                                   Factors
                                                                                                     3
Ethylbenzene                                        Chronic              1.0E+00             mg/m                NA                 NA                Developmental                  300               IRIS             3/1/1991
                                                                                                     3
4-Chloroaniline                                     Chronic                 NA               mg/m                NA                 NA                      NA                       NA                NA                 NA
                                                                                                     3
Biphenyl (diphenyl)                                 Chronic              4.0E-04             mg/m                NA                 NA         Respiratory, Hepatic, Renal          3,000        PPRTV-Appendix         4/4/2011
                                                                                                     3
Manganese                                           Chronic              5.0E-05             mg/m                NA                 NA                    Nervous                   100/1              IRIS            12/1/1993
                                                                                                     3
Naphthalene                                         Chronic              3.0E-03             mg/m                NA                 NA             Nervous, Respiratory            3000/1              IRIS            9/17/1998
                                                                                                     3
Tetrachloroethylene                                 Chronic              4.0E-02             mg/m                NA                 NA                    Nervous                   1,000              IRIS            2/10/2012
                                                                                                                                                Developmental, Hepatic,
Trichloroethylene                                   Chronic              2.0E-03             mg/m3               NA                 NA         Renal, Nervous, Lymphatic,            10                IRIS            9/28/2011
                                                                                                                                                      Reproductive
Vinyl Chloride                                      Chronic              1.0E-01             mg/m3               NA                 NA                    Hepatic                    30                IRIS             8/7/2000
Footnotes:
(1) Adjusted RfD for Dermal = Oral RfD x Oral Absorption Efficiency for Dermal (Exhibit 4-1, RAGS E, 2004)
(2) The RfD for manganese was based on non-diet contributions as recommended in the IRIS assessment and User's Guide of the RSL tables; a modifying factor of 3 was also used.


Definitions:
 IRIS = Integrated Risk Information System, U.S. EPA
 NA = Not available
 mg/m3 = Milligrams per cubic meter
 mg/kg-day = Milligrams per kilogram per day
 PPRTV (Appendix) = PPRTV Screening Toxicity Values- available in the appendix of the PPRTV assessment




                                                                                                                        Page 5 of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Table 4
                                                                                Cancer Toxicity Data Summary
Pathway: Ingestion/ Dermal
  Chemical of Concern               Oral Cancer                Units               Adjusted   Slope Factor              Weight of Evidence/ Cancer                    Source            Date of Slope
                                    Slope Factor                                 Cancer Slope    Units                          Guideline                                               Factor Source
                                                                                    Factor                                                                                               Publication
                                                                                 (for Dermal)
Ethylbenzene                            1.1E-02            (mg/kg-day)-1           1.1E-02          (mg/kg-day)-1                        D                           CAL EPA                1/20/2011
                                                                           -1                                     -1
4-Chloroaniline                         2.0E-01           (mg/kg-day)              2.0E-01          (mg/kg-day)        Likely to be carcinogenic to humans            PPRTV                 9/30/2008
                                                                                                                       Suggestive evidence of carcinogenic
Biphenyl (diphenyl)                     8.0E-03           (mg/kg-day)-1            8.0E-03          (mg/kg-day)-1                                                       IRIS                8/27/2013
                                                                                                                                    potential
Manganese                                 NA              (mg/kg-day)-1              NA             (mg/kg-day)-1                       NA                              NA                      NA
                                                                                                                        Carcinogenic potential cannot be
Naphthalene                               NA              (mg/kg-day)-1              NA             (mg/kg-day)-1                                                       IRIS                9/17/1998
                                                                                                                                 determined
Tetrachloroethylene                     2.1E-03           (mg/kg-day)-1            2.1E-03          (mg/kg-day)-1 Likely to be carcinogenic to humans                   IRIS                2/10/2012
                                                                           -1                                     -1
Trichloroethylene                       4.6E-02           (mg/kg-day)              4.6E-02          (mg/kg-day)              Carcinogenic to humans                     IRIS                9/28/2011

Vinyl Chloride                          7.2E-01           (mg/kg-day)-1            7.2E-01          (mg/kg-day)-1       Known/likely human carcinogen                   IRIS                 8/7/2000

Pathway: Inhalation
  Chemical of Concern                 Unit Risk                Units              Inhalation  Slope Factor              Weight of Evidence/ Cancer                    Source            Date of Slope
                                                                                 Cancer Slope    Units                          Guideline                                               Factor Source
                                                                                    Factor                                                                                               Publication
                                                                    3 -1
Ethylbenzene                            2.5E-06                      )               NA                   NA                             D                           CAL EPA                1/20/2011
                                                                    3 -1
4-Chloroaniline                           NA                         )               NA                   NA                            NA                               NA                     NA
                                                                    3 -1
Biphenyl (diphenyl)                       NA                         )               NA                   NA                            NA                               NA                     NA
                                                                    3 -1
Manganese                                 NA                         )               NA                   NA                             D                               NA                     NA
                                                                    3 -1                                               C; Carcinogenic potential cannot be
Naphthalene                             3.4E-05                      )               NA                   NA                                                         CAL EPA                1/20/2011
                                                                                                                          determined [US EPA, 1996]
                                                                    3 -1
Tetrachloroethylene                     2.6E-07                      )               NA                   NA           Likely to be carcinogenic to humans              IRIS                2/10/2012
                                                                    3 -1
Trichloroethylene                       4.1E-06                      )               NA                   NA                 Carcinogenic to humans                     IRIS                9/28/2011
                                                                    3 -1
Vinyl Chloride                          4.4E-06                      )               NA                   NA            Known/likely human carcinogen                   IRIS                 8/7/2000
Definitions:
 CAL EPA = Toxicity Criteria Database; Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment (OEHHA)
 IRIS = Integrated Risk Information System, U.S. EPA
 NA = Not available
 PPRTV = Provisional Peer Reviewed Toxicity Values, U.S. EPA
 (µg/m3)-1 = Per micrograms per cubic meter
 (mg/kg-day)-1 = Per milligrams per kilogram per day


EPA Weight of Evidence (EPA, 1986):
 A = Human carcinogen
 C = Possible human carcinogen - based on sufficient evidence of carcinogenicity in animals and inadequate or no evidence in humans
 D = Not classifiable as to human carcinogenicity


                                                                                   Summary of Toxicity Assessment
This table provides carcinogenic risk information which is relevant to the contaminants of concern at the Site. Toxicity data are provided for the ingestion, dermal and inhalation routes of exposure.




                                                                                              Page 6 of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                      Table 5
                                                  Risk Characterization Summary - Noncarcinogens
Scenario Timeframe:           Future
Receptor Population:          On-Site Construction Worker
Receptor Age:                 Adult
   Medium         Exposure      Exposure Point        Chemical of            Primary Target Organ                      Noncarcinogenic Hazard Quotient
                  Medium                                Concern                                                Ingestion    Dermal      Inhalation   Exposure
                                                                                                                                                   Routes Total
 Groundwater    Groundwater        Tapwater        Tetrachloroethylene            Nervous System                 0.016             0.51            9.7         10
                                                                           Developmental, Hepatic, Renal,
                                                   Trichloroethylene                                             0.0063            0.065           7.4         7.4
                                                                          Nervous, Lymphatic, Reproductive
                                                   Biphenyl (diphenyl)                 Renal                   0.00000055        0.000045          2.5         2.5

                                                   Naphthalene           Developmental/ Nervous, Respiratory    0.00007           0.0027           2.0         2.0

                                                                                                                            COC Total Hazard Index (HI) =      21.9
                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                        Groundwater Hazard Index Total =       25
                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                  Receptor Hazard Index =      25
                                                                                                                Total Developmental HI across all media=       7.7
                                                                                                                          Total Hepatic HI across all media=   10
                                                                                                                    Total Lymphatic HI across all media=       8.1
                                                                                                                         Total Nervous HI across all media=    21
                                                                                                                 Total Renal System HI across all media=       10
                                                                                                                 Total Reproductive HI across all media=       7.5
                                                                                                                   Total Respiratory HI across all media=      4.6
Scenario Timeframe:           Future
Receptor Population:          On-Site Resident
Receptor Age:                 Child (0-6 years)
   Medium         Exposure      Exposure Point         Chemical of           Primary Target Organ                      Noncarcinogenic Hazard Quotient
                  Medium                                Concern                                                Ingestion    Dermal      Inhalation   Exposure
                                                                                                                                                   Routes Total
 Groundwater      Sitewide         Tapwater        Tetrachloroethylene            Nervous System                  4.5               2.4            10          17
                Groundwater
                                                                           Developmental, Hepatic, Renal,
                                                   Trichloroethylene                                              1.8              0.27            6.9         9.0
                                                                          Nervous, Lymphatic, Reproductive
                                                   4-Chloroaniline                   Lymphatic                    13               0.76            NA          13
                                                                                                                            COC Total Hazard Index (HI) =      39.0
                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                        Groundwater Hazard Index Total =       59
                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                  Receptor Hazard Index =      60
                                                                                                                Total Developmental HI across all media=       9.3
                                                                                                                          Total Hepatic HI across all media=   9.5
                                                                                                                    Total Lymphatic HI across all media=       24
                                                                                                               Total Nervous System HI across all media=       38
                                                                                                                           Total Renal HI across all media=    9.5
                                                                                                                 Total Reproductive HI across all media=       9.9
Scenario Timeframe:           Future
Receptor Population:          On-Site Resident
Receptor Age:                 Adult
   Medium         Exposure      Exposure Point         Chemical of           Primary Target Organ                      Noncarcinogenic Hazard Quotient
                  Medium                                Concern                                                Ingestion    Dermal      Inhalation   Exposure
                                                                                                                                                   Routes Total
 Groundwater      Sitewide         Tapwater        Tetrachloroethylene            Nervous System                  2.7               1.6            12          16
                Groundwater
                                                                           Developmental, Hepatic, Renal,
                                                   Trichloroethylene                                              1.1              0.18            8.1         9.4
                                                                          Nervous, Lymphatic, Reproductive
                                                   4-Chloroaniline                   Lymphatic                    7.5              0.51            NA           8
                                                                                                                            COC Total Hazard Index (HI) =      33.4

                                                                                                                        Groundwater Hazard Index Total1 =      46
                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                  Receptor Hazard Index =      46
                                                                                                                Total Developmental HI across all media=       9.3
                                                                                                                          Total Hepatic HI across all media=   9.5
                                                                                                                    Total Lymphatic HI across all media=       24
                                                                                                               Total Nervous System HI across all media=       38
                                                                                                                           Total Renal HI across all media=    9.5
                                                                                                                 Total Reproductive HI across all media=       9.9




                                                                         Page 7 of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                          Table 5
                                                                      Risk Characterization Summary - Noncarcinogens
Scenario Timeframe:                         Current/Future
Receptor Population:                        Off-Site Recreator
Receptor Age:                               Child (0-6 years)
   Medium         Exposure                    Exposure Point                  Chemical of                   Primary Target Organ                              Noncarcinogenic Hazard Quotient
                  Medium                                                       Concern                                                                Ingestion    Dermal      Inhalation   Exposure
                                                                                                                                                                                          Routes Total
    Seep Water            Seep Water                   Seep              Tetrachloroethylene                      Nervous System                        0.0090              0.52               NA          0.53
                                                                                                         Developmental, Hepatic, Renal,
                                                                         Trichloroethylene                                                               0.011              0.20               NA          0.21
                                                                                                        Nervous, Lymphatic, Reproductive
                                                                         Manganese**                              Nervous System                         0.027              0.81               NA          0.84
                                                                                                                                                                   COC Total Hazard Index (HI) =           1.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                 Seep Water Hazard Index Total =           1.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                          Receptor Hazard Index =          4.2
                                                                                                                                                      Total Nervous System HI across all media=            3.3
Footnotes:
** Manganese is not considered to be site related and was not retained as a COC for purposes of remedy selection. It is shown in this table for informational purposes only.
(1) The HI represents the summed HQs for all chemicals of potential concern at the site, not just those requiring remedial action (i.e., the chemicals of concern [COCs]) which are shown in this table.
Definitions:
 HI = hazard index
 HQ = hazard quotient
 NA = Not available




                                                                                                       Page 8 of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                    Table 6
                                                                 Risk Characterization Summary - Carcinogens
Scenario Timeframe:           Future
Receptor Population:          On-site Resident
Receptor Age:                 Adult and child
  Medium      Exposure Medium      Exposure Point                                         Chemical of Concern                                             Carcinogenic Risk
                                                                                                                                Ingestion          Dermal           Inhalation       Exposure Routes
                                                                                                                                                                                          Total
 Groundwater             Groundwater                      Tap Water                             Ethylbenzene                      3.3E-05           1.7E-05           1.5E-04               2.0E-04

                                                                                               Vinyl Chloride                     1.2E-04           8.4E-06           3.9E-04               5.3E-04

                                                                                               4-Chloroaniline                    3.1E-03           1.8E-04             NA                  3.3E-03

                                                                                                                                                              COC Total Risk =              4.0E-03

                                                                                                                                                   Groundwater Risk Total1=                 4.3E-03

                                                                                                                                                        Receptor Risk Total1=               4.4E-03
Footnotes:
(1) Total Risk values represent cumulative estimates from exposure to all chemicals of potential concern (COPCs) as identified in the RAGS D table 2 series, and not only from those identified in this table
(i.e. , the chemicals of concern [COCs]).




                                                                                              Page 9 of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                  Table 7
                                                              Remediation Goals

        Contaminant               CAS                       Criteria                      Maximum Detected   Remediation Goal
                                 Number                                                     Concentration
                                              NJDEP RDCSRS       NJDEP IGWSSL
 Soil
                                                 (mg/kg)            (mg/kg)                     (mg/kg)          (mg/kg)
      VOCs
 Benzene                         71-43-2            2                  0.005                       4              0.005
 Tetrachloroethylene (PCE)      127-18-4            2                  0.005                       3              0.005
 Trichlorethene (TCE)            79-01-6            7                  0.01                        33             0.01
 Total Xylenes                  1330-20-7         12,000                19                         74              19
      SVOCs
 Benzyl Butyl Phthalate         85-68-7           1,200               230                         670              230
 Bis(2-ethylhexyl) Phthalate    117-81-7            35               1,200                        590              35
 Naphthalene                    91-20-3             6                  25                         420               6
                                              NJDEP SQC LEL      NJDEP SQC ER-L
 Sediment
                                                 (mg/kg)            (mg/kg)                     (mg/kg)          (mg/kg)
 Tetrachloroethylene (PCE)      127-18-4          0.990               0.45                        5.8              0.45
 Trichlorethene (TCE)           79-01-6           0.112               1.6                         0.27            0.112
 1,1,1-Trichloroethane          71-55-6           0.213                NA                          1              0.213
                                               Federal MCL        NJDEP GWQS
 Groundwater
                                                  (ug/l)             (ug/l)                      (ug/l)           (ug/l)
      VOCs
 1,1,1-Trichloroethane           71-55-6          200                  30                         4,500            30
 Benzene                         71-43-2            5                  1                            51              1
 Ethylbenzene                   100-41-4          700                 700                         5,600            700
 Tetrachloroethylene (PCE)      127-18-4            5                  1                          6,100             1
 Trichlorethene (TCE)            79-01-6            5                  1                           720              1
 Vinyl Chloride                  75-01-4            2                  1                            6               1
 Total Xylenes                  1330-20-7       10,000               1,000                        22,700          1,000
      SVOCs
 4-Chloranaline                 106-47-8          NA                   30                         6,900            30
Note: The remediation goal for each contaminant is the lowest of the options listed in the table.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                     TABLE 8
                           Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements (ARARs)

                                             CHEMICAL-SPECIFIC ARARS

    Type of ARAR          Statute/Requirement           CITATION                        Applicability/Relevance

Federal            Safe Drinking Water Act            40 C.F.R. 141      Drinking water standards which apply to specific
                                                                         contaminants. (Relevant to remediation of
                                                                         groundwater.)

                   Identification and Listing of      40 CFR Part        Defines those wastes which are subject to regulation as
                   Specific Hazardous Waste           261.3, 261.6,      hazardous wastes, and lists specific chemical and
                                                      261.10             industry-source wastes.


State              New Jersey Safe Drinking Water     N.J.A.C. 7:10      Drinking water standards which apply to specific
                   Act regulations                                       contaminants and which are more stringent than
                                                                         federal standards. (Relevant to remediation of
                                                                         groundwater.)
                   New Jersey Groundwater Quality     N.J.A.C. 7:9C      Standards for protection of groundwater quality.
                   Criteria                                              (Applicable to remediation of groundwater.)
                   New Jersey Impact to Groundwater   NJDEP              Document for development of impact to groundwater
                   Soil Remediation Standards         Guidance           soil remediation standards and provides default
                                                      Document for       screening values. (Applicable to excavation at greater
                                                      Development of     than 2 feet below ground surface.)
                                                      Impact to
                                                      Groundwater
                                                      Soil Remediation
                                                      Standards,
                                                      January 27, 2011
                   New Jersey Residential Direct      N.J.A.C. 7:26-     Establishes minimum remediation standards for direct
                   Contact Soil Remediation           4.2                contact exposure to soil. (Applicable to excavation at
                   Standards                                             0-2 feet below ground level.)



                                                          1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                            LOCATION-SPECIFIC ARARS

    Type of ARAR         Statute/Requirement              CITATION                        Applicability/Relevance

Federal            National Environmental Policy Act    40 CFR Part 6      Statement of procedures on floodplain management
                                                        Appendix A         and wetlands protection.

                   Endangered Species Act               40 CFR 400         Standards for the protection of threatened and
                                                        50 CFR 17,         endangered species (wildlife, marine and anadromous
                                                        81, 223, 224,      species and plants) and establish cooperation with the
                                                        226, 402           Federal and State Governments.

                   Fish and Wildlife Conservation Act   16 USC 2901 et     Established EPA policy and guidance for promoting
                                                        seq.               the conservation of non-game fish and wildlife and
                                                                           their habitats.


                   National Historic Preservation Act   16 USC 469 et      Establishes procedures to provide for preservation of
                                                        seq.; 40 CFR       historical and archaeological data that might be
                                                        6301               destroyed through alteration of terrain as a result of a
                                                                           Federally licensed activity or program.

State              Freshwater Wetlands Protection       NJSA 13:9B-1 et    Requirements governing regulated activity disturbing
                   Act                                  seq.               freshwater wetlands
                   Endangered and Non-Game              N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1   Standards for the protection of Federal and New Jersey
                   Species Conservation Act                                threatened and endangered species.

                   Endangered Plant Species List Act    N.J.S.A. 13:1B et Establishes the requirement to protection threatened
                                                        seq.              and endangered plant species in New Jersey by
                                                                          developing and adopting a list.




                                                            2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                               ACTION-SPECIFIC ARARS

    Type of ARAR         Statute/Requirement            CITATION                        Applicability/Relevance

Federal            Resource Conservation and          40 CFR 260-270;    Establishes responsibilities and standards for the
                   Recovery Act (RCRA)                42 USC 6901 et     management of hazardous and non-hazardous waste.
                                                      seq.

                   Clean Air Act                      40 CFR 50          Establishes particulate and fugitive dust emission
                                                                         requirements.



                   Solid Waste Disposal Act, as       42 U.S.C §6901-    Specifies TCLP constituent levels for identifying
                   amended – Regulated levels for     6992k; 40 C.F.R.   wastes that exhibit toxicity characteristics.
                   TCLP Constituents                  Part 261


                   Clean Water Act (CWA)              33 USC 1251 et     Procedures to preserve surface water quality by
                                                      seq.               reducing direct pollutant discharges into waterways,
                                                                         finance municipal wastewater treatment facilities and
                                                                         manage polluted runoff.

                   Ambient Water Quality Criteria     40 CFR 131, 401    Provides criteria developed for the protection of
                   (AWQC)                                                freshwater and marine aquatic life and for the
                                                                         protection of human health from the ingestion of water
                                                                         and/or organisms.
State              Well Construction and              N.J.A.C. 7:9D      Establishes requirements for construction and
                   Maintenance                                           decommission (sealing) of wells, and well driller /
                                                                         pump installer licensing.
                   New Jersey Soil Erosion and        N.J.S.A. 4:24-39   To establish soil erosion and sediment control
                   Sediment Control Act               et seq.            standards for Department of Transportation
                                                                         certification of its projects to the Soil Conservation
                                                                         Districts.
                   New Jersey Air Pollution           N.J.A.C. 7:27-8,   Establishes standards for discharge of pollutants to air.
                   Control Act                        16

                                                          3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             Technical Requirements for Site      N.J.A.C. 7:26E-     Identifies requirements for institutional controls for
                             Remediation and Administrative       8                   contaminated soils left in place, and for contaminated
                             Requirements for the Remediation                         groundwater; identifies administrative requirements
                             of Contaminated Sites                                    for site remediation that may be applicable.

                             Noise Control                        N.J.A.C. 7:29       Establishes allowable noise levels.


Note: While not an ARAR, all relevant sections of the Occupational Safety and Health Standards and Safety and Health Regulations for
Construction (29 CFR 1910 and 1926) will be complied with.




                                                                      4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        APPENDIX 3


ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                 FINAL
                                                                              08/23/2017                                          REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: MATLACK INCORPORATED
          CERCLIS ID: NJD043584101
               OUID: 01
                SSID: 02P9
              Action:


                                                                     Image
DocID:   Doc Date:   Title:                                          Count:     Doc Type:          Addressee Name/Organization:         Author Name/Organization:
510580   8/23/2017   ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX FOR OU1 FOR THE         2    Administrative                                      (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                     MATLACK INCORPORATED SITE                                 Record Index                                       AGENCY)


149511   09/01/2012 HAZARD RANKING SYSTEM (HRS) PACKAGE FOR THE       2871        Report       (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (WESTON SOLUTIONS, INC.)
                    MATLACK, INC. SITE, VOLUME 1 OF 6                                          AGENCY)

145403   09/01/2012 HAZARD RANKING SYSTEM (HRS) PACKAGE FOR THE       1029        Report       (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (WESTON SOLUTIONS, INC.)
                    MATLACK, INC. SITE, VOLUME 2 OF 6                                          AGENCY)

145404   09/01/2012 HAZARD RANKING SYSTEM (HRS) PACKAGE FOR THE       1576        Report       (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (WESTON SOLUTIONS, INC.)
                    MATLACK, INC. SITE, VOLUME 3 OF 6                                          AGENCY)


145405   09/01/2012 HAZARD RANKING SYSTEM (HRS) PACKAGE FOR THE       2075        Report       (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (WESTON SOLUTIONS, INC.)
                    MATLACK, INC. SITE, VOLUME 4 OF 6                                          AGENCY)

145406   09/01/2012 HAZARD RANKING SYSTEM (HRS) PACKAGE FOR THE       1801        Report       (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (WESTON SOLUTIONS, INC.)
                    MATLACK, INC. SITE, VOLUME 5 OF 6                                          AGENCY)


145407   09/01/2012 HAZARD RANKING SYSTEM (HRS) PACKAGE FOR THE       1115        Report       (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (WESTON SOLUTIONS, INC.)
                    MATLACK, INC. SITE, VOLUME 6 OF 6                                          AGENCY)


503540   07/01/2015 REVISED REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION/FEASIBILITY         114        Report                                          (HDR)
                    STUDY WORK PLAN VOLUME 1 AND 2 FOR THE
                    MATLACK INCORPORATED SITE

503541   06/14/2017 FINAL REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION REPORT WITH TEXT,     135        Report                                          (HDR)
                    TABLES, AND FIGURES FOR THE MATLACK
                    INCORPORATED SITE




                                                                              Page 1 of 2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                 FINAL
                                                                              08/23/2017                                        REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: MATLACK INCORPORATED
          CERCLIS ID: NJD043584101
               OUID: 01
                SSID: 02P9
              Action:


                                                                     Image
DocID:    Doc Date: Title:                                           Count:     Doc Type:        Addressee Name/Organization:           Author Name/Organization:
503542   06/14/2017 FINAL REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION REPORT WITH          1626       Report                                         (HDR)
                    APPENDICES A-O FOR THE MATLACK INCORPORATED
                    SITE

473421   7/10/2017   SCREENING LEVEL ECOLOGICAL RISK ASSESSMENT        218        Report     (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (HENNINGSON, DURHAM & RICHARDSON
                     REPORT FOR THE MATLACK INCORPORATED SITE                                AGENCY)                            ARCHITECTURE AND ENGINEERING PC)


473420   7/20/2017   BASELINE HUMAN HEALTH RISK ASSESSMENT             349        Report     (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (HENNINGSON, DURHAM & RICHARDSON
                     REPORT FOR THE MATLACK INCORPORATED SITE                                AGENCY)                            ARCHITECTURE AND ENGINEERING PC)


407813   08/18/2017 FINAL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT FOR THE MATLACK     119        Report     (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (HDR ENGINEERING
                    INCORPORATED SITE                                                        AGENCY)                            INCORPORATED)|(HENNINGSON, DURHAM
                                                                                                                                & RICHARDSON ARCHITECTURE AND
                                                                                                                                ENGINEERING PC)

451907   08/23/2017 PROPOSED PLAN FOR THE MATLACK INCORPORATED          17     Publication                                      (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                    SITE                                                                                                        AGENCY)




                                                                              Page 2 of 2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 APPENDIX 4


STATE LETTER

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    ~tale of ~cfu Wcn,£tl
                                               DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
CHRIS CHRISTIE                             SITE REMEDIATION & WASTE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM                               BOB MARTIN
Governor                                                      Mai I Code 401-06                                      Commissioner
                                                               P. 0. Box 420
KIM GUADAGNO                                          Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0420
Lt. Governor                                                Tel.#: 609-292-1250
                                                            Fax.#: 609-777-1914


                                                         September 27, 2017

       Ms. Angela Carpenter, Acting Director
       Emergency and Remedial Response Division
       U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
       Region II
       290 Broadway
       New York, NY 10007-1866

       Re:       Matlack, Inc. Superfund Site
                 Record of Decision
                 EPA ID# NJD043584101
                 DEP PI# 007390

       Dear Ms. Carpenter:

       The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) completed its review of the
       "Record of Decision, Matlack, Inc. Superfund Site, Woolwich Township, Gloucester County,
       New Jersey" prepared by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Region II in
       September 201 7 and concurs with the selected remedy to address all contaminated soil,
       groundwater, seep water, surface water and sediment at the site.

      Further, DEP appreciates that EPA included measures to ensure that the full horizontal and
      vertical extent of aromatic and chlorinated volatile organic compound (VOC) impacts in soil,
      sediment and groundwater will be delineated to successfully guide the selected cleanup remedy.
      The additional concern of determining if dense non-aqueous phase liquid is present at the site
      also is properly included in the cleanup document. Lastly, DEP's request for additional
      installations of the permeable reactive barrier walls, which may be needed to fully remediate the
      groundwater, have been included at appropriate timeframes to ensure groundwater meets
      remedial goals for the site.

      The major components of the remedy selected for the site include the following:

                 Installation of two permeable reactive barriers to provide passive treatment of aromatic
                 and chlorinated VOCs and the semi-volatile organic compound 4-chloroanaline in
                 groundwater;




                           1Ve1v Jersey is an Equal Opportunity Employer, Printed on Recycled Paper and Recyclable

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     •   Excavation and off-site disposal of contaminated soil and sediment that acts as a source
         of further contamination to groundwater, seep water, surface water and sediment;
     •   Long-term monitoring to assure the effectiveness of the remedy over time; and,
     •   Institutional controls including a Classification Exception Area and deed notices until
         remedial action objectives are met.

By remediating the groundwater and removing ongoing sources of contamination, the remedy
also addresses contamination resulting from the discharge of groundwater to seeps, which has
impacted seep water, surface water and sediment. In addition, by remediating the groundwater,
potential future risks associated with inhalation of indoor air through vapor intrusion if a building
or structure were to be built over the contaminated plumes will be addressed.

DEP appreciates the opportunity to participate in the decision-making process to select an
appropriate remedy for this site. Further, DEP is looking forward to future cooperation with EPA
during remedial actions for this site to protect the Grand Sprute Run waterway and the local
environment.

If you have any questions, please call me at 609-292-1250.

                                              Sincerely,



                                               . Jik
                                              MartJ. Pedersen :
                                                                  I
                                              Assi ant Commissioner
                                              Site emediation & Waste Management Program
                                                    \



C:       Kenneth J. Kloo, Director, Division of Remediation Management, DEP
         Edward Putnam, Assistant Director, Publicly Funded Response Element, DEP
         Carole Petersen, Chief, New Jersey Remediation Branch, EPA Region II

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      APPENDIX 5


RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY
                                           FOR THE
                                  RECORD OF DECISION
                           MATLACK, INC., SUPERFUND SITE
          WOOLWICH TOWNSHIP, GLOUCESTER COUNTY, NEW JERSEY




INTRODUCTION
This Responsiveness Summary provides a summary of comments and concerns provided during
the public comment period related to the Proposed Plan (Attachment A) for Matlack, Inc.,
Superfund site (the Site) and provides the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s)
responses to those comments. All comments summarized in this document have been considered
in EPA’s final decision in the selection of a remedy to address the contamination at the Site.

SUMMARY OF COMMUNITY RELATIONS ACTIVITIES

All documentation which EPA used to develop the Proposed Plan and select the remedy in this
Record of Decision (ROD), including EPA’s Feasibility Study dated August 2017, are in the
Administrative Record for the site which was made available to the public beginning August 23,
2017 in the information repositories maintained in the EPA Docket Room at the EPA Region 2
offices at 290 Broadway, New York, New York, at the Township of Woolwich Municipal
Building, 120 Village Green Drive, Woolwich Township, New Jersey and on EPA’s website for
the site, www.epa.gov/superfund/matlack.

On August 23, 2017, EPA published a notice in the Star Ledger newspaper informing the public
of the commencement of the public comment period for the Proposed Plan, the upcoming public
meeting on September 14, 2017, the preferred remedy for the Site, contact information for EPA
personnel, and the availability of site-related documents in the Administrative Record. Copies of
the notice can be found in Attachment B of this appendix. The Proposed Plan is available at each
of the repositories listed above, including online. The public comment period ran from August
23, 2017 to September 22, 2017. EPA held a public meeting on September 14, 2017 at 6:30 P.M.
in the Woolwich Township Municipal Courtroom, 120 Village Green Drive, Woolwich, New
Jersey, to present the findings of the Proposed Plan, and to answer questions from the public
about the Proposed Plan, the remedial alternatives evaluated, and EPA’s preferred alternative.

SUMMARY OF COMMENTS AND RESPONSES

A summary of the comments provided at the public meeting are provided below. The transcript
from the public meeting and the comments submitted during the public comment period can be
found in Attachments C and D, respectively, of this appendix.


                                                1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Comment 1: The Township of Woolwich endorses EPA’s preferred alternative.

EPA Response to Comment 1: EPA acknowledges the comment in support of its preferred
alternative.

Comment 2: A commenter questioned whether the Site investigation activities, including those
conducted as part of the EPA Remedial Investigation (RI), evaluated a comprehensive list of
potential contaminants, given the nature of the business conducted at the Site. The commenter
noted that the better the understanding of the nature and extent of contamination at the Site, the
greater chance there is that an appropriate remedy will be selected and that it will succeed
without the need for modification.

EPA Response to Comment 2: The Site was investigated, and a remedy was chosen, in
accordance with the requirements of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601-9675, and the
National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 CFR Part 300.
Consistent with CERCLA, the full suite of CERCLA hazardous substances was analyzed for at
the site, including volatile organic compounds, semi-volatile organic compounds, metals,
pesticides, and polychlorinated biphenyls. In addition, tentatively identified compounds (TICs)
were reported in the remedial investigation report. TICs may include compounds that are not part
of the full CERCLA suite of compounds. TICs that have high concentrations or frequent
detections can be evaluated further to determine the identify and possible source. There were no
compounds identified as TICs at the Site that required additional evaluation.

Comment 3: A commenter stated that the Site may be considered a former hazardous waste
treatment, storage and disposal unit/facility, and could be subject to provisions of 40 CFR Part
264, Subpart F and Part 265, Subpart F.

EPA Response to Comment 3: Matlack, Inc., ceased operating a waste water lagoon on the Site
in 1975. 40 CFR Part 264, Subpart F and Part 265, Subpart F are regulations that govern
operation and permitting of hazardous waste facilities under the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA), but RCRA was not enacted until 1980. Therefore, a permit would not
have been required before 1980. In addition, Matlack has been out of business since 2001,
having been liquidated in bankruptcy. Accordingly, RCRA permitting requirements do not apply
to the Site.

Comment 4: The selected remedy includes the potential need to establish a Classification
Exception Area (CEA) for the Site until Remedial Action Objectives (RAOs) are met. A
commenter noted that the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) may
require additional groundwater sampling as part of their CEA application/approval process.

EPA Response to Comment 4: If additional groundwater sampling is required as per NJDEP’s
CEA/Well Restriction Area application process, it will be conducted prior to submitting the full
application package to NJDEP. Note that NJDEP is in agreement with the selected remedy, and a
letter of concurrence is attached as Appendix 4 of the ROD.



                                                 2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Comment 5: A commenter asked EPA to confirm that the surficial geology is in fact the
Pennsauken Formation, as described in the RI report, or if the initial underlying geology consists
of the Englishtown Formation/Aquifer.

EPA Response to Comment 5: Based on a literature review, EPA has concluded that the
surficial geology at the Site is in the Pennsauken Formation. This conclusion is primarily based
on a document prepared by W.F Hardt and G.S. Hilten entitled, “Water resources and geology of
Gloucester County, New Jersey.” (New Jersey Department of Conservation and Economic
Development Special Report 30, 130 p.1969).

Comment 6: A commenter asked EPA to explain the anomalously high total and dissolved iron
concentrations in the April and July 2016 sampling results in MW-2B, and questioned the
construction of this well.

EPA Response to Comment 6: Elevated iron concentrations were also identified in other wells
around the Site, including MW-03, MW-06 and PZ-01. The highest concentration of iron was
identified in monitoring well PZ-01. Monitoring well MW-2B was installed in 1984 and is a 4-
inch diameter well installed to a depth of approximately 103 feet below ground surface.
Naturally occurring iron is present in the aquifer, and EPA monitors the installation and integrity
of wells on site to ensure proper construction.

Comment 7: A commenter stated that the map displayed on Page 120 of the RI report cannot be
easily used to evaluate individual contaminant transport of the primary contaminants of concern,
such as tetrachloroethylene, trichloroethylene, benzene and 4-chloroanaline.

EPA Response to Comment 7: EPA thinks the figures adequately display the data to assist in
the decision-making process. For clarity, the chlorinated volatile organic plume identified as the
southern-most plume includes tetrachloroethylene, trichloroethylene and other chlorinated
volatile organics. The northern plume includes benzene and other aromatic volatile organics,
and the 4-chloroanaline plume has been identified separately because if falls within the plume of
aromatic volatile organics; but is itself a semi-volatile aromatic compound. Identifying each
constituent plume would likely make it more difficult to evaluate the data on the figure.

Comment 8: A commenter notes that the concentration of contaminants in groundwater seems to
be decreasing over time without any action taking place, and states that removal of the soil
source area (former lagoon) will likely enhance this process. As such, the commenter states that
the use of an active groundwater remediation approach in the form of permeable reactive barriers
(PRBs) may not be necessary at all. The commenter recommends waiting for a period of time
after excavation of the contaminated soil and monitoring to determine the best path forward.

EPA Response to Comment 8: The comment is noted. The details of the implementation of the
remedial action, including timing and sequencing, will be evaluated during the remedial design
process. While constituent concentrations in groundwater have, indeed, been decreasing over
time, constituents are still present in groundwater at concentrations representing an unacceptable
risk to human health and the environment at the point of discharge to Grand Sprute
Run. Removal of the potential source area in concert with the use of a passive technology at the


                                                 3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

point of groundwater discharge is considered to represent the most appropriate remedy for the
site.

Comment 9: A commenter observes that there is, in the commenter’s opinion, unacceptable
variability between sampling event results for several key parameters, and recommends
identifying these issues and possibly resampling.

EPA Response to Comment 9: Variability exists in all environmental data sets. Multiple years
of data was collected and evaluated to help inform the selection of a remedy. Additional
groundwater, soil, seep water, surface water and sediment monitoring will be conducted during
the pre-design investigation to further evaluate conditions prior to finalizing the design.

Comment 10: A commenter states that there since PRBs are passive in nature, there is no way of
knowing how long it will take for all contaminants to eventually migrate through the walls, and
that the timeframe for cleanup could be in excess of 100 years.

EPA Response to Comment 10: EPA agrees that the exact timeframe for RAOs to be met is
unknown. The groundwater flow rate is measured and the timeframe for reaching RAOs may be
more or less than the 30 years that is estimated in the Feasibility Study. This estimate will be
refined during the remedial design, the performance of the remedy will be evaluated on an
ongoing basis over time, and it will be optimized as necessary and appropriate.

Comment 11: A commenter notes that the reactive material used in the PRBs could be expended
before all remediation goals are achieved.

EPA Response to Comment 11: EPA agrees this could occur, and has thus included in its cost
estimate for the remedy two potential replacements of the reactive material within the PRB wall.

Comment 12: A commenter asked EPA to reconsider the inclusion of In-Situ Chemical
Oxidation (ISCO) as a viable remedial alternative at this Site, and states that limited injections of
oxidants in combination with long-term monitored natural attenuation may be effective.

EPA Response to Comment 12: The use of ISCO was considered during the Feasibility Study;
however, it was not retained due to the potential for discharge of ISCO reagents to surface water
within Grand Sprute Run and the potential ecological side-effects of that discharge. While ISCO
could be effectively used within the potential source area, the use of a reactive barrier would still
be necessary to prevent the discharge of contaminated groundwater to Grand Sprute Run.

Comment 13: A commenter notes that the remedial timeframe for Alternative 3, Air
Sparging/Soil Vapor Extraction (AS/SVE), is much shorter than that for the selected remedy of
PRBs with soil/sediment excavation, monitoring and institutional controls until RAOs are met.
The commenter goes on to posit that AS/SVE is a proven technology with a near certain chance
of success.

EPA Response to Comment 13: While AS/SVE is a proven method for the treatment of volatile
organics in soil and groundwater, its efficacy for the treatment of semi-volatile compounds such


                                                  4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

as 4-chloroanaline has not been proven. In addition, the use of AS/SVE will result in much
greater short-term disruption to the Site due to the presence of operating equipment, piping and
utilities at the ground surface over the entire footprint of the groundwater plume.

Comment 14: A commenter notes that the PRB approach will require extensive bench scale
testing to evaluate feasibility.

EPA Response to Comment 14: The use of PRBs has been demonstrated at numerous sites as
an effective method for treatment of groundwater contamination. The specific configuration of
each PRB wall will be determined via bench-scale testing during the design process; however,
bench-scale or pilot-scale testing would be conducted to better determine the configuration and
cost of any selected alternative, not just for the use of PRBs.

Comment 15: A commenter asked if there were any unacceptable risks to boaters in Grand
Sprute Run. They noted that usage may increase in the coming years as part of the Township of
Woolwich’s master plan.

EPA Response to Comment 15: EPA did not evaluate this exposure scenario. However, a more
conservative (i.e., health-protective) wading scenario was considered in the human health risk
assessment, and exposure to surface water and sediment while boating in Grand Sprute Run is
expected to be less than that of a wading scenario. Therefore, EPA thinks that boating on Grand
Sprute Run would not be associated with elevated cancer risks or non-cancer health hazards.
That said, EPA will continue to visually monitor the site on an on-going basis and, if necessary,
will post signs or other institutional controls if warranted. This would be consistent with the
selected remedy. It is EPA’s understanding that Woolwich Township’s Master Plan may lead to
increased recreational use of this area, including Grand Sprute Run.



ATTACHED TO THIS RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY ARE THE FOLLOWING:

Attachment A – Proposed Plan
Attachment B – Public Notice – Star Ledger
Attachment C – September 14, 2017 Public Meeting Transcript
Attachment D – Comments Submitted During Public Comment Period




                                                5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Attachment A

Proposed Plan

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                            Matlack, Inc. Superfund Site

                                   Woolwich Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey



Superfund Proposed Plan                                                                            August 2017

EPA ANNOUNCES PROPOSED PLAN                                EPA is issuing this Proposed Plan as part of its
                                                           community relations program under Section 117(a) of
This Proposed Plan identifies the Preferred Alternative    the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
to remediate contaminated soil, groundwater, seep          Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA) 42 U.S.C.
water and sediment associated with the Matlack Inc.        9617(a), and Section 300.435(c) (2) (ii) of the National
Superfund Site (the Site) located in Woolwich              Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency
Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey. The               Plan (NCP). This Proposed Plan summarizes
Preferred Alternative calls for the use of Permeable       information that can be found in greater detail in the RI
Reactive Barriers (PRBs) in combination with the           and Feasibility Study (FS) reports and other related
excavation of contaminated soil and sediment as the        documents, which can be found in the Administrative
final remedy to address contamination at the site. By      Record for this action. The location of the
remediating the groundwater and removing ongoing           Administrative Record is provided below. EPA and
sources of contamination, the remedy also addresses
                                                             MARK YOUR CALENDARS
contamination resulting from the discharge of
groundwater to seeps, which has impacted surface             Public Comment Period:
water in the seep and Grand Sprute Run, as well as seep      August 23 - September 22, 2017
sediment.                                                    EPA will accept written comments on the Proposed
                                                             Plan during the public comment period. Written
EPA has completed remedial investigation (RI)                comments should be addressed to:
activities at the site over three phases, from July 2015
to August 2016. The RI activities involved sampling                             Juan E. Davila
                                                                           Remedial Project Manager
surface water, seeps, sediment, soil, and groundwater to             U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
characterize the former waste disposal (lagoon) area                       290 Broadway, 18th Floor
and the extent of contamination.                                             New York, NY 10007
                                                                          Email: davila.juan@epa.gov
This Proposed Plan includes summaries of cleanup
alternatives evaluated for use to address contaminated       Written comments must be postmarked no later than
soil, groundwater, seep water and sediment at the site.      September 22, 2017.
This Proposed Plan was developed by EPA, the lead
                                                            Public Meeting
agency for the Site, in consultation with the New Jersey    September 14, 2017 at 6:30 P.M.
Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP), the         EPA will hold a public meeting to explain the Proposed
support agency. EPA, in consultation with NJDEP, will       Plan and all of the alternatives presented in the
select a final remedy for the contaminated media after      Feasibility Study. Oral and written comments will also
reviewing and considering all information submitted         be accepted at the meeting. The meeting will be held
during the 30-day public comment period. EPA, in            at:
consultation with NJDEP, may modify the Preferred                 Woolwich Township Municipal Courtroom
Alternative or select another response action presented         120 Village Green Drive, Woolwich, NJ 08085
in this Proposed Plan based on new information or
                                                             In addition, the administrative record is available on-
public comments. Therefore, the public is encouraged
                                                             line at:
to review and comment on the alternatives presented in       www.epa.gov/superfund/matlack
this Proposed Plan.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

NJDEP encourage the public to review these documents               The active portion of the remedy focuses on the
to gain a more comprehensive understanding of                      remediation of groundwater and removal of sources of
activities for the site.                                           contamination from soil and sediment. However, by
                                                                   taking these actions, the remedy also addresses
COMMUNITY ROLE IN SELECTION PROCESS                                contamination resulting from the discharge of
                                                                   groundwater to seeps, which has impacted surface
This Proposed Plan is being issued to inform the public            water in the seep and Grand Sprute Run, as well as seep
of EPA’s preferred alternative to address contaminated             sediment.
soil, groundwater, seep water and sediment at the site
and to solicit public comments pertaining to all of the            SITE DESCRIPTION
remedial alternatives evaluated, including the preferred
alternative. Changes to the preferred alternative, or a            The Site is located along Route 322 East in Woolwich
change to another alternative, may be made if public               Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey (Figure 1-
comments or additional data indicate that such a change            1). The Site is bounded by Route 322 to the North, by
would result in a more appropriate remedial action. The            woodlands to the east and west, and by field leading
final decision regarding the selected remedy will be               down to Raccoon Creek to the south. Grand Sprute
made after EPA has taken into consideration all public             Run, about 600 feet west of the Site’s western
comments. EPA is soliciting public comments on all of              boundary, drains into Raccoon Creek.
the alternatives considered in the Proposed Plan,
because EPA may select a remedy other than the                     SITE BACKGROUND
preferred alternative. This Proposed Plan has been
made available to the public for a public comment                  The Site includes Matlack Inc.’s former Swedesboro
period that concludes on September 22, 2017.                       Terminal that occupied the northern portion of a 72-
                                                                   acre parcel. The Site includes the investigation area as
A public meeting will be held during the public                    well as a northern portion of a parcel owned by the
comment period to present the conclusions of the                   Grand Sprute Plantation that is located immediately
RI/FS, to elaborate further on the reasons for proposing           west and down-gradient of the Site.
the preferred alternative, and to receive public
comments. The public meeting will include a                        A one-story building (formerly known as the terminal
presentation by EPA of the preferred alternative and               building with an attached tank-cleaning facility), is
other cleanup options.                                             located in the northeast quadrant of the Site, and is
                                                                   surrounded on the north, east, and west by a paved
Information concerning the public meeting and on                   parking lot and driveway. A former wastewater lagoon
submitting written comments can be found in the                    is located south of the former terminal building, and is
“Mark Your Calendars” text box on Page 1. Comments                 presently in a field with various shrubs. The land use
received at the public meeting, as well as written                 surrounding the Site is mixed use consisting of
comments received during the public comment period,                agricultural, commercial and residential.
will be documented in the Responsiveness Summary
section of the Record of Decision (ROD). The ROD is                Matlack, Inc. transported chemicals, petrochemicals,
the document that explains which alternative has been              and food-grade liquid in bulk using tank trailers
selected and the basis for the selection of the remedy.            (tankers) from 1962 until 2001 when the company
                                                                   submitted a petition for Chapter 11 bankruptcy and
SCOPE AND ROLE OF THE ACTION                                       ceased operations.

As with many Superfund sites, the contamination at this            The primary source of waste generation at the Site was
site is complex. Even so, the cleanup of the site is being         the cleaning of tankers that had previously held a
managed as one operable unit, and thus this remedy is              variety of substances including petroleum products,
being considered the final action for this site, and it will       xylenes, benzene, toluene, glycol, styrene, wax, alum,
address contaminated soil, groundwater, surface seeps              resins, acids, naphthalene, various organic solvents,
and sediment associated with the site.                             flammable substances, coal tar, and hazardous wastes.

                                                               2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

From 1962 until 1976, Matlack, Inc. discharged the             •   A clay surface high exists in the area of well MW-
wastewater into an unlined surface impoundment                     13 and further west, which appears to be above
(lagoon) located southwest of the terminal building.               normal water table elevations and splits
The lagoon and Site layout are shown on Figure 2.                  groundwater flow in the area.
After discontinuing the use of the surface impoundment
in 1976, Matlack, Inc. began collecting its wastewater         •   Another clay surface high, just below normal water
in multiple open-top, in-ground concrete tanks for                 elevation, exists in the area of well MW-7.
temporary storage.
                                                               •   A clay trough is evident, generally following a line
During the operating period, from 16 to 20 tank trailers           west-southwest, from wells MW-15 through MW-
per day were cleaned at the Swedesboro Terminal.                   6. A second trough splits off north-northwestward
Matlack, Inc. used various solvents, including                     at an area approximately midpoint between wells
tetrachloroethene (PCE), methylene chloride, toluene,              MW-15 and MW-6, and continues between the two
trichloroethene (TCE), acetone, methanol, and ethanol,             clay highs toward the area of well MW-17.
to clean the tankers. The tanker cleaning operations
generated from 5,000 to 15,000 gallons of wastewater           Investigations have determined that two separate
per day, which was hauled off-site for treatment and           hydrogeologic systems exist at the Site. A shallow
disposal.                                                      unconfined aquifer exists under water table conditions
                                                               (the Pennsauken Formation). This is underlain by the
Matlack, Inc. discontinued tanker cleaning operations at       Woodbury clay, which acts as a confining unit
the Site in November 1997, but continued to service            preventing the vertical migration of groundwater
and store its vehicles at the Swedesboro Terminal. The         contaminants.
Site is currently operated by Liberty Kenworth, a
medium and heavy duty truck sales and service center.          Water level measurements indicate that the water table
                                                               occurs from approximately 4 feet below the surface at
Site Geology and Hydrogeology                                  the southeast comer of the Site to approximately 28 feet
                                                               below the surface at the northwest corner of the Site.
The geology encountered by the wells generally                 The gradient dips in a north-northwesterly direction
consists of fine to coarse sand (Pennsauken Formation)         towards Grand Sprute Run.
overlying clay (Woodbury Clay). Additionally,
discontinuous gravel units were encountered between            The clay trough and clay highs identified by the 1990
the sand and the clay units.                                   geophysical investigation were anticipated to exert
                                                               some control on the direction of groundwater
As discussed below, in 1987, NJDEP and Matlack, Inc.           movement in the shallow aquifer. Groundwater
entered into an Administrative Consent Order (ACO).            elevations measured during 2016 indicated that
Between 1990 and 2001, Matlack Inc. conducted a two            groundwater in the shallow/unconfined aquifer flowed
phase RI and remedial/removal actions to address               to the west-northwest toward Grand Sprute Run in the
source areas identified from previous investigations.          northern portion of the Site, while shallow groundwater
                                                               in the southern portion of the Site flowed to the west-
The Phase II Investigation performed by SAIC (SAIC             southwest toward a topographic low at Grand Sprute
2001) revealed a low in the (Woodbury) clay surface at         Run in the vicinity of monitoring well MW-27. The
monitoring wells MW-6 and MW-12, and a high                    groundwater flow direction was not observed to vary
(mound) in the clay surface near pumping well PW-12            greatly between the May and July 2016 monitoring
in the southeast area of the Site. Prior to that, a            rounds conducted as part of the RI.
geophysical investigation performed by Environmental
Resources Management, Inc. (ERM) as part of Phase I            The deep aquifer in the Magothy-Raritan Formations
of the RI delineated the topography of the upper surface       has been found to be separated from the upper
of the clay horizon.                                           unconfined aquifer by the Woodbury Clay confining
                                                               unit, which is over 50 feet thick. Significant head
Three outstanding features were noted in ERM’s 1990            differences (about 30 feet) between the aquifers imply
RI report:
                                                           3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

considerable hydraulic separation. Groundwater in this           RI activities were conducted in three phases: Phase 1
aquifer flows towards the southeast.                             was conducted during July 2015, Phase 2 was
                                                                 conducted during March, April, and May 2016, and
Groundwater elevations in RI monitoring wells MW-                Phase 3 was conducted during July and August 2016.
1B, MW-2B and MW-7B indicate that flow in the                    RI activities involved sampling surface water, seeps,
deeper, confined aquifer below the Woodbury Clay                 sediment, soil, and existing and newly installed
flows to the west-southwest. The groundwater flow                groundwater monitoring wells to further characterize
direction in this aquifer was also not observed to vary          the former waste disposal (lagoon) area and the extent
greatly between the May and July monitoring rounds,              of both the petroleum hydrocarbon (PHC) and 4-
though groundwater elevations in the deeper aquifer              chloroanaline plume (identified as the Area 1 plume)
were, on average, seven to eight feet lower in July than         and the chlorinated volatile organic compound (VOC)
in May.                                                          plume (identified as the Area 2 plume) identified at the
                                                                 Site.
REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION AND EARLY
RESPONSE ACTIONS                                                 In surface soil samples collected (depth of 0-2 ft.), there
                                                                 were no VOCs detected at concentrations above New
Early Response Actions                                           Jersey Residential Direct Contact Soil Remediation
                                                                 Standards (NJRDCSRS). Semi-volatile organic
The NJDEP began investigating potential groundwater              compounds (SVOCs) and polychlorinated biphenyls
contamination at the Site in December 1982 in response           (PCBs) were identified at concentrations slightly above
to potable water well contamination in the area                  the NJRDCSRS at isolated locations within the former
surrounding the facility.      Investigations included           lagoon area.
sampling of groundwater, soil, surface water and
sediment associated with identified areas of concern.            The results of subsurface soil sampling (depth greater
                                                                 than 2 ft.) indicated that the SVOCs benzyl butyl
In May 1987, NJDEP and Matlack, Inc. entered into an             phthalate, bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate and napthalene
ACO. Between 1990 and 2001, Matlack Inc. conducted               were present in subsurface soil at concentrations above
a two phase investigation and remedial/removal actions           New Jersey Impact to Groundwater Soil Screening
to address source areas identified from previous                 Levels (NJIGWSSL), based on sampling conducted
investigations. One such action included installation of         during 2016.
a groundwater treatment system that consisted of
extraction wells, an infiltration trench and aeration            The VOCs benzene, PCE, TCE, and total xylenes were
system, which was operated from November 1995 to                 identified during 2016 sampling at numerous locations
May 1997 and then again from June 2006 through 2011.             at concentrations above the NJIGWSSL. Benzene,
Additional actions included the removal of aboveground           PCE, TCE and total xylenes were also identified during
and underground storage tanks (ASTs and USTs) used               2014 sampling at two locations at concentrations above
for waste and petroleum, and the excavation and off-site         IGWSSL. The SVOCs benzyl butyl phthalate, bis(2-
disposal of contaminated soil.                                   ethylhexyl) phthalate, di-n-octylphthalate and
                                                                 naphthalene were also identified at concentrations
NJDEP conducted additional investigation and sampling            above IGWSSL during 2014 at the same two locations.
activities between 2002 and 2009 and a site reassessment
in 2011, at the request of EPA. EPA began investigation          As noted, groundwater sampling indicates two distinct
activities in 2012 and the Site was listed on the National       plumes: one plume consists of PHC-related aromatic
Priorities List in 2013. In 2014, EPA conducted a site           VOCs (e.g., benzene) and the SVOC 4-chloroaniline;
investigation to determine if the former unlined disposal        the other plume consists of chlorinated VOCs. The
lagoon or other nearby source areas were continuing to           highest concentration detected of chlorinated VOCs
leak contaminants of potential concern to groundwater            was 1,800 µg/l and of aromatic compounds was 1,347
and thereby impacting Grand Sprute Run and associated            µg/l.
wetlands located to the west of the Site.

Remedial Investigation

                                                             4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The results for surface water and sediment sampling              Assessment, Toxicity Assessment, and Risk
indicated PCE and TCE were present in seep and                   Characterization (see text box entitled “What is Risk
sediment samples above New Jersey Surface Water                  and How is it Calculated” for additional explanation of
Quality Criteria and New Jersey Sediment Quality                 these terms).
Criteria, respectively.
                                                                         WHAT IS A “PRINCIPAL THREAT?”
The maximum detected concentrations associated with               The NCP establishes an expectation that EPA will use
each contaminant of concern (COC) and media are                   treatment to address the principal threats posed by a Site
provided in Table 1, along with the Preliminary                   wherever         practicable         (NCP         Section
Remediation Goals.                                                300.430(a)(1)(iii)(A)). The "principal threat" concept is
                                                                  applied to the characterization of "source materials" at
PRINCIPAL THREATS                                                 a Superfund site. A source material is material that
                                                                  includes or contains hazardous substances, pollutants or
Principal threat wastes are those source materials                contaminants that act as a reservoir for migration of
considered to be highly toxic or highly mobile that               contamination to ground water, surface water or air, or
generally cannot be reliably contained or would present           acts as a source for direct exposure. Contaminated
a significant risk to human health or the environment             ground water generally is not considered to be a source
should exposure occur. They include liquids and other             material; however, Non-Aqueous Phase Liquids
highly mobile materials (e.g., solvents) or materials             (NAPLs) in groundwater may be viewed as source
having high concentrations of toxic compounds. No                 material. Principal threat wastes are those source
"threshold level" of toxicity/risk has been established to        materials considered to be highly toxic or highly mobile
equate to "principal threat" A detailed explanation of            that generally cannot be reliably contained, or would
principle threat wastes can be found in the box, “What            present a significant risk to human health or the
is a Principle Threat?”                                           environment should exposure occur. The decision to
                                                                  treat these wastes is made on a site-specific basis
Although VOCs in soil and sediment at the site may act            through a detailed analysis of the alternatives using the
as a limited source of contamination to groundwater,              nine remedy selection criteria. This analysis provides a
water seeps and sediment, these sources are not                   basis for making a statutory finding that the remedy
considered principal threat wastes at the site. The               employs treatment as a principal element.
primary media contaminated at the site is groundwater.

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS                                            The HHRA began with the selection of chemicals in the
                                                                 various media found at the Site (i.e., groundwater, soil,
As part of the RI/FS for the Site, a baseline risk               seep water, seep sediment and surface water) that could
assessment was conducted to estimate the current and             potentially cause adverse health effects in exposed
future effects of contaminants on human health and the           populations. As a result, 47 chemicals, including VOCs,
environment. A baseline risk assessment is an analysis           SVOCs, pesticides, PCBs and inorganics were retained
of the potential adverse human health and ecological             as COPCs and carried through to the remainder of the
effects of releases of hazardous substances from a site if       HHRA.
no actions to mitigate such releases are taken, under
current and future land and groundwater uses. The                The identification and selection of potential receptor
baseline risk assessment includes a human health risk            populations was based on both current and potential
assessment (HHRA) and a screening-level ecological               future land uses of the Site. The Site is located within a
risk assessment (SLERA).                                         portion of Woolwich Township zoned as RC-1
                                                                 (Regional Center), and is currently being used as a
Human Health Risk Assessment                                     medium and heavy truck sales and service facility
                                                                 operated by Liberty Kenworth. Impacted groundwater
A four-step HHRA process was used for assessing site-            associated with the site is not currently used for
related cancer risks and noncancer health hazards. The           drinking water. Although the groundwater is currently
four-step process is comprised of: Hazard Identification         not used for drinking water purposes, the HHRA
of Chemicals of Potential Concern (COPCs), Exposure

                                                             5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

assumed groundwater could be used as a source of
drinking water in the future.                                         WHAT IS HUMAN HEALTH RISK AND HOW IS IT
                                                                                  CALCULATED?
The land use surrounding the Site is mixed, consisting           A Superfund baseline human health risk assessment is an analysis of the
of agricultural, commercial and residential uses. As             potential adverse health effects caused by hazardous substance releases
such, the following receptor populations were evaluated          from a site in the absence of any actions to control or mitigate these
in the HHRA: future on-Site worker, future on-Site               under current- and future-land uses. A four-step process is utilized for
construction worker, future on-Site resident (child and          assessing site-related human health risks for reasonable maximum
                                                                 exposure scenarios.
adult), current/future off-Site resident (adult and child)
and a current/future off-Site recreator (adult and child).       Hazard Identification: In this step, the contaminants of concern
                                                                 (COPCs) at the site in various media (i.e., soil, groundwater, surface
The potential exposure pathways considered in the                water, and air) are identified based on such factors as toxicity, frequency
                                                                 of occurrence, and fate and transport of the contaminants in the
HHRA included inhalation of soil particulates and                environment, concentrations of the contaminants in specific media,
vapors; incidental ingestion of and dermal contact with          mobility, persistence, and bioaccumulation.
soil particulates; groundwater ingestion, dermal contact
and inhalation of groundwater; and incidental ingestion          Exposure Assessment: In this step, the different exposure pathways
and dermal contact with seep water and sediment along            through which people might be exposed to the contaminants identified
                                                                 in the previous step are evaluated. Examples of exposure pathways
with surface water. In addition, for overall                     include incidental ingestion of and dermal contact with contaminated
completeness, a screening evaluation was conducted to            soil and ingestion of and dermal contact with contaminated
determine if the potential for vapor intrusion (VI) into         groundwater. Factors relating to the exposure assessment include, but
indoor air from subsurface vapor sources exists. The             are not limited to, the concentrations in specific media that people might
                                                                 be exposed to and the frequency and duration of that exposure. Using
VI screening evaluation consisted of comparing the               these factors, a “reasonable maximum exposure” scenario, which
maximum groundwater concentration of COPCs to both               portrays the highest level of human exposure that could reasonably be
residential and commercial based Vapor Intrusion                 expected to occur, is calculated.
Screening Levels (VISLs) through the use of EPA’s
VISL Calculator.                                                 Toxicity Assessment: In this step, the types of adverse health effects
                                                                 associated with chemical exposures, and the relationship between
                                                                 magnitude of exposure and severity of adverse effects are determined.
Two types of toxic effects were evaluated for each               Potential health effects are chemical-specific and may include the risk
receptor in the risk assessment: carcinogenic effects and        of developing cancer over a lifetime or other non-cancer health hazards,
non-carcinogenic effects. Calculated risk estimates for          such as changes in the normal functions of organs within the body (e.g.,
                                                                 changes in the effectiveness of the immune system). Some chemicals are
each receptor were compared to EPA’s target threshold            capable of causing both cancer and non-cancer health hazards.
values for carcinogenic risk of 1 x 10-6 (one-in-one
million) to 1 x 10-4 (one-in-ten thousand) and calculated        Risk Characterization: This step summarizes and combines outputs of
hazard index (HI) to a target value of 1.                        the exposure and toxicity assessments to provide a quantitative
                                                                 assessment of site risks for all COPCs. Exposures are evaluated based
                                                                 on the potential risk of developing cancer and the potential for non-
Summary of HHRA Results                                          cancer health hazards. The likelihood of an individual developing cancer
                                                                 is expressed as a probability. For example, a 10-4 cancer risk means a
This section provides a summary of the conclusions of            “one in ten thousand excess cancer risk;” or one additional cancer may
the HHRA per media. The bolded values in Tables A                be seen in a population of 10,000 people as a result of exposure to site
                                                                 contaminants under the conditions identified in the Exposure
through D highlight the cancer risk and noncancer                Assessment. Current Superfund regulations for exposures identify the
hazards estimates that exceed EPA’s threshold criteria.          range for determining whether remedial action is necessary as an
Further, media-specific COCs were identified in                  individual excess lifetime cancer risk of 10-4 to 10-6, corresponding to a
instances when the threshold criteria were exceeded. A           one in ten thousand to a one in a million excess cancer risk.
complete discussion of all exposure scenarios evaluated
                                                                 For non-cancer health effects, a “hazard index” (HI) is calculated. The
can be found in the final HHRA Report for the site.              key concept for a non-cancer HI is that a “threshold” (measured as an
                                                                 HI of less than or equal to 1) exists below which non-cancer health
 Surface Soil                                                   hazards are not expected to occur. The goal of protection is 10-6 for
                                                                 cancer risk and an HI of 1 for a non-cancer health hazard. Chemicals
                                                                 that exceed a 10-4 cancer risk or an HI of 1 are typically those that will
Risks and hazards were evaluated for future exposure to          require remedial action at the site.
on-site surface soil by a future child and adult resident
and an adult worker. As summarized in Table A, the
estimated cancer risks and noncancer hazards for all
                                                             6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

receptor populations evaluated were found to be below          populations of interest included the following future on-
or within EPA’s target threshold values. Based on              Site receptors: adult workers, construction workers and
these results, there were no COCs identified for on-Site       child and adult residents. As summarized in Table C,
surface soils.                                                 the hazard indices for the child resident (59), adult
                                                               resident (46), and construction worker (25) exceeded
                                                               EPA’s threshold value of 1. In addition, the combined
    Table A: Summary of hazard and risks                       cancer estimates for the child and adult resident of 4.3 x
         associated with surface soil                          10 -3 exceeded EPA’s threshold range of 1×10-6 to
                    Hazard                                     1×10-4. The groundwater COCs varied by receptor
   Receptor                      Cancer Risk                   population. For the future on-Site resident,
                    Index
 Future on-Site                                                groundwater COCs include ethylbenzene, PCE, TCE,
                     0.1          4.4 x 10 -6                  vinyl chloride and 4-chloroaniline. Additionally,
    Worker
 Future on-Site                                                exposure to several metals, namely cobalt, iron,
     Child             1                                       manganese and thallium, was associated with elevated
   Resident                                                    noncancer hazard indices. However, since metals are
                                  7.7 x 10 -5                  not considered site-related they were not retained as
 Future on-Site
     Adult           0.2                                       COCs for purposes of remedy selection. Lastly, in
   Resident                                                    addition to PCE and TCE, two additional VOCs
                                                               (biphenyl and naphthalene) were identified as COCs via
                                                               the inhalation pathway for the future on-Site
 Surface/Subsurface Soil                                      construction worker working in a trench.

Risks and hazards were evaluated for potential future          The potential for soil VI is evaluated when Site soils
exposure to surface and subsurface soil present on-Site        and/or groundwater are known or suspected to contain
by an adult construction worker. Results of the risk           chemicals that are considered to be volatile. A
assessment indicated the estimated risk and hazards fell       comparison of maximum detected concentrations of
below EPA’s threshold criteria (Table B).                      volatile chemicals found in site-wide groundwater to
Consequently, COCs were not identified for on-Site             EPA’s chemical specific, risk-based groundwater
surface and subsurface soils.                                  VISLs. The VISLs provide groundwater levels
                                                               associated with an indoor air concentration that
                                                               represents a cancer risk ranging from 1 x 10-4 and 1 x
    Table B: Summary of hazard and risks                       10-6 or a noncancer hazard quotient of 1.
    associated with surface/subsurface soil                    Concentrations exceeding these screening values
                     Hazard                                    indicate the potential for VI. Results of the screening
    Receptor                     Cancer Risk                   evaluation identified the following nine chemicals at
                     Index
                                                               concentrations greater than the residential VISLs: 1,2-
 Future on-Site                                                dichloroethane, 1,4-dichlorobenzene, benzene,
  Construction         0.5         8.5 x 10 -7                 ethylbenzene, PCE, TCE, vinyl chloride, naphthalene
    Worker                                                     and cyanide. Based on the results of the screening
                                                               evaluation, the potential for VI exists in the future
                                                               timeframe if buildings were to be constructed overlying
                                                               the plume.
Note that exposure to several metals, namely cobalt,
iron, manganese and thallium, was associated with
elevated noncancer hazard indices; however, since
metals are not considered site-related, they were not
retained as COCs for purposes of remedy selection.

 Groundwater

Risks and hazards were evaluated for potential future
exposure to groundwater beneath the Site. The

                                                           7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    Table C: Summary of hazard and risks
         associated with groundwater                           summarized per media in Table D. Exposure to seep
                    Hazard                                     water by a child recreator was the only receptor
   Receptor                     Cancer Risk                    population that was found to exceeded EPA’s threshold
                     Index
 Future on-Site                                                criteria. The associated hazard index of 2 was primarily
                      0.6        2.7 x 10 -5                   attributable to PCE, TCE and manganese in seep water;
    Worker
 Future on-Site                                                however, manganese is not considered to be site related
  Construction         25        1.6 x 10 -5                   and was not retained as a COC for purposes of remedy
    Worker                                                     selection.
 Future on-Site
     Child             59                                      In summary, results of the HHRA found that exposure to
   Resident                                                    VOCs and SVOCs in groundwater beneath the Site was
                                 4.3 x 10 -3                   associated with cancer and noncancer risk estimates that
 Future on-Site
     Adult             46                                      exceeded EPA’s threshold criteria. The presence of
   Resident                                                    volatile COCs were also found at levels that could be of
                                                               concern for the future VI pathway.         Furthermore,
 Seep Water, Seep Sediment and Surface Water                  exposure to PCE, TCE, and manganese present in seep
                                                               water samples collected from Grand Sprute Run was
Risks and hazards were evaluated for current and future        associated with a noncancer hazard that slightly
exposure to seep water, seep sediments and surface water       exceeded EPA’s hazard index of 1.
within Grand Sprute Run. The populations of interest
included child and adult recreators who may visit the          Ecological Risk Assessment
area and participate in recreational activities such as
wading. The results of the risk assessment are                 A SLERA was conducted that focused on evaluating
                                                               the potential for impacts to sensitive ecological
     Table D: Summary of hazard and risks                      receptors to site-related constituents of concern through
    associated with seep water, sediment and                   exposure to surface soil, surface water, sediment, and
                  surface water                                seep surface water and sediment. Compounds detected
                      Hazard                                   in these media were compared to ecological screening
    Receptor                       Cancer Risk                 values to determine the potential for adverse effects to
                       Index
                                                               ecological receptors. A complete summary of the
 Exposure Media: Seep Water
                                                               exposure scenarios can be found in the SLERA in the
 Current/Future
                                                               administrative record.
  off-Site Child         2
    Recreator
                                    6.0 x 10 -6                The SLERA evaluated risk to ecological receptors
 Current/Future
                                                               using two different analyses, a standard SLERA
 off-Site Adult         0.9
                                                               evaluation and a refined SLERA evaluation that
    Recreator
                                                               included less stringent assumptions and parameters.
 Exposure Media: Seep Sediment                                 The initial evaluation used the maximum concentration
 Current/Future                                                of all detected compounds and the evaluation indicated
  off-Site Child         1                                     that there is a potential ecological risk from surface
    Recreator                                                  soil, seep water, seep sediment and surface water of
                                    1.6 x 10 -5
 Current/Future                                                Grand Sprute Run due to exposure to VOCs, SVOCs
 off-Site Adult         0.1                                    and metals. Fifty-nine compounds were identified as
    Recreator                                                  COPCs in the initial SLERA evaluation. The SVOCs
 Exposure Media: Surface Water                                 and metals were detected throughout the Site, while
 Current/Future                                                VOCs were associated with groundwater discharges
  off-Site Child         1                                     originating from groundwater under the former lagoon
    Recreator                                                  that migrated to seeps and surface water through seep
                                    7.0 x 10 -6
 Current/Future                                                sediment. The historical description of activities that
 off-Site Adult         0.5                                    occurred at the Site indicate the discharge of VOCs into
    Recreator                                                  the former lagoons and soil resulted in contaminated
                                                           8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

groundwater, which then flowed towards Grand Sprute              REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES
Run.
                                                                 Remedial Action Objectives (RAOs) are specific goals
The second evaluation, identified as Step 3A, evaluated          to protect human health and the environment. These
risks to ecological receptors exposed to the 95% upper-          objectives are based on available information and
confidence limit (UCL) concentrations of COPCs. It               standards, such as applicable or relevant and
also included other refinements, such as consideration           appropriate requirements (ARARs), to-be-considered
of whether compounds are associated with former site             (TBC) guidance, and site-specific risk-based levels.
activities (i.e., site-related compounds). The refined           The primary objective of any remedial strategy is overall
evaluation reduced the COPC list from 59 to 30                   protectiveness.
COPCs. This analysis also resulted in a finding of
unacceptable risk for ecological receptors exposed to            RAOs for soil at the Matlack Site are as follows:
VOCs in surface soil, seep water, seep sediment and
surface water. This indicates that a remedial action is              •   Control or remove source areas to prevent or
needed to address the discharge of compounds in the                      minimize impacts to sediment and seep water,
soil, seep water and sediment and Grand Sprute Run to                    and further impacts to groundwater.
prevent or eliminate exposure to ecological receptors.
Although SLERAs that identify unacceptable risk                      •   Prevent current and potential future
usually proceed to a Baseline Ecological Risk                            unacceptable risks to human receptors through
Assessment (BERA), where additional data and revised                     ingestion, dermal contact with and inhalation of
toxicity values are used to further evaluate the potential               contaminated groundwater.
for ecological impacts, it is evident from the results of
this SLERA, combined with the fate and transport of                  •   Prevent current and potential future
the groundwater, that the primary ecological issue is                    unacceptable inhalation risks to human
groundwater contamination discharging to the seeps                       receptors through subsurface vapor intrusion
and Grand Sprute Run. The SLERA evaluations also                         into indoor air.
identified impacts from surface soils, mainly from
inorganic compounds; however, these are currently not                •   Restore groundwater to its expected beneficial
considered to be site related. Given that the proposed                   use to the extent practicable by reducing
remedial alternatives will address the soil in the former                contaminant concentrations below the more
lagoon area, as well as the contaminated groundwater                     stringent of federal Maximum Contaminant
discharge to the seeps and Grand Sprute Run, no                          Levels (MCLs), state MCLs and NJ
additional ecological investigation is needed, as the                    Groundwater Quality Standards (GWQS).
completed ecological exposure pathways will be
eliminated with the implementation of the remedial                   •   Prevent or minimize current and potential
actions.                                                                 future unacceptable risks to ecological
                                                                         receptors through direct contact with or
Risk Assessment Summary                                                  ingestion of contaminated soil, sediment and
                                                                         surface water.
Based on the results of the human health and ecological
risk assessments a remedial action is necessary to protect       To achieve these RAOs, EPA has selected cleanup
public health, welfare and the environment from actual           goals for all COCs in soil, sediment and groundwater.
or threatened releases of hazardous substances.                  These are summarized in Table 1, below, which also
                                                                 provides the basis for each proposed cleanup goal.
It is EPA’s judgment that the preferred alternative              Achievement of these cleanup goals will also
summarized in this Proposed Plan is necessary to                 effectively address elevated concentrations in the water
protect public health or welfare or the environment              seeps. As such, no specific cleanup goals are selected
from actual or threatened releases of hazardous                  for surface water.
substances into the environment.




                                                             9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                  Alternative 1 - No Action

                                                                  The NCP requires that a “No Action” alternative be
                                                                  evaluated to establish a baseline for comparison with
                                                                  other groundwater remedial alternatives. If no active
                                                                  remedial action is taken, contaminants already present
                                                                  in the soil, groundwater, water seeps and sediment will
                                                                  remain and RAOs for the Site will not be met. It is
                                                                  assumed that land and groundwater resource use will
                                                                  not change over time, and human health and
                                                                  environmental risks for the Site essentially would be
                                                                  the same as those identified in the human health and
                                                                  ecological risk assessments. Because this alternative
                                                                  would result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or
                                                                  contaminants remaining at the properties above levels
                                                                  that would allow for unlimited use and unrestricted
                                                                  exposure, EPA would review conditions at the site
                                                                  every five years.

                                                                  Total Capital Cost:             $0
                                                                  Total O&M:                      $0
                                                                  Total Periodic Cost:            $0
                                                                  Total Present Net Worth:        $0
                                                                  Timeframe:                       0 years

SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES                                  Alternative 2 –Permeable Reactive barriers with soil
                                                                  and sediment excavation; institutional controls
CERCLA requires that each selected remedy be
protective of human health and the environment, be                This remedial alternative consists of installing two PRB
cost effective, comply with other statutory laws, and             trenches to provide passive treatments for aromatic
utilize permanent solutions and alternative treatment             VOCs and the SVOC 4-chloroanaline in Area 1 and
technologies and resource recovery alternatives to the            chlorinated VOCs in Area 2 as shown on Figure 3 and
maximum extent practical. In addition, the statute                described above.
includes a preference for the use of treatment as a
principal element for the reduction of toxicity, mobility,        Ongoing sources of this groundwater contamination
or volume of the hazardous substances.                            will be addressed through excavation. Soil within the
                                                                  former unlined lagoon area will be excavated to the
Potential technologies applicable to soil, groundwater,           water table, an estimated depth of 10 feet below grade.
seep water and sediment remediation were identified and           Contaminated sediment will be excavated from
screened by effectiveness, implementability and cost              impacted sediment/seep locations along Grand Sprute
criteria, with emphasis on effectiveness. Those                   Run.
technologies that passed the initial screening were then
assembled into remedial alternatives.                             By remediating the groundwater and removing ongoing
                                                                  sources of contamination, the remedy also addresses
The time frames below for construction do not include             contamination resulting from the discharge of
the time for designing a remedy, reaching remedy                  groundwater to seeps, which has impacted surface
agreement with responsible parties if they are identified,        water in the seep, as well as seep sediment.
or the time to procure necessary contracts.
                                                                  A pre-design investigation (PDI) will be needed to
                                                                  determine the horizontal and vertical extent of aromatic
                                                                  and chlorinated VOCs impacts in soil, sediment and
                                                             10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

groundwater. Sampling will be conducted to the clay                  based on site conditions characterized during the PDI
layer, and if additional soil and/or sediment excavation             phase of the project and refined during pilot scale
beyond that anticipated is needed, it will be conducted,             testing. These rates can be adjusted during full-scale
as appropriate. In addition, while not anticipated based             remediation to accommodate observed results and
on the existing data, if dense non-aqueous phase liquid              increase remediation efficiency. Impacted soil within
is found, it would be addressed in a future decision                 the former unlined lagoon area will be addressed by
document.                                                            installing a soil vapor extraction (SVE) system in
                                                                     conjunction with the air sparge system within the
Long-term monitoring outside of the PRB capture                      former lagoon area to address impacted vadose zone
zones will also be needed to assure the effectiveness of             soil. Vacuum pumps will be used to remove VOCs
the remedy over time, and institutional controls will                from the subsurface for treatment via carbon
assure the remedy remains protective while RAOs are                  adsorption.
being met. The institutional controls may include a
New Jersey Ground Water Classification Exception                     Impacted sediment will be addressed through the
Area that restricts the use of the contaminated aquifer,             excavation of impacted sediment/seep locations along
along with deed notices that restrict development of the             Grand Sprute Run. Institutional controls similar to
affected areas.                                                      those described for Alternative 2 will assure the remedy
                                                                     remains protective while RAOs are being met.
While not anticipated, additional installations of the
PRB may be needed to fully remediate the                             Total Capital Cost:              $3.09M
groundwater. For purposes of costing, a second                       Total O&M:                       $259K
installation is included five years after installation of            Total Periodic Cost:             $62K
the initial wall, and then, as a contingency, a third                Total Present Net Worth:         $3.41M
installation is included 10 years after initial installation.        Timeframe:                        1 year

Total Capital Cost:                $2.24M
Total O&M:                         $582K                             EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES
Total Periodic Cost:               $1.198 K
Total Present Net Worth:           $4.02M                            EPA uses nine criteria to evaluate the remedial
Timeframe:                          30 years                         alternatives individually and against each other to select
                                                                     a remedy. This section of the Proposed Plan profiles
Alternative 3 – Air Sparging/Ventilation for soil and                the relative performance of each alternative against the
groundwater with sediment excavation; Institutional                  nine criteria, noting how it compares to the other
controls                                                             options under consideration. The nine evaluation
                                                                     criteria are discussed below. A detailed analysis of
This remedial alternative consists of the installation of            each of the alternatives is in the FS.
an air sparging system to remediate the shallow aquifer
groundwater contamination at the Site. Long Term                     Overall Protection of Human Health and the
Monitoring would also be needed as part of this                      Environment
alternative.
                                                                     Since Alternative 1 would not address the risks posed
An air sparging system consists of a network of air                  by the site, it would not be protective of human health
injection (“sparging”) wells installed into the saturated            and the environment.
zone. The network of injection wells is designed so
that all of the area requiring treatment is effectively              Alternatives 2 and 3 would provide adequate protection
aerated. This typically involves establishing                        of human health and the environment by eliminating,
overlapping radii of influence for the sparging well                 reducing or controlling risk through treatment and
network. Air compressors are used to deliver oxygen                  removal of contamination.
under pressure. An aboveground process control
system is used to monitor and adjust the air delivery                Because the “no action” alternative, Alternative 1, is
equipment. Flow rates and pressures of injected air are              not protective of human health and the environment, it

                                                                11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

was eliminated from further consideration under the                   THE NINE SUPERFUND EVALUATION CRITERIA
remaining eight criteria.
                                                                 1. Overall Protectiveness of Human Health and the Environment
                                                                 evaluates whether and how an alternative eliminates, reduces, or
Compliance with Applicable or Relevant and                       controls threats to public health and the environment through
Appropriate Requirements                                         institutional controls, engineering controls, or treatment.

Actions taken at any Superfund site must meet all                2. Compliance with Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate
                                                                 Requirements (ARARs) evaluates whether the alternative meets
applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements              federal and state environmental statutes, regulations, and other
under federal and state laws or provide grounds for              requirements that pertain to the site, or whether a waiver is justified.
invoking a waiver of those requirements.
                                                                 3. Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence considers the ability of
                                                                 an alternative to maintain protection of human health and the
Both Alternative 2 and Alternative 3 should provide              environment over time.
compliance with chemical-specific ARARs, because
the contamination would either be treated or removed.            4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume (TMV) of
However, bench-scale testing will be necessary to                Contaminants through Treatment evaluates an alternative's use of
confirm that air sparging can effectively achieve                treatment to reduce the harmful effects of principal contaminants, their
                                                                 ability to move in the environment, and the amount of contamination
ARARs for 4-chloroanaline.                                       present.

Location-specific ARARs and Action-specific ARARs                5. Short-term Effectiveness considers the length of time needed to
would both be met by proper design and                           implement an alternative and the risks the alternative poses to workers,
                                                                 the community, and the environment during implementation.
implementation of the respective components of the
remedy. The Location-specific and Action-specific                6. Implementability considers the technical and administrative
ARARs for the disposal phase would be met with                   feasibility of implementing the alternative, including factors such as
proper selection of the disposal facility.                       the relative availability of goods and services.

                                                                 7. Cost includes estimated capital and annual operations and
Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence                           maintenance costs, as well as present worth cost. Present worth cost is
                                                                 the total cost of an alternative over time in terms of today's dollar
Alternative 2 is expected to permanently remove VOCs             value. Cost estimates are expected to be accurate within a range of
from soil within the former lagoon area, contaminated            +50 to -30 percent.
sediment from the seep location, and COCs from                   8. State/Support Agency Acceptance considers whether the State
impacted groundwater within the active treatment area.           agrees with the EPA's analyses and recommendations, as described in
                                                                 the RI/FS and Proposed Plan.
Alternative 3 would remove VOCs from groundwater
within the active remedial areas effectively in a shorter        9. Community Acceptance considers whether the local community
                                                                 agrees with EPA's analyses and preferred alternative. Comments
timeframe (~1 year) than Alternative 2; however,                 received on the Proposed Plan are an important indicator of community
treatment efficacy for the removal of 4-chloroanaline is         acceptance.
expected to be more moderate and will require bench-
scale testing to confirm the duration required to achieve
remediation goals.                                               restoring the aquifer thereby achieving the RAOs.
                                                                 Alternative 3 is likely to reduce VOC concentrations
Under Alternative 2, the reactive medium of the PRB              more quickly than Alternative 2; however, the ability
treats site contaminants through permanent and                   for this alternative to reduce 4-chloroanaline
irreversible processes. PRBs would be effective in               concentrations as quickly as the other COCs will
maintaining reduced groundwater contaminant                      require bench-scale testing to confirm efficacy.
concentrations for both VOCs and 4-chloroanaline
downgradient of the site and preventing further                  Institutional controls under Alternatives 2 and 3 would
migration to Grand Sprute Run over a long-term (~30              contribute to the protection of human health when
years) remedial timeframe.                                       properly implemented and maintained.

The PRB under Alternative 2 would provide the most               Soil excavation under Alternatives 2 and SVE treatment
long-term effectiveness and permanence by reducing               under Alternative 3 will provide active reduction in
the contaminant concentrations in the plumes and
                                                            12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

contaminant levels on-site, providing long term
effectiveness or permanence.                                      Short-term impacts for Alternative 3 are greater since it
                                                                  would require the installation of piping over the entire
Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility,            Volume     of         ground surface associated with the groundwater plume
Contamination through Treatment                                   and soil remediation area, and the operation of blowers
                                                                  and vacuum pumps for the full duration of active
Alternatives 2 and 3 will reduce the mass of COCs soil,           remediation, which is estimated to be one year.
sediment, water seeps and groundwater.
                                                                  Implementability
Alternative 2 will reduce toxicity, mobility, or volume of
on-site contaminated soil by excavation and                       Alternative 2 can be easily implemented and requires a
transportation of the soil to a permitted landfill for            shorter duration to complete installation. The PRBs are
disposal. Alternative 3 will reduce the mass of                   also a passive treatment technology and will require no
VOCs/SVOCs in soil through transport to the vapor                 maintenance during the active life of the remediation.
phase and potential adsorption on activated carbon.               The PRB trench excavation under Alternative 2 can be
                                                                  performed using either standard excavation or one-pass
PRBs under Alternative 2 permanently remove                       trenching equipment. Due to the relatively steep slopes
contaminants from the aquifer by adsorption and                   within the proposed location of the Area 1 PRB, site
biogeochemical processes. Toxicity, mobility, and                 preparation and re-grading may be required in selected
volume of contaminants in groundwater over a long-term            locations prior to installation of the PRB.
(~30 years) remedial timeframe are reduced as
contaminant groundwater passes through the PRBs                   The installation of air sparge/SVE system under
located at the downgradient edges of the both plumes.             Alternative 3 is a well-established technology and it can
                                                                  be readily implemented at this Site; however, the air
Alternative 3 permanently removes VOCs from the                   sparging system will require the installation of a
aquifer within the active remedial area in a shorter              significant number of air sparge/SVE well points (~500)
timeframe (~1 year) but will require bench-scale testing          as well as supporting piping, equipment and electric
to confirm that it will effectively remove 4-                     utilities both on and off the site. Alternative 3 is also an
chloroanaline, an SVOC, in that timeframe. Vapor-phase            active technology that will require ongoing operation
VOCs generated under Alternative 3 will be collected              and maintenance over the short duration (~1 year)
and treated with granular activated carbon, if necessary,         anticipated for active remediation.
and discharged to the atmosphere. Regeneration of the
activated carbon will transform contaminants to                   Cost
harmless compounds, thereby reducing the toxicity of
contaminants removed from the Site groundwater. Air               Total present worth costs for Alternatives 2 and 3 are
sparging also serves to enhance the aerobic                       summarized below:
biodegradation of compounds, which may prove
effective in reducing concentrations of 4-chloroanaline           Alternative 2: PRB with Soil/Sediment Excavation
and other less volatile aromatic compounds in Area 1.                     • Total Present-Worth Cost $4.02 M
                                                                          • 30 years of LTM
Short-Term Effectiveness
                                                                  Alternative 3: Air Sparging with SVE and Sediment
Both Alternative 2 and Alternative 3 would be effective           Removal
in the short term. The extent of excavation of soil and/or                • Total Present-Worth Cost $3.41 M
sediment required is relatively small and excavation
activities would be completed in less than one year.                      • 1 year of air sparging and 4 years of LTM

For Alternative 2, installation of the PRB would require
minimal impacts to soil during installation. The

timeframe for installation       is   expected    to   be         State Acceptance
approximately one month.
                                                             13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The State of New Jersey concurs with the preferred                      and
alternative as presented in this Proposed Plan.                     •   It is a permanent remedy that will not require
                                                                        the implementation of permanent institutional
Community Acceptance                                                    controls once RAOs are achieved.

Community acceptance of the preferred alternative will          The EPA and NJDEP expect the preferred alternative to
be evaluated after the public comment period ends and           satisfy the following statutory requirements of
will be described in the ROD. Based on public comment,          CERCLA Section 121(b): 1) be protective of human
the preferred alternative could be modified from the            health and the environment; 2) comply with ARARs; 3)
version presented in the proposed plan. The ROD is the          be cost effective; 4) utilize permanent solutions and
document that formalizes the selection of the remedy for        alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery
a site.                                                         technologies to the maximum extent practicable; and 5)
                                                                satisfy the preference for treatment as a principal
PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE                                           element. EPA will assess the modifying criteria of
                                                                community acceptance in the ROD following the close
The Preferred Alternative for achieving remedial action         of the public comment period.
objectives for contaminated soil, groundwater, water
seeps and sediment associated with the site is
Alternative 2, PRBs with soil and sediment excavation,
and institutional controls. A detailed pre-design                 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION
investigation will be conducted, and if additional soil
and/or sediment excavation beyond that anticipated is             The administrative record file, which contains copies
necessary, it will be conducted, as appropriate. In               of the Proposed Plan and supporting documentation, is
addition, while a reinstallation of the PRBs may not be           available at the following locations:
necessary, costs have been included for a second and,
                                                                  EPA Region 2 Superfund Records Center
as a contingency, third installation of the PRBs.
                                                                  290 Broadway, 18th Floor
                                                                  New York, New York 10007-1866
Based on the information available at this time, EPA              (212) 637-4308
and NJDEP believe the preferred alternative meets the             Hours: Monday-Friday – 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
threshold criteria and provides the best balance of
tradeoffs among the other alternatives with respect to            Township of Woolrich
the balancing criteria.                                           Mr. Matthew Blake
                                                                  Director for Community Affairs
The preferred alternative satisfies the two threshold             120 Village Green drive
criteria and achieves the best combination of the five            Woolwich Township NJ 08085
balancing criteria of the comparative analysis. This              (856)467-2666, x-3101
                                                                  Hours: Monday-Friday – 9 AM. To 5 PM.
alternative is preferred for the following reasons:

    •   It will achieve the RAOs and cleanup goals in             In addition, select documents from the administrative
        the most effective way;                                   record are available on-line at:
    •   It will reduce the toxicity, mobility or volume
        of contamination through treatment for all                www.epa.gov/superfund/matlack
        COCs. Bench-scale studies should not be
        needed to evaluate the effectiveness of the
        alternative at reducing COC concentrations.
    •   It is faster and easier to implement;
    •   It will present no visual impact once installed;


    •   It is less intrusive and will not be disruptive
        once installed for activities at the State Park;

                                                           14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

I                                                                                                                       •+ -""'"'-'Col
                                                                                                                           __ a:_. _ _ ,


                                                                                                                         --....
                                                                                                                            +    ~-..---



                                                                                                  N 'SllCA nJ .e.P(A     --
                                                                                                                         --
                                                                                                                         --...
                                                                                                                       ---·
                                                                                                                                 ...,.




                                                                                                                                                                  16
                                                                                                                       ""'"'.......
                                                                                                                       I.   a.()Ol(O~lil(US"WIJCM1!

                                                                                                                       l. Ji,.! IOlll!lttC IITU lOCA'!ICNI WOft
                                                                                                                            $U'W"'W l!l~ ""81:J' C(IISATNI •A
                                                                                                                            OIIM,0.201•
                                                                                                                       .J. nteal,5ll51!'["1WIS8'XDCll'l-
                                                                                                                            nc~o IIU"~ llt~CO C»t • M ..
                                                                                                                       • ~L.t':"u-~~rr:.(Ja(:lli
                                                                                                                         =' l'~':aa~ (IICW ~
                                                                                                                       • ~Q,lf\j- - ~ ~
                                                                                                                            ""'""-




           /


       I
                                            UNtTI; D STATl; S ~ NVIRO Nl,H; NTA L   MATLACK INC SUPERFUND StTE              SITE PLAN
                                                  f'H01'ECTION M. ENCY

    I-)~:==:-.: : .========~==::::::::===                                               FEASIB IL ITV STUDY


                                                                                                                                                   I""',..,.,.
                                               CONTRACT NO. E.P-W-09..01)1
                                                WOfl lli AS'StGN' Ni:'nr NO.
                                                     02:'9.JtlCO-CUP9
               a"tut   !lo.II

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +      _ _.. "°"' __ _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        - ~-~-.....
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DI---LIJl---1111"-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !     o r . 1 "0.r,...,._..,...._
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       f


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             --
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -·....
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             _tt' ,.,,. ,..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             "''"-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ~~~T-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -ti_tl'-.- .-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 - - :m~,;,.~7---1~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -----~~'..:.~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -- ~~~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  - - e:·.~. .~.:;,:;""' -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ....
HO-   ,po- ~~wur r            "
R"[ MOVAL l('t '_..L   •   'W Jt
                             .... ~




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17
                                                                                 UNJff.D STATES EHVIRCIH.MENTAL        MATLACK INC, SUPERFUND SI TE                                 ALTERNATIVE 2 - PERMEABLE REACTIVE BAR.RJERS
                                                                                      PAOTl:CTl~J AGENCY
                                                                                                                            FEASIBILITY STUDY                                            WITH SOIL/SEDIMENT EXCAVATION

                       I-)~        ~
                                   JrH:L:!tl T"
                                   115Slf a,1.11
                                                   -•••v•<_
                                                   C,i,,r' "'J I ~ ,
                                                   DESOIWTl(II         t. ,..,
                                                                                    CONTRACT NO. EP -W..ot-OCII
                                                                                     WOR K ASSIGNMENT NO,
                                                                                          D29..fflCO.(l'lPI
                                                                                                                  ' ~t,-...QtT 0 ¥'AQi oi' :.1.01. CES-ei t.OI.-KT 'l'. 'E\'".~r
                                                                                                                                                                                   ,....__
                                                                                                                                                                                         .,..,.ai
                                                                                                                                                                                              c=l<'"'-' _ _.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          eo.J ILt lll llf

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Attachment B

Public Notice

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

             EPA Invites Public Comment on Proposal to Cleanup
             Groundwater, Soil, Sediment and Seep Water at the
             Matlack, Inc. Superfund Site, Woolwich Township, NJ

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has issued a Proposed Plan to
remediate localized groundwater, soil, sediment and seep water contamination
associated with the Matlack, Inc. Superfund site. A 30-day public comment
period on the Proposed Plan, which identifies the EPA’s preferred cleanup plan
and other cleanup options that were considered by the EPA, begins on August
23, 2017 and ends on September 22, 2017.
The EPA’s preferred cleanup plan consists of the installation of underground
treatment walls called Permeable Reactive Barriers (PRBs), as well as soil and
sediment excavation, to address the contamination at the site. PRBs allow the
passage of impacted groundwater through a passive chemical or biological
treatment zone. As a result of past truck maintenance and tanker washing
operations at the site, the soil, groundwater, sediment and seep water are
contaminated with volatile and semi-volatile organic compounds, which can
potentially harm people’s health.
During the public comment period, the EPA will hold a public meeting in
Woolwich Township, NJ to receive comments on the preferred cleanup plan
and other options that were considered. The meeting will be held on
September 14, 2017 at 6:30 pm at the Woolwich Township Municipal
Courtroom, 120 Village Green Drive, Woolwich, NJ 08085.
The Proposed Plan is available at www.epa.gov/superfund/matlack or by
calling Wanda Ayala, EPA’s Community Involvement Coordinator, at (212)
637-3676 and requesting a copy by mail.
Written comments on the Proposed Plan, postmarked no later than September
22, 2017, may be mailed to Juan Davila, EPA, Project Manager, U.S. EPA, 290
Broadway, 18th floor, New York, NY 10007-1866 or emailed no later than
September 22, 2017 to davila.juan@epa.gov.
The Administrative Record file containing the documents used or relied on in
developing the alternatives and preferred cleanup plan is available for public
review at the following repositories:
Woolwich Township office located at 120 Village Green Drive, Woolwich, NJ
08085.
EPA Region 2 Superfund Records Center located at 290 Broadway, 18th Floor,
New York, New York

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      Attachment C

Public Meeting Transcripts

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Page 1
1     UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
2                                  REGION 2
3       --------------------------------------------
4                  PROPOSED REMEDIAL ACTION PLAN
5       MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE PUBLIC MEETING
6       --------------------------------------------
7
8                                              Woolwich Township
                                               120 Village Green Drive
9                                              Swedesboro, NJ
10
                                               September 14, 2017
11                                             6:36 p.m.
12
13      PRESENT:
14      CECILIA ECHOLS, Community Involvement Coordinator
15      STEPHANIE VAUGHAN, Section Chief for Mega Project
16      ULA KINAHAN, Risk Assessor
17      CHUCK NACE, Risk Assessor
18      JUAN DAVILA, Remedial Project Manager
19      BRADLEY WILLIAMS, Contractor for HDR
20      ERIC ZIMMERMAN, Contractor for HDR
21      MAYOR ALAN SCHWAGER, Woolwich Township
22      MATHEW BLAKE, Director of Community Development
23                            Woolwich Township
24
25                                   -    -    -


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Page 2
1                     MS. ECHOLS:          Good evening, everyone.                  I
2       am Cecilia Echols.              And I am a Community
3       Involvement Coordinator for the Region 2 EPA
4       Office.       I am standing in for Wanda Iyella, who
5       was deployed to Puerto Rico.                    Once she gets back,
6       she will be right back serving everyone here.
7       Thank you all for coming out tonight.                          And I
8       would like to thank Matt Blake with the Woolwich
9       Township for allowing us to have this meeting in
10      such a beautiful facility.
11                    The purpose of tonight's meeting is to
12      discuss the proposed planned cleanup for the
13      contaminated soil, groundwater, seep water and
14      sediment.         Community Involvement is a program
15      where we want the community to be involved in the
16      decision making process for cleaning up sites
17      that directly affect them in their community.
18                    Today's presentation will be done by
19      Juan Davila.          He's the Remedial Project Manager
20      for the site.           We also have other EPA employees
21      here.      We have Stephanie Vaughan.                   She's the
22      Section Chief for Mega Project.                      We have Chuck
23      Nace.      He's the Risk Assessor.                 Ula Kinahan.
24      She's a Risk Assessor, as well.                      We also have two
25      contractors who are working on the project with


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Page 3
1       HDR.      That's Bradley Williams and Eric Zimmerman.
2       We would like for all questions to be asked after
3       the presentation.              The Public Comment Period
4       opened on August 23 and closes on September 22.
5                     We have a stenographer here.                     She is
6       taking all of our presentation and our notes and
7       our comments and questions tonight.                        And it will
8       become part of those response summary, then a
9       record of decision will be prepared and signed by
10      our Acting Regional Administrator Catherine
11      McCabe.       All documents can be found on the web
12      page.      And we do have an information repository
13      here in this building.                 Thank you.
14                    And now we will have Juan give the
15      presentation.
16                    MR. DAVILA:          Good evening, everyone.                  My
17      name is Juan Davila, Regional Project Manager for
18      Matlack Superfund Site.                 The agenda for the
19      evening will be the introduction and purpose, EPA
20      and the Superfund Program, site history and
21      investigation, remedial alternative for the site,
22      preferred remedy, future work, and then we will
23      have a question and comment section.
24                    Why are we here tonight?                  We are here to
25      discuss the preferred alternative and other


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Page 4
1       cleanup option for Matlack, Inc.                       EPA will accept
2       additional verbal comments until Friday
3       September 22.           All public comments will be
4       considered and included formally in the
5       Administrative Record.                 And EPA will assess
6       public comments in its Record of Decision
7       Responsive Summary.
8                     The Superfund Process.                 The Superfund
9       Process start with the discovery of the site
10      followed by a preliminary assessment and the
11      preliminary assessment shows that there is a
12      problem.        We do a site investigation.                    Then we
13      propose the site for the national -- to be
14      included on the National Priority List.                           Once the
15      site is on the National Priority List, we do a
16      remedial investigation to define site conditions
17      and to determine the human and ecological risk.
18      Followed by feasibility study, which will be
19      followed by remedial alternatives using what we
20      call the Nine Criterias.
21                    The remedy proposed will be part of the
22      proposed plan and public comment period.                            Remedy
23      Selected will go into Record of Decision.
24      Remedial design will be comprised of the
25      pre-design sampling and the remedy design.                             And


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Page 5
1       the Remedial Action will be construction and
2       operation of the remedy.
3                     If I am going to too fast for you guys,
4       let me know.
5                     Site Location.            The site is located
6       along Route 322 East, Woolwich Township.                            And it
7       includes Matlack, Inc. former Swedesboro Terminal
8       that occupied the northern portion of a 72-acre
9       parcel of land.            There is a one-story building,
10      which is located on the northeast quadrant of the
11      property.         There is a former wastewater lagoon,
12      which is located south of the former terminal
13      building.         The terminal building is currently
14      leased by Liberty Kenworth.                    So, there is work
15      there.       There is a company there.
16                    (Indicating with the Map) This will be
17      the Matlack Site location.                   And this will be the
18      property in question you will see that the lagoon
19      and the trucking company on your right side.                              And
20      then there will be the protected area on the
21      left.
22                    Site History.            Matlack, Inc. transported
23      chemicals, petrochemicals and food-grade liquid
24      in bulk from 1962 to 2001.                   The primary source of
25      waste generation was the cleaning of tankers that


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Page 6
1       transported petroleum products, organic solvents,
2       flammable substances, coal tar and hazardous
3       wastes.       They used various solvents, including
4       tetrachloroethylene and trichloroethylene,
5       acetone, methanol and ethanol in order to clean
6       the tankers.          And the cleaning operation
7       generated between 5,000 and 15,000 gallons of
8       wastewater per day.
9                     From 1962 to 1976, Matlack, Inc.
10      discharged the wastewater into an unlined surface
11      impoundment or lagoon.                 And after this, they
12      began sending the wastewater offsite for
13      treatment and disposal.                 Matlack ceased operation
14      and declared bankruptcy in 2001.
15                    Our Site Investigation History.                       NJDEP
16      began investigation for potential groundwater
17      contamination in 1982.                 Between 1990 and 2001,
18      Matlack, Inc. conducted investigations and
19      cleanup activities under an Administrative
20      Consent Order with New Jersey DEP.                        They
21      installed groundwater treatment system that
22      operated from 1995 to '97, and again from 2006 to
23      2011.      They removed above ground and underground
24      storage tanks.            And, excavated contaminated soil
25      and dispose of it offsite.


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Page 7
1                     NJDEP conducted additional investigation
2       and sampling activities between 2002 and 2009.
3       At EPA request, the site was reassessed.                            EPA
4       began its own investigation activities in 2012.
5       The site was added to the National Priority List
6       in 2013.        In 2014, the Environmental Protection
7       Agency initiated a remedial investigation and
8       feasibility study for the site.
9                     Remedial Investigation.                  The remedial
10      investigation activities were conducted from
11      July 2015 to August 2016.                  It included sampling
12      of groundwater, soil, surface water, sediment and
13      seeps, which is groundwater discharging to the
14      surface.
15                    Groundwater.           The remedial investigation
16      found the existence of two groundwater plumes.
17      One plume consists of petroleum hydrocarbons and
18      4-chloroanaline.             The other plume consists of
19      chlorinated volatiles organic compounds.
20                    Soil.       Surface soil, from zero to two
21      feet below the ground surface we found
22      semi-volatile organic compounds and
23      polychlorinated biphenyls.                   And they were found
24      slightly above New Jersey DEP cleanup standards.
25      And they were located at isolated locations


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Page 8
1       within the former lagoon area.
2                     Subsurface soil, which is greater than
3       two feet below the ground surface, we found
4       volatile and semi-volatile organic compounds
5       found at concentrations slightly above New Jersey
6       standards.
7                     Surface Water, Sediment and Seeps.                        Our
8       surface water we found tetrachloroethylene and
9       trichloroethylene detected at concentrations
10      below New Jersey DEP.                Sediment,
11      tetrachloroethylene and trichloroethylenes found
12      in sediment above New Jersey DEP for sediment
13      qualify criteria.              For the seeps,
14      tetrachloroethylene and trichloroethylene found
15      in seep water above New Jersey water quality
16      criteria.
17                    That is a map showing the plumes.                        We
18      have the plume on the south part which is
19      containing the PHC.               And we have the purple line
20      representing the plume containing VOC.                          We have
21      the dashed green line representing the
22      4-chloroanaline plume.                 So in reality, two plumes
23      and we have what remains contaminate within the
24      two.
25                    Site Geology and Hydrogeology.                      We have


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           Page 9
1       two separate hydrogeological systems exist at the
2       site.      We have a shallow unconfined aquifer which
3       exists at the Pennsauken formation, which is 4 to
4       28 feet deep or below ground.                     And the
5       groundwater flows west/northwest towards the
6       Grand Sprute Run.              The deep aquifer is the
7       Magothy-Raritan formation.                   And the two aquifers
8       are separated by the Woodbury Clay confining
9       unit, which is over 50 feet thick.
10                    Human Health Risk Assessment.
11                    Groundwater, we have exposure to VOC and
12      SVOCs in the shallow aquifer associated with
13      cancer and non-cancer risk estimates that
14      exceeded EPA's threshold criteria.                        We have seep
15      water, tetrachloroethylene and trichloroethylene
16      and manganese in seep water samples associated
17      with non-cancer hazard that slightly exceeded the
18      EPA hazard index of 1.                 Site-related
19      contaminants -- arsenic, lead, PAH and
20      pesticides -- were found in soil above Federal
21      and State standards at the lagoon area.                           Direct
22      exposure to contaminated soil poses an
23      unacceptable human health risk to future users.
24                    MS. VAUGHAN:           Can you back up?             I'm
25      sorry.       There is an error on the previous slide.


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 10
1                     MR. DAVILA:          Sorry.
2                     MS. KINAHAN:           Yeah.
3                     MS. VAUGHAN:           Go ahead.
4                     MS. KINAHAN:           The bottom for site
5       related contaminants, there was none in the soil.
6                     MR. DAVILA:          None in the soil?
7                     MS. KINAHAN:           No.
8                     MS. VAUGHAN:           They are in soil, but not
9       arsenic and lead and pesticides.                       I thought it
10      was just the -- none of those.                     It was the TC, PC
11      the chlorinated.             None of the metals.               And in the
12      seep waters slide, the manganese shouldn't be
13      there.       I don't know how we --
14                    MS. KINAHAN:           Yeah.
15                    MS. VAUGHAN:           -- missed that.
16                    Just for the record, the contaminants of
17      concern are the chlorinated solvents and the
18      4-chloroanaline.
19                    MS. KINAHAN:           I can give summary of the
20      results of this.
21                    MR. DAVILA:          Okay.
22                    MS. KINAHAN:           We had -- based on the
23      risk assessment, future use of site groundwater
24      for portable uses was found to be above our
25      threshold criteria.               The chemicals of concern


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 11
1       were trichloroethylene, tetrachloroethylene,
2       4-chloroanaline along with some other VOCs.
3                     The risk assessment also found
4       unacceptable non-cancer hazard for the current
5       and future child recreator exposed to seep water.
6       And the risk chemicals were trichloroethylene,
7       tetrachloroethylene and manganese.
8                     MR. DAVILA:          Okay.       Ecological Risk
9       Assessment.          The primary ecological risk is from
10      groundwater contaminated with VOCs and primarily
11      tetrachloroethylene and trichloroethylene
12      discharging to the seeps and through the
13      sediments into Grand Sprute Run.                       Our secondary
14      ecological risk from exposure to metals in site
15      soils in the former lagoon area.
16                    Our Remedial Action Objectives are to
17      control or remove source areas to prevent or
18      minimize impacts to sediment and seep water and
19      further impacts to groundwater; to prevent
20      current and potential future unacceptable risks
21      to human receptors through ingestions, dermal
22      contact with inhalation of contaminated
23      groundwater; prevent current and potential future
24      unacceptable inhalation risks to human receptor
25      through subsurface vapor intrusion into indoor


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 12
1       air; restore groundwater to its expected
2       beneficial use to the extent practicable by
3       reducing contaminant concentrations below the
4       more stringent of federal, state maximum
5       contaminant levels and New Jersey groundwater
6       quality standards; and to prevent or minimize
7       current and potential future unacceptable risks
8       to ecological receptor through direct contact
9       with or ingestion of contaminated soil sediment
10      and surface water.
11                    Remedial Alternative.                We have three
12      remedial alternatives.                 Number 1 is no action.
13      Number 2 will be a permeable reactive barrier
14      with soil and sediment excavation and
15      institutional controls.                 And Alternative 3 is the
16      air sparging/ventilation for soil and groundwater
17      with sediment excavation and institutional
18      controls.
19                    MS. VAUGHAN:           Juan, I will say we always
20      evaluate the No Action Alternative.                        It's a
21      baseline to see if we did nothing, what would
22      happen.
23                    MR. DAVILA:          Basically, this is done so
24      public realize that they have more than one
25      alternative.          After we do remedial alternative,


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 13
1       they would not feel that they one selected by the
2       EPA go through the needs.                  They can always
3       comment on that.             We can just basically answer
4       the questions.
5                     We have the Nine Superfund Evaluation
6       Criteria.         Overall protection of human health and
7       the environment; compliance with applicable or
8       relevant requirements; long term effectiveness
9       and permanence; reduction in toxicity, mobility
10      or volume through treatment; short term
11      effectiveness; implementability; cost; state
12      acceptance and community acceptance.
13                    Our Preferred Alternative is Alternative
14      Number 2.         We believe it will achieve the
15      remedial action objective and the cleanup goals.
16      It will reduce the toxicity, mobility or volume
17      of contaminants through the treatment of all
18      contaminants of concern.                  It is faster and easier
19      to implement.           It will present no visual impact
20      once installed.            It is less intrusive and will
21      not be disruptive once installed for activities
22      at the State Park.
23                    MR. BLAKE:          Can we jump back to the
24      previous slide and see what were not recommended?
25                    MS. VAUGHAN:           Sure.


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 14
1                     MS. ECHOLS:          Go back to the
2       alternatives.
3                     MS. VAUGHAN:           Can you walk them through
4       what the three alternatives consists of?                            No
5       action the law requires.
6                     MR. DAVILA:          Okay.       It comes down to
7       this.      You saw the map with the two plumes,
8       groundwater.          Basically, we are going to dig a
9       trench and we are going to fill with permeable
10      materials that will react with the contaminants
11      of concern.
12                    MR. BLAKE:          They will not go any
13      further?
14                    MR. DAVILA:          They will not go any
15      further.        So contaminant react or will remain
16      there.       Five years down the road, we will
17      basically remove this barrier.                     And if we sample
18      and we decide that, yes, the concentration in the
19      groundwater is below state standards, we will
20      fill the trench with clean dirt.                       And we just
21      remove the material that we use for the permeable
22      barrier.
23                    MR. BLAKE:          So the plume becomes
24      inactive.         When it becomes inactive, we can
25      remove the barrier.               But the contaminants will


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 15
1       remain in place with the understanding that the
2       mobility has been arrested.                    It's no longer
3       active?
4                     MS. VAUGHAN:           A key part of this remedy,
5       though, is the other part, the soil and sediment
6       excavation.          The contaminant of the groundwater
7       is coming from that remaining contamination in
8       the soil and lagoon area.
9                     MR. BLAKE:          We should dig that out.
10                    MR. DAVILA:          Yes.      We will move the
11      source.
12                    MR. BLAKE:          Which is driving it.
13                    MS. VAUGHAN:           Yes.
14                    MR. DAVILA:          And we also remove the
15      contaminant that reach -- which is not in the
16      sediment.         Because in VOCs, we just find in the
17      site, the organics -- sorry.
18                    Comes down to this.               We will remove the
19      source.
20                    MR. BLAKE:          Yes.
21                    MR. DAVILA:          We will have the barrier
22      put up.       And then we will remove the sediments of
23      the hot spot that we have on the Grand Spruce
24      Run, which we only found one.
25                    MS. VAUGHAN:           The groundwater as well as


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 16
1       at the Grand Sprute Run, it comes to the surface
2       and the seeps.            Where it is seeping to the
3       surface is one area where the concentrations in
4       the sediment there or the seep water are
5       elevated.         We will remove that, as well.                     If we
6       remove the lagoon, the primary source and where
7       the contamination is impacting the surface and
8       then treat the groundwater in the ground, it
9       essentially over time the contamination will go
10      away.      It will take time.              It will take many
11      years.
12                    MR. BLAKE:          Right.
13                    MS. VAUGHAN:           But it will be very --
14      after we excavate the source, you won't see it.
15                    MR. BLAKE:          That menu of contaminants
16      they all will break down over time?
17                    MS. VAUGHAN:           Two separate.
18                    MR. BLAKE:          Plumes?
19                    MS. VAUGHAN:           So that we will have
20      different reactive components to treat the two
21      separate.
22                    MR. BLAKE:          Of course, the concentration
23      will go down once you remove the source which is
24      adding new contaminants to the plume.
25                    MS. VAUGHAN:           We may need to do more


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 17
1       than one installation.
2                     MR. BLAKE:          So, the idea is to avoid
3       digging out all that forested area?
4                     MR. DAVILA:          Yes, absolutely.             We want
5       to do less damage as possible to the protective
6       area.      And you know, take into consideration that
7       the groundwater for aquifers is not really
8       utilized in the areas except for the -- to fill
9       it.     So, we think it's more most effective and
10      will be a better solution.
11                    MS. VAUGHAN:           It would help if we
12      described the other alternative.
13                    MR. DAVILA:          The other alternative?
14                    MS. VAUGHAN:           Just one more thing to add
15      with that.         We will do regular testing throughout
16      this process to make sure things are working out
17      as we plan.          And we'll make adjustments as
18      necessary if needed, you know.                     And we will test
19      the groundwater to make sure the concentrations
20      aren't affected.
21                    MR. DAVILA:          Alternative No. 3 was in
22      the air sparging/ventilation for soil and
23      groundwater.          It involves basically you just have
24      little wells on the plume, and you just inject
25      air.      And make the air just take a lot organics


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 18
1       and pretty much just evaporate them with air and
2       going to, you know, towards the surface.                            The
3       problem with this is you need a lot of the the
4       little wells to do this.                  And it's very intense
5       and probably going to take a year.                        For that
6       year, it's going to be like equipment all over
7       the area.
8                     MR. BLAKE:          Basically, very disruptive.
9                     MR. DAVILA:          You will have two trucking
10      companies in the area.                 Could be a series of
11      accidents.         I might guess also it's not going to
12      be -- because we have petroleum contaminants,
13      also.      We don't think going to adapt completely
14      effective.
15                    MS. VAUGHAN:           Particularly, we have
16      heard Juan mention a couple times
17      4-chloroanaline.             We don't have any confidence
18      that this air sparging would address that
19      contaminant.          Even if we did this very invasive
20      process over the course of a year, we may still
21      need to do more such as installing the PRD, so
22      the permeable drafted barrier.
23                    So on balance, we think the Alternative
24      2 makes more sense than Alternative 3.                          It's a
25      proven technology.              It's been done at many sites


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 19
1       across the country.
2                     MAYOR SCHWAGER:             So, if you put a
3       barrier around the plume --
4                     MR. DAVILA:          No.
5                     STENOGRAPHER:            Just state your name.
6                     MAYOR SCHWAGER:             Alan Schwager,
7       S-c-h-w-a-g-e-r.             Do you need my address?
8                     STENOGRAPHER:            Oh, no.
9                     MS. VAUGHAN:           Are you the Mayor?
10                    MAYOR SCHWAGER:             I am.
11                    MS. VAUGHAN:           Your name sounded
12      familiar.
13                    MR. DAVILA:          Let me just go back.
14                    MS. VAUGHAN:           You dig literally like a
15      trench.       You inject material into the trench that
16      will react with the chemicals, so these chemicals
17      will break down into non-hazards.
18                    MR. DAVILA:          You see these lines here,
19      this is where we are planning to have the
20      trenches.
21                    MAYOR SCHWAGER:             Trench across.
22                    MR. DAVILA:          And the trench will
23      intersect each other so, you know, we will
24      capture the entire property.
25                    MAYOR SCHWAGER:             You will capture?


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 20
1                     MR. DAVILA:          It will not go through.
2       The trenches will intersect.
3                     MAYOR SCHWAGER:             What happens to the
4       water?       It comes out, it's treated.
5                     MS. KINAHAN:           It's treated while it
6       passes the wall.
7                     MR. BLAKE:          It is permeable.             Captures
8       and filters out the contaminants?
9                     MS. VAUGHAN:           Correct.
10                    MR. ZIMMERMAN:            We have the barrier
11      because where we propose to put the walls, you
12      have a clay area.              So, it's very easy to trench
13      down to that depth.
14                    MR. BLAKE:          That defining layer, you
15      are --
16                    MR. ZIMMERMAN:            The defining layer, the
17      50-foot layer of clay underneath the aquifer.
18      The water stays on top of that clay layer into
19      the sand and flows towards the creek.                          So
20      Alternative 2 consists, in part, of trenching in
21      front of the portion of plume where it's higher
22      concentrations before it gets to the creek,
23      filling it on the southern side with a
24      combination of gravel and it's called zero valent
25      irons.       Very reactive iron filings.


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 21
1                     It will react with the chlorinated
2       organics in the south center, that's the purple
3       one, and it turns it essentially to ethylene as
4       it flows through this wall of gravel and iron
5       filings.        It comes out the other side.
6       Chlorinated solvents are gone.
7                     The northern plumes, both the
8       4-chloroanaline, green plume, and the petroleum
9       hydrocarbons benzine, the blue plume, we would
10      put a combination of gravel and granular
11      activated carbon.              The carbon will absorb
12      gasoline constituents.
13                    MR. BLAKE:          You will trade up the carbon
14      periodically?
15                    MR. ZIMMERMAN:            Right.       You put enough
16      in there, it's designed for the mass over
17      ten-year period.             As it's flowing through there,
18      it's being hung up on the carbon, and then that
19      gets dug out.           Bottom plume reacts with
20      chlorinated solvent so when it goes through it,
21      there is nothing left.                 Being tested over time,
22      the aquifer has been cleaning itself up over a
23      period of ten years.
24                    MAYOR SCHWAGER:             I imagine.
25                    MR. ZIMMERMAN:            The highest


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 108 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 22
1       concentration is really --
2                     MAYOR SCHWAGER:             Start cleaning out
3       today.       You got to.
4                     MS. VAUGHAN:           And then once we remove
5       the source, it will --
6                     MR. ZIMMERMAN:            Yeah.      Frankly, the
7       treatment system, the groundwater treatment that
8       was put in over a period of ten years treated and
9       then they injected treated water up right and
10      turned.
11                    MAYOR SCHWAGER:             I thought they'd been
12      treating groundwater out here.
13                    MR. ZIMMERMAN:            Correct.        So the
14      combination of removing the source area and the
15      soil, before we did that, we would be taking
16      samples called pre-designed investigation to
17      identify specifically where the worst parts are
18      and would come out.               Same with the sediment on
19      the stream bank going down the creek or the seeps
20      are.      Those hot spots would be excavated.                        And
21      then reactive barrier treats the groundwater,
22      over time it will be cleaned up.
23                    MR. BLAKE:          Can you just point out where
24      the seeps are?
25                    MR. DAVILA:          Right on the Grand Sprute


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 109 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 23
1       Run.
2                     MR. BLAKE:          The designs out here?
3                     MR. ZIMMERMAN:            Yes.      Those green dots
4       are seep locations.               And seep number three which
5       somebody has a pointer.
6                     MR. DAVILA:          I believe it's right over
7       there.
8                     MR. BLAKE:          Are these all seeps?
9                     MS. KINAHAN:           They are all seep samples.
10                    MR. BLAKE:          But only some of these are
11      hot spots, right?              You got all these seep
12      samples, but only some of them are hot spots?
13                    MR. ZIMMERMAN:            Right.
14                    MR. BLAKE:          That's this one?
15      (Indicating with pointer.)
16                    MR. ZIMMERMAN:            Yes.
17                    MR. BLAKE:          This is basically right at
18      the bank edge.
19                    MR. ZIMMERMAN:            That's the bank of the
20      creek.
21                    MR. BLAKE:          I hope that's not where I
22      pulled my kayak out and had lunch.
23                    MR. ZIMMERMAN:            When you say hot spot,
24      the concentrations are barely -- they are not
25      even particular with that location.                        They are


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 110 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 24
1       above ecological guidelines.
2                     MAYOR SCHWAGER:             Slightly.        Your public
3       hearing says "slightly."                  I noticed that.
4                     Listen, and I know site remediation is
5       really not an exact science.                    Are we talking five
6       years?       Ten years?         Twenty years?
7                     Best guess?
8                     MS. VAUGHAN:           Yeah, no.         The excavation
9       part, once we get --
10                    MAYOR SCHWAGER:             No.     I'm talking about
11      you're below standards, you are done, pull
12      everything out, clean bill of health.
13                    MS. VAUGHAN:           The estimate we are going
14      to put in the Record of Decision is 30 years.
15      That's what we use for costing purpose, but it
16      could be significantly less.                    It really could be.
17      Once we are done with removing the source, you
18      won't see --
19                    MR. BLAKE:          What's the timeline on the
20      source removal?
21                    MS. VAUGHAN:           We have to go through --
22      once the Record of Decision is signed, we would
23      then have to do a design which is our
24      extension -- will require some additional
25      investigation.            If we were able to start


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 111 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 25
1       immediately, we could probably start remedial
2       action in a couple years, maybe less.                          You know,
3       it's a --
4                     MR. BLAKE:          I mean, does the fact that
5       people are boating out there, does that have any
6       weight in moving up the timeline?
7                     MS. VAUGHAN:           Right.       For the risk
8       assessment, the water and --
9                     MS. KINAHAN:           We did -- what was above
10      that threshold criteria was just above, was the
11      scenario where a child would be playing in the
12      seeps.       So, be very direct contact.                   It's very
13      conservative.
14                    MR. BLAKE:          Right.       Little water on your
15      hand from the paddle will not do it?
16                    MS. VAUGHAN:           It's really not.
17                    MR. BLAKE:          You are not concerned with
18      human contact with the water to the extent
19      its' --
20                    MR. ZIMMERMAN:            The surface water, I
21      don't believe, was above anything for the record.
22      It's just the seeps.
23                    MR. BLAKE:          That's the questions we
24      might get.         I want to be able to answer it.
25                    MS. VAUGHAN:           Another thing you saw in


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 112 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 26
1       the remedies is institutional controls.                           You
2       know, what does that term mean?                      That means
3       things like fences.               That means things like well
4       restriction areas, at least temporary.                          It could
5       mean things like a deed restriction if necessary.
6       Don't know that it would be.
7                     If there were concern with that seep
8       area, we can always put up a sign or --
9                     MR. BLAKE:          That seems overkill in your
10      opinion?
11                    MS. VAUGHAN:           I think so.          But if you're
12      saying people are boating, docking like where the
13      seeps is, I mean, we would be happy to go out
14      there with you.
15                    MS. KINAHAN:           Right there that water is
16      pretty shallow in this area.
17                    MR. BLAKE:          But I know that I see
18      hunters out there.              We just don't know if
19      people might --
20                    MAYOR SCHWAGER:             You know, I would say
21      right now probably not.                 But as the corridor
22      develops commercially, once we get water and
23      sewer infrastructure in place, you know, I have
24      talked to the owner of Liberty years ago.                            And I
25      believe once water and sewer, that land is going


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 113 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 27
1       to become very valuable.
2                     It may -- you may want to reserve that
3       right and we may reserve the right to ask you at
4       some later date to maybe keep the world away from
5       that.
6                     MR. DAVILA:          Absolutely.
7                     MAYOR SCHWAGER:             Right now, I don't know
8       that there's much water out there.
9                     MR. DAVILA:          Part of the site there is.
10                    MAYOR SCHWAGER:             I'm sorry?
11                    MR. DAVILA:          Half of the site is to the
12      State of New Jersey.               It's only this area.                It's
13      only this area that is private property.
14                    MAYOR SCHWAGER:             Okay.
15                    MR. DAVILA:          Liberty is leasing this
16      part.      And this part is, you know, what is the
17      Superfund Site.
18                    MAYOR SCHWAGER:             Okay.
19                    MS. VAUGHAN:           So --
20                    MR. BLAKE:          You would never know it was
21      there.
22                    MS. VAUGHAN:           But it's a good point.
23      The State of New Jersey does own that land.
24      We -- they know -- we are in communication with
25      them.


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 114 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 28
1                     MR. BLAKE:          Do they have to sign off
2       then, I assume?
3                     MS. VAUGHAN:           Yes.
4                     MR. BLAKE:          You are comfortable with --
5                     MS. VAUGHAN:           Yes.
6                     MAYOR SCHWAGER:             Okay.
7                     MS. VAUGHAN:           We always have the
8       ability, you know, throughout this process, you
9       know, the community, the public's concerns are
10      always, you know, we take that into account.                              We
11      make adjustments as necessary.                     I know, showing
12      us the master plan earlier.
13                    MAYOR SCHWAGER:             They are really
14      concerned tonight, aren't they?
15                                (Laughter)
16                    MS. VAUGHAN:           But I understand your
17      point, they may become more concerned.
18                    MAYOR SCHWAGER:             In time.        As the
19      Township grows, you know, the concern today is
20      this -- nobody knows is there.                     But 30 years is a
21      long time.
22                    MR. DAVILA:          Yes.
23                    MS. KINAHAN:           Also as part of this
24      remedy, every five years after the remedy is
25      implemented, we do five year reviews where we see


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 115 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 29
1       if the remedy is still protected, if the land use
2       has changed.          There is a process that makes sure
3       that we keep on looking at these sites.
4                     MR. DAVILA:          That particular remedy is
5       more of a source, is the only one which is in
6       private property.              The installation of the
7       barriers and the removal of the sediment is on
8       state protected area.                So once we remove that
9       soil, in the source area, we probably do it
10      firsthand.
11                    MS. VAUGHAN:           They do.        And we put -- we
12      have risk analysis --
13                    MAYOR SCHWAGER:             Especially, when they
14      know it's state owned.                 They are like, well, I
15      own it.
16                    MS. VAUGHAN:           Right.
17                    MAYOR SCHWAGER:             Public Property, I got
18      the right.
19                    MR. BLAKE:          It just might be valuable if
20      somebody went out there and looked at the
21      location where the seep is.                    Could be a hunting
22      stand right there for all we know.
23                    MS. KINAHAN:           We've been out there.
24      There isn't.
25                    MR. BLAKE:          Kids are drawn to water.


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 116 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 30
1       You know this.
2                     MS. VAUGHAN:           Ula and Chuck have both
3       been out there.
4                     MR. BLAKE:          We would be remiss to not
5       raise the concern.              Sounds like a very remote
6       risk, though.
7                     MS. KINAHAN:           It's hard to get there.
8       It's pretty -- there is a lot of vegetation, or
9       at this time of year it is.
10                    MR. DAVILA:          Pretty.        Been in the area.
11                    MS. VAUGHAN:           From, I guess, the water.
12                    MR. DAVILA:          Only really want to kayak
13      there.
14                    MR. BLAKE:          Well, understand that the
15      state boat access point is right at the mouth of
16      that creek.          So when I went out last summer with
17      the gentleman from the Department of
18      Environmental Protection, there was like 40 kids
19      out there.         So, they didn't go up the creek
20      because I knew about this.                   So, I made sure that
21      we didn't lead a voyage of people up there not
22      fully having the benefit of the presentation.
23      People are leading groups out there, so you
24      should be aware of that.
25                    MR. DAVILA:          Okay.


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 117 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 31
1                     MS. KINAHAN:           Thank you.
2                     MR. DAVILA:          We should again go.               We
3       finish, maybe a warning sign should be erected
4       there.
5                     MR. BLAKE:          I don't know if that's what
6       I'm saying.          Just it's awareness for you to take
7       into consideration.
8                     MS. VAUGHAN:           We will revisit it on an
9       ongoing basis.
10                    MR. BLAKE:          The gentleman with the
11      Department was Rick Brown from Coastal Land and
12      Planning.
13                    MR. DAVILA:          Okay.       So then description
14      alternative, pretty much what we just talking
15      about.       Installation of the barriers, removal of
16      the soil at the lagoon, removal of the
17      contaminants sediment, hot spot, remediation of
18      groundwater, and removal of soil and sediment
19      sources and institutional controls will be put in
20      place until remedial actions are met.
21                    Our next steps is to sign the Record of
22      Decision and to prepare remedial design with a
23      detailed pre-design investigation.                        Additional
24      soil and/or sediment excavation beyond that
25      anticipated is necessary, it will be conducted.


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 118 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 32
1       Conduct the remedial action, additional
2       installation of the underground reactive barrier
3       wall may be needed; one or possibly two
4       anticipated.
5                     So, what we are thinking one will be all
6       we need.        But we are just making provisions if
7       necessary.
8                     MR. BLAKE:          You have left that open as
9       an option.
10                    MR. DAVILA:          That is an option.               We are
11      very conservative on our remedial design.
12                    MS. VAUGHAN:           If we didn't leave it as
13      an option and we needed it, we might have to go
14      through this process again.
15                    MR. BLAKE:          The Record Decision?
16                    MR. DAVILA:          As said before, any
17      comments is until September 22.                      And you can
18      address that to Mr. Juan Davila, Remedial Project
19      Manager.        Telephone number and email right on the
20      screen.
21                    MS. ECHOLS:          Do you have any more
22      questions?         No?
23                    MR. DAVILA:          I think you already,
24      already prepared for idea of what is warranted.
25      If you just send an email to me, we will response


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 119 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 33
1       to that, the Record of Decision.
2                     MR. BLAKE:          Communications has been very
3       good from the beginning on this project, and I
4       appreciate it.
5                     MR. DAVILA:          Absolutely.
6                     MR. BLAKE:          Been in touch for a couple
7       years now.         You guys have been very responsive.
8                     MR. DAVILA:          We are trying.
9                     MS. ECHOLS:          We want to thank each and
10      every one of you for coming tonight.                         Thank you
11      so much Woolwich Township for allowing us to have
12      the meeting here.
13                    Public Comment Period closes on
14      September 22, so you have up until then to send
15      in any questions to Juan.                  And we will just close
16      here.      Thank you very much.
17         (Public Meeting adjourned at 7:17 p.m.)
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 120 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 34
1
2
3         C E R T I F I C A T I O N
4
5                  I, hereby certify that the
6     proceedings and evidence noted are
7     contained fully and accurately in the
8     stenographic notes taken by me in the
9     foregoing matter, and that this is a
10    correct transcript of the same.
11
12
13    -----------------------------
14    ANGELA M. KING, RPR
15    Court Reporter - Notary Public
16
17
18                 (The foregoing certification of
19    this transcript does not apply to any
20    reproduction of the same by any means,
21    unless under the direct control and/or
22    supervision of the certifying reporter.)
23
24
25


                                  Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                     (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 121 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  Attachment D

Written Comments

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 122 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

September 20, 2017


Juan E. Davila
Remedial Project Manager
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
290 Broadway, 18th Floor
New York, NY 10007
Email: davila.juan@epa.gov

Comments on Proposed Remedial Action Plan, August 2017 Superfund
Proposed Plan and Supporting Documentation
Matlack, Inc. Superfund Site
Woolwich Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey

As attached, are various comments to the above. We thank you for the opportunity to provide
comments and appreciate USEPA’s decision in making the relevant documents available through
your webpage.

Final Remedial Investigation Report, Matlack Inc. Superfund Site RI/FS
Woolwich Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey, dated June 14, 2017

Within Section 4.3.2, HDR reports a list of analytes collected from site groundwater, however, it
should be noted it does not appear all potential contaminants were evaluated through sampling.
The nature of the site as a former hauler of raw chemicals, including wastes, makes a
comprehensive assessment of potential chemicals disposed of at the site a priority.

No one can say for certainty what raw chemicals and wastes were disposed of at the site, simply
based upon the nature of the business. The former lagoon/site may be considered a former
hazardous waste treatment, storage, and disposal unit/facility, and could be subject to the
provisions of 40 CFR Part 264, Subpart F and Part 265, Subpart F. More of a “shotgun” approach
to potential contaminants should be considered; USEPA is asked the relevance of the Appendix
IX list in 40 CFR 264 and 270) for example this type of site, but collect a very limited number of
samples to keep costs at a minimum.
USEPA is asked to either provide such evidence a unique, comprehensive assessment was
completed, complete such an assessment using the Appendix IX List, or conduct supplemental
groundwater sampling for additional potential contaminants such as, but not limited to, the
following:

      Glycols, based on transport history in Section 1.4;
      Alcohols, based on transport history in Section 1.4;
      Dissolved Petroleum and TOC, based on transport history in Section 1.4 and documented
       UST releases (Section 1.5);
      Acid Extractables, based on transport history in Section 1.4;
      Hexavalent Chromium; and
      Fluorotelomers. Within the past decade, these chemicals have proved to a specific
       contaminant of concern in southern New Jersey, due to their extensive releases at two (2)
       primary facilities; in Deepwater, NJ (Dupont), and Thorofare NJ (Elf Atochem/Ausimont
       and Solvay). It has been confirmed billions of gallons of groundwater is contaminated, yet

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 123 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                              Mr. Juan E. Davila
                                                                             September 20, 2017
                                                                                         Page 2


       all potential sources remain unidentified. There exist the potential Matlack may have
       hauled raw material/wastes to/from these, and other unknown facilities, thus it would be
       prudent to collect a few representative samples from shallow wells to confirm
       fluorotelomers are not present in groundwater.

The requested sampling is sound science through elimination of data gaps, not technically difficult
(as the monitoring wells/collection points already exist), not cost prohibitive (as only a few key
wells could be targeted), and can be completed in a timely manner (during the next mandatory
sampling event). Thus, USEPA has no technical, scientific, or cost justification to deny such a
request, given the unique nature of past site operations.

The additional sampling data would serve to reinforce USEPA’s own confidence in fully satisfying
the respective ARARs regarding reduction/elimination of human health risks associated with the
site, by identifying all contaminants in exceedance of the agreed-upon health standards, prior to
the remedial phase, to ensure the chosen remedial action has the highest potential chance of
success, with the minimal amount of associated funds incurred. USEPA can only strengthen its
future position by addressing these data gaps presently, its concurrence additional sampling is
warranted would reduce the potential of reopeners and give all interested parties a better feeling
USEPA is aware of all issues at the site and has developed a remedial alternative to that effect.

Finally, NJDEP could eventually require supplemental sampling parameters as part of its
requirements for completion of a future Classification Exception Area (CEA) for the groundwater
plumes. As you may be aware, NJDEP requires all contaminants present above their respective
GWQS be identified when instituting and tracking a long-term CEA. Thus, NJDEP may require
the supplemental parameters if they feel the current data does not represent all potential
contaminants in site groundwater.

Additional comments to the June 14, 2017 Final RI Report area as follows:

      Section 3.4.1, surficial geology is described as the Pennsauken Formation, however other
       references exist to suggest the initial underlying geology consists of the Englishtown
       Formation/Aquifer. USEPA is asked to clarify this position by comparing the site geologic
       logs with the descriptions of said geologic formations.
      Table 4-2B, page 2 of 9, USEPA is asked to explain the anomalously high total and
       dissolved iron concentrations in the April and July 2016 sampling events in well MW-2B.
       Could there be an issue with the construction of well MW-2B?
      Page 120 of 135, the current map display of total VOCs cannot be easily used in evaluating
       individual contaminant transport, it is requested USEPA consider preparing separate
       isoconcentration maps for the primary contaminants, such as PCE, TCE, Benzene, and
       4-Chloroaniline to better assist in identifying potential contaminant hot-spots, to better
       understand groundwater flow direction, if the current well monitoring network sufficient,
       etc..
      In reviewing the most recent groundwater sampling results (2016), there appears to be
       marked decreases in concentrations over the limited sampling timeframe. Groundwater
       contaminant degradation over time appears to be rapidly occurring, to the point active
       groundwater remediation in the form of PRBs, may not even be necessary. This
       observation is even highlighted by the fact USEPA is planning to excavate soil hot-spots,
       thereby further reducing/eliminating soil contaminants leaching potential to groundwater,

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 124 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                             Mr. Juan E. Davila
                                                                            September 20, 2017
                                                                                        Page 3


       ultimately improving groundwater quality over time. USEPA should allot some time to
       allow soils remediation to improve groundwater quality, perhaps during this period USEPA
       could complete the required bench scale testing as described in the respective Final
       Feasibility Report, dated August 2017.
      Several key sampling event results for PCE, TCE, Benzene and 4-Chloroaniline show an
       unacceptable variability between events. For example 4-Chloroaniline reportedly
       “decreased” in well MW-13 from 740 ppb (April 2016) to non-detect in the August 2016
       event. However, 4-Chloroaniline “increased” in well MW-06 from 39 ppb (April 2016) to
       6,900 in the July 2016 event. These results are concerning as they are not reproducible,
       and may suggest inconsistencies in sampling protocols, thus said results cannot be relied
       upon for critical decision making. Even dramatic decreases, like that observed above,
       could represent sampling variability, or significant improvements in groundwater quality,
       the latter only supporting the position active groundwater remediation may not even be
       necessary. At a minimum, each of these variability issues should be identified (where
       results differ by more than +/- 10%) and re-sampling should be considered.

Final Feasibility Study Report, Matlack Inc. Superfund Site
Woolwich Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey, dated August 2017

Superfund Proposed Plan for the Matlack Site, August 2017

The current chosen approach of Alternative 2 for groundwater (installation of permeable reactive
barriers, or PRBs) may be premature. In fact, PRBs are passive in nature, relying on
contaminants to migrate and eventually come in contact with the barrier, said contaminant
movement being driven primarily by groundwater velocity and not considering contaminant
adsorption to soils. USEPA is asked to seriously consider the timeframe it may take for all
contaminants to eventually migrate to the PRBs, this could be on the order in excess of 100 years
given the above; there simply is no method to determine how long it will take for the majority of
contaminants to migrate to the PRBs. Additionally, whatever chemical is chosen to reside in the
PRBs could be expended before all targeted contaminants even have a chance to reach the
PRBs, as the reactive chemical installed (carbon, ZV-iron, etc..) may react out with undesirables
such as naturally occurring organic carbons and acids, biodegradation byproducts, metals, etc…

      Page 85 of 119, USEPA is asked to reconsider the potential application of in-situ chemical
       injection (ISCO), relying on the critical assumption chemical reagents would need to be
       injected at pre-determined intervals throughout the entire areal extent of the VOC/SVOC
       plumes. This may not be the case, ISCO may only be required at yet to be determined
       groundwater hot-spots; once these are remediated long-term monitored natural
       attenuation may be appropriate for any residual contaminants. This observation is
       highlighted by the lack of contaminant-specific isocontour maps, which would aid in
       decision making.
      Section 8.1.3 describes the timeframe for remediation using PRBs to be approximately 30
       years. As stated above, this may be considered a minimum timeframe, but more
       importantly, Alternative 3, (Air Sparging & SVE) as described in Section 8.1.4 cites a
       remedial timeframe of approximately 1 year. Both these timeframes are repeated in the
       August 2017 Superfund Proposed Plan, regardless, Alternative 2 may take, conservatively
       20 times longer to implement, and is still subject to the limitation described above. It is
       acknowledged bench scale testing may be necessary to address 4-Chloroaniline, but

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 125 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                    Mr. Juan E. Davila
                                                                                   September 20, 2017
                                                                                               Page 4


       bench scale is common (see Table 5 and below, USEPA will already require bench scale
       tests for the PRB option) and can be completed at low cost, the priority should be the
       selection of the most effective and timely remedial action so USEPA has the greatest
       chance of success with the first, and presumably the only remedial action needed.

In summary, the choice of Alternative 2 (PRBs) is concerning when given the virtual 100% chance
of success of implementing Alternative 3 (Air Sparging & SVE), which is a proven technology
used successfully at thousands of sites and in many different geologic conditions. The potential
application of groundwater hot-spot remediation via ISCO, the lack of evidence a funnel-gate or
pass-through PRB system will capture all contaminated groundwater, and the potential active
groundwater remediation may not be necessary once soils hot spots are remediated should all
be carefully considered by USEPA before Alternative 2 is implemented. Finally, Section 6.1.5.2
states:

       “The reactions within the PRB are dependent on pH, redox potential, contaminant concentrations,
       and other factors. The hydrogeology must be conductive (relatively shallow depth to groundwater
       and to an underlying hydraulic barrier) and a relatively shallow confining layer is needed to “key”
       into and thereby contain the system.”

The PRB approach will require extensive bench scale testing to determine if full-scale application
is feasible. Thus, USEPA should acknowledge the limitations of PRBs and agree the ultimate
remedial action will be chosen based upon the outcomes of the various bench scale test results
proposed.

We thank USEPA for the opportunity to comment, and are available to answer any questions
regarding the enclosed.



Ernie Risha
112 Kirschling Drive
Woolwich, Twp. NJ
609-206-9353


REFERENCES


Voronin, L.M., Documentation of Revisions to the Regional Aquifer System Analysis Model of the
New Jersey Coastal Plain. U.S. Geological Survey, Water-Resources Investigations Report 03-
4268.

Sugarman, P.J., Sanford, S.D. Bedrock Geology of the Bridgeport and Marcus Hook
Quadrangles, Gloucester and Salem Counties, New Jersey. 2006.

Owens, J.P., Sugarman, P.J. and others. Bedrock Geologic Map of Central and Southern New
Jersey, IMAP 2540-B, 1999.
