LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: RECORD OF DECISION FOR OU2 FOR THE MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SITE
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/541229
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: f9930146a1601a200ac9f727cd1e8e50ce997851cdb0f229c6ef8382533cb9c5
Source PDF pages: 162
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                           Record of Decision

                   Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site

Operable Unit 2 – Contaminated Groundwater and Residual Soil Contamination

                             Byram Township
                        Sussex County, New Jersey




              United States Environmental Protection Agency

                                Region 2

                             September 2019



                                                                      *541229*
                                                                             541229

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               DECLARATION STATEMENT
                                  RECORD OF DECISION


SITE NAME AND LOCATION

Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site (NJN000206345), Byram Township, Sussex County, New
Jersey. Operable Unit 2 – Contaminated Groundwater and Residual Soil Contamination.

STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

This decision document presents the remedy selected to address site-wide contaminated
groundwater and residual soil contamination at the Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site (“site”)
in Byram Township, Sussex County, New Jersey. The selected remedy was chosen in accordance
with the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, as
amended (“CERCLA”), and to the extent practicable, the National Oil and Hazardous Substances
Pollution Contingency Plan (“NCP”). This decision is based on the Administrative Record
established for this site.

The State of New Jersey conditionally concurs with the selected remedy. The State concurs on
all aspects of the remedy except for MNA. This portion of the remedy will be further reviewed
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (“NJDEP”) upon collection of
additional data.

ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE

The remedy selected in this Record of Decision (“ROD”) is necessary to protect public health or
the environment from actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from the site into the
environment.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY

The selected remedy described in this document represents the second of two planned remedial
phases, or operable units (“OUs”), for the site. OU1 addresses site-impacted potable wells and
was addressed in the 2017 OU1 ROD. The OU1 remedy is currently in the design phase. OU2
addresses site-wide contaminated groundwater and residual soil contamination.

The major components of the OU2 selected remedy include:

   •   Capping and vapor extraction in the source area vadose zone,
   •   Treatment of groundwater contamination in the source area saturated zone through
       amendment injection,
   •   Monitored Natural Attenuation (“MNA”) in the distal groundwater plume,
   •   Excavation and off-site disposal of contaminated soil in the former dump areas,
   •   Excavation of residual soil contamination and restoration of the affected residential area,


                                                i

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   •   Installation of additional and maintenance of existing vapor intrusion mitigation systems
       as needed, and
   •   Institutional controls for capped areas and to restrict the installation of wells in the
       contaminated plume.

DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

Part 1: Statutory Requirements

The selected remedy is protective of human health and the environment, complies with federal
and state requirements that are applicable or relevant and appropriate to the remedial actions, is
cost effective, and utilizes permanent solutions and treatment technologies to the maximum
extent practicable.

Part 2: Statutory Preference for Treatment

Treatment is a principal element in the OU2 selected remedy.

Part 3: Five-Year Review Requirements

This remedy will not result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants remaining at the
site above levels that would allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure. However,
because it may take more than five years to attain the remediation goals, pursuant to Section
121(c) of CERCLA, policy reviews will be conducted no less often than once every five years
after the completion of construction to ensure that the remedy is, or will be, protective of human
health and environment.

ROD DATA CERTIFICATION CHECKLIST

The following information is included in the Decision Summary section of this ROD. Additional
information can be found in the Administrative Record for the OU2 ROD.

       •   Chemicals of concern and their respective concentrations may be found in the “Site
           Characteristics” section.

       •   Baseline risk represented by the chemicals of concern may be found in the “Summary
           of Site Risks” section.

       •   A discussion of remediation goals may be found in the “Remedial Action Objectives”
           section.

       •   A discussion of source materials constituting principal threats may be found in the
           “Principal Threat Waste” section.

       •   Current and reasonably anticipated future land use assumptions are discussed in the
           “Current and Potential Future Site and Resource Uses” section.

                                                 ii

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      •   Estimated capital, annual operation and maintenance ("O&M") and total present
          worth costs are discussed in the "Description of Alternatives" section.

      •   Key factors that led to selecting the remedy (i.e., how the selected remedy provides
          the best balance of tradeoffs with respect to the balancing and modifying criteria,
          highlighting criteria key to the decision) may be found in the "Comparative Analysis
          of Alternatives" and "Statutory Determinations" sections.




   a-
Pat Evangelista, Acting Director
Superfund and Emergency Management Division
EPA - Region 2
                                                          Date   I     7




                                              1ll

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                        DECISION SUMMARY

                   Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site
Operable Unit 2: Contaminated Groundwater and Residual Soil Contamination

                            Byram Township
                       Sussex County, New Jersey




              United States Environmental Protection Agency

                                Region 2

                            September 2019



                                   1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                PAGE
DECLARATION STATEMENT .................................................................................................... i
SITE NAME AND LOCATION ..................................................................................................... i
STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE ................................................................................... i
ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE........................................................................................................ i
DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY .......................................................................... i
DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS ......................................................... ii
ROD DATA CERTIFICATION CHECKLIST .............................................................................. ii
DECISION SUMMARY ................................................................................................................ 1
SITE NAME, LOCATION, AND DESCRIPTION ....................................................................... 3
SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES .............................................................. 3
HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION ................................................................. 5
SCOPE AND ROLE OF THIS OPERABLE UNIT ....................................................................... 5
SITE CHARACTERISTICS........................................................................................................... 5
NATURE AND EXTENT OF CONTAMINATION ..................................................................... 6
CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES ............................... 11
SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS ...................................................................................................... 12
REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES ......................................................................................... 17
DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES .................................................................. 18
Five-Year Reviews........................................................................................................................ 19
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES ................................................................ 24
PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE .................................................................................................. 30
SELECTED REMEDY ................................................................................................................. 30
STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS .......................................................................................... 32
DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES ............................................................... 33
APPENDIX I - Tables & Figures .....................................................................................................
APPENDIX II - Administrative Record ...........................................................................................
APPENDIX III - State Letter ............................................................................................................
APPENDIX IV - Responsiveness Summary ....................................................................................
Attachment A ....................................................................................................................................
Attachment B ....................................................................................................................................
Attachment C ....................................................................................................................................
Attachment D ....................................................................................................................................


                                                                        2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE NAME, LOCATION, AND DESCRIPTION

The Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site (“site”) is located in a residential neighborhood in
Byram Township, Sussex County, New Jersey. The site consists of former waste disposal
trenches in a wooded area and groundwater contamination in the area. Contamination, primarily
trichloroethylene (“TCE”), from the former waste disposal trenches has migrated into the
groundwater to nearby residential potable wells. The former waste disposal trenches are bounded
to the north, south, and west by upland woods, and by a former rail line to the east (Figure 1).
The remedy selected for OU1 addresses impacted residential potable wells. The OU2 remedy,
described herein, addresses the site-wide contaminated groundwater, residual soil contamination
and related vapor intrusion at the site.

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) is the lead agency, and the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection (“NJDEP”) is the support agency for this site.

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES

EPA believes that the site was used as a dump for septic and other industrial wastes from the late
1950s through at least the early 1970s. In May 2005, the Sussex County Department of Health
and Human Services and NJDEP became aware of TCE contamination in residential potable
wells serving homes on Brookwood and Ross Roads and notified residents in the neighborhood
of the contamination. Point-of Entry-Treatment Systems (“POETS”) were installed, primarily by
NJDEP, at impacted residential properties to provide safe drinking water. By June 2005, 13
residential potable wells were known to be contaminated with TCE at concentrations in excess of
New Jersey Ground Water Quality Standards (“NJ GWQS”) and additional POETS were
installed. Currently, 19 homes are equipped with POETS, installed by NJDEP or by
homeowners, to remove the contamination and to ensure potable water for area residents.

In addition, from 2006 to 2008, NJDEP collected indoor air and sub-slab soil gas samples from
homes throughout the affected neighborhood. NJDEP installed vapor intrusion mitigation
systems or modified existing radon mitigation systems in five of the affected homes to prevent
the migration of harmful vapors associated with site-related contamination from entering the
homes.

NJDEP first identified the former waste disposal trenches at the site in 2009 during an effort to
determine the source of the contamination detected in the nearby residential potable wells along
Brookwood and Ross Roads. On October 16, 2009, NJDEP submitted a request to the EPA
Region 2 to evaluate the site for a removal action under the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, as amended (“CERCLA”). Subsequent
reconnaissance efforts conducted by NJDEP, EPA, and contractors in December 2009 and May
2010 indicated disposal trenches that were designated Dump Areas A, B, C, D and E (Figure 2).
EPA collected soil and sludge-like-waste, groundwater (on-site monitoring wells), and
residential well samples from February to May 2010. EPA also installed a background
monitoring well, MW-3, south of NJDEP’s previously installed monitoring wells, MW-1 and
MW-2 (Figure 3). Concurrently, in February and March of 2010, EPA collected well water
samples from 21 residences along Brookwood Road and Ross Road and from the Byram

                                                3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Intermediate School wells. The school well samples did not exceed Maximum Contaminant
Levels (“MCLs”), state and federal drinking water standards, for site-related contaminants.

Based on NJDEP and EPA’s sampling from 2009 to 2010, the groundwater plume was found to
begin at the former waste disposal trenches and extend downgradient toward the Brookwood
Road and Ross Road residential area. The contaminated waste and soil that was present within
the trench areas was determined to be a source of TCE to the underlying aquifer and presented a
threat to the public via ingestion of groundwater. After performing a Removal Site Evaluation ,
EPA concluded that a CERCLA removal action was warranted to address the threats posed by
the former waste disposal areas (i.e., trenches) at the site.

Removal Action

In March 2011, based on the impacted disposal and residential areas outlined above, the site was
added to the National Priorities List (“NPL”). On September 29, 2011, an Action Memorandum
was approved by EPA for the excavation and off-site disposal of TCE-contaminated soil at the
site. From February 21 to May 30, 2012, EPA completed excavation activities to remove soil
contamination from Dump Areas A, B, C, D and E. Approximately 11,170 tons of non-
hazardous soil and debris and 383 tons of hazardous soil were removed from the site and
transported to approved off-site disposal facilities. The removal action was completed on July
23, 2012. The contaminated waste disposal trenches were excavated to bedrock and re-graded
and restored to match the former topography.

Remedial Investigations

From August 2013 to December 2015, EPA performed the first phase of remedial investigation
(“RI”) activities at the site. Ten multilevel system (“MLS”) groundwater wells and eleven
conventional (screened or open-hole) groundwater wells were installed. Wells in the shallow and
deep groundwater aquifer were sampled between March 2014 and December 2015. During this
phase EPA also collected overburden soil samples, subsurface soil samples, rock core samples,
groundwater samples, soil gas and indoor air samples. Samples were taken from both the former
dump area and the downgradient residential neighborhood.

A second phase of RI was performed between 2017 and 2018. Additional groundwater
monitoring wells were installed at the site including three MLS wells and two conventional
wells. This phase also included surface water sampling, sediment sampling, soil sampling, and
three rounds of groundwater sampling. A detailed description of both phases of the investigation
is included in the 2019 RI Report.

Enforcement Activities

Currently, the properties containing the former waste disposal trenches are owned by two parties:
the estate of Anna McConnell (who, along with her husband Dennis J. McConnell owned the site
when it was in operation) and the Hopatcong Land Development Company, Inc., which
purchased part of the site from the McConnells in 1990. EPA has issued Notices of Potential
Liability pursuant to Section 107(a) of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. Section 9601(a), to Hopatcong Land

                                               4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Development, Inc. in October 2014 and to the Estate of Anna McConnell in July 2015. At
present, EPA is continuing its search for potentially responsible parties.

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

EPA has worked closely with local residents, public officials, and other interested members of
the community since NJDEP requested assistance with the site in 2009. At the completion of the
Feasibility Study (“FS”) for OU2, EPA prepared a Proposed Remedial Action Plan (“Proposed
Plan”) presenting remedial alternatives as well as EPA’s preferred remedy for the contaminated
groundwater and residual soil contamination. The Proposed Plan and supporting documentation
for OU2 were released to the public for comment on July 15, 2019. The Proposed Plan and index
for the Administrative Record were made available to the public online, and the Administrative
Record files were made available at the EPA Administrative Record File Room, 290 Broadway,
18th Floor, New York, New York and the Sussex County Library Louise Childs Branch, 21 Sparta
Road, Stanhope, New Jersey.

On July 15, 2019, EPA published a Public Notice in the NJ Herald newspaper that provided
information about the public comment period, the public meeting for the Proposed Plan, and the
availability of the Administrative Record for the OU2 Proposed Plan. EPA also published a press
release on July 15, 2019, to announce the release of the Proposed Plan. The public comment
period closed on August 13, 2019.

A public meeting was held on July 23, 2019, at the Byram Township Municipal Building, 10
Mansfield Drive, Sparta, New Jersey. The purpose of this meeting was to inform residents, local
officials, and interested members of the public about the Superfund process, present details about
the Proposed Plan, and to take comments and respond to questions from area residents and other
interested parties on the Proposed Plan. Responses to the comments received at the public
meeting, and in writing during the public comment period, are included in the Responsiveness
Summary, attached as Appendix IV to this ROD.

SCOPE AND ROLE OF THIS OPERABLE UNIT

The selected remedy described in this document represents the second of two planned remedial
phases, or operable units (“OUs”), for the site. The scope of the response action for OU2 is to
address human health risks associated with contaminants above remediation goals (“RGs”) in
contaminated groundwater and residual soil contamination at the site.

OU1 addresses potable wells at residential properties downgradient of the former waste disposal
trenches that are known to be impacted (Figure 4) by site-related contaminated groundwater
plume. The OU1 ROD was issued by EPA in September 2017, and the remedy is currently in the
design phase.

SITE CHARACTERISTICS

The site is bordered to the east by a steep, narrow valley where an abandoned railroad bed, a bike
trail and a waterway, Cowboy Creek, are located. Cowboy Creek flows north to Lubbers Run

                                                5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

and the Musconetcong River. Both Lubbers Run and the Musconetcong River are used for
recreation, including fishing, boating, and hiking. Information obtained from the New Jersey
Division of Fish and Wildlife indicates that portions of the Musconetcong River are fished for
human consumption. Segments of the Musconetcong River downstream of the site are federally
designated as a Wild and Scenic River. The groundwater at the site is classified as a NJDEP
Class II-A aquifer as described in N.J.A.C. 7:9C Ground Water Quality Standards.

The geology along the top and flanks of the ridge at the site consists of a thin (five feet or less)
surficial layer of unconsolidated soil (overburden) overlying bedrock. The upper five to 10 feet
of the bedrock is extremely weathered and the deeper bedrock is consolidated, fractured
metamorphic and igneous rock (gneiss and pyroxene syenite) with low primary porosity, and,
thus, a low potential for diffusion of contaminants into the rock matrix. The overburden is
thicker in the residential area below the ridge with a maximum thickness of 40 feet. The bedrock
underlying the overburden in this area is also fractured igneous and metamorphic rock (gneiss
and pyroxene syenite). Bedrock outcrops are located across the site, and the depth to bedrock
throughout the site ranges from near-surface to approximately 25 feet below ground surface (feet
bgs). In the residential area north of the site, the bedrock elevation drops almost 300 feet from
the ridge north toward Cowboy Creek. Along the ridge, the overburden and the shallow bedrock
is mostly unsaturated, with the depth to groundwater approximately 60 to 80 ft bgs. In the
residential area west and north of the site, the depth to groundwater ranges from approximately
12.5 ft bgs near the ridge to 15.5 ft bgs toward the west northwest.

Groundwater flow occurs primarily in the weathered shallow bedrock and through
interconnected fractures in the deeper consolidated bedrock aquifer. Groundwater moves from
the higher-elevation former dump areas to the north-northwest and discharges to surficial seeps
and the overburden in the lower areas or flows deeper into the bedrock system. Shallow
groundwater may discharge from seeps in the exposed bedrock face along the downward slope
toward the northeast. Groundwater at intermediate depths may discharge in seeps further
downgradient or into the wetland area. Bedrock groundwater continues to flow towards the
northwest as the fracture network becomes more confined. The hydraulic conductivity of the
bedrock measured at the site ranges from less than 0.001 feet/day to 23 feet/day (or a
transmissivity of 345 square feet/day).

At the site, contamination from the former waste disposal trenches entered groundwater through
the bedrock. Based on the topography and the detections of volatile organic compounds
(“VOCs”) in the residential potable wells, it is likely that shallow groundwater flows beneath
Former Dump Area A, which lies on the west side of the ridge, to the west-northwest toward the
Brookwood and Ross Roads neighborhood.

Nature and Extent of Contamination

Source Area

Dump Area A consisted of two trenches located on a ridgeline that trends southwest to northeast,
directly upslope of and overlooking the Brookwood and Ross Roads neighborhood to the west,
while Dump Areas B, C, D, and E were situated on the east side of the ridge. Dump Area A

                                                 6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

consisted of a lower trench, approximately 120 feet long and 10 feet wide, and an upper trench,
approximately the same length as the lower trench. On the east side of the ridge, Dump Area B
consisted of a single trench approximately 132 feet long and 15 feet wide. Dump Area C
consisted of an open, roughly circular patch of disturbed vegetation approximately 140 feet in
diameter adjacent to Dump Area B. Dump Area D consisted of four trenches (designated as
Trenches 1 - 4). Dump Area E, first observed during the May 2010 reconnaissance, was found to
consist of four parallel mounds, which are likely to be small berms surrounding the Dump Area
D trenches.

The waste disposal trenches consisted of contaminated soil and sludge-like-waste from unknown
origins. Analytical results of soil and waste samples collected during the waste-source-
delineation phase indicated the presence of VOCs, such as TCE, cis-1,2-dichloroethylene (cis-
1,2-DCE), benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene, and xylene (BTEX) compounds, as well as various
chlorinated benzene compounds throughout the former waste disposal trenches. Polychlorinated
biphenyls (“PCBs”) were detected in composite samples collected from the former Dump Area
A lower trench, Dump Area B, and Dump Area D, trenches 1 and 2.

Although former Dump Area C was observed to be littered with tires and miscellaneous trash,
and was considered an additional area of concern, no evidence was found of the same type and
method of waste deposition as the other disposal trenches (i.e., excavated trenches and sludge-
like-waste material). Contaminants were not detected in the former Dump Area D, Trench 4.

The 2012 EPA removal action included excavating Dump Areas A, B, D, and E containing waste
and contaminated soil to bedrock.

Source Area Groundwater

Groundwater was sampled by the EPA in 2014, 2017, and 2018. The highest concentrations of
contaminants in groundwater at the site are seen in the shallow bedrock aquifer directly beneath
the former dump areas, particularly Dump Areas A and D. The areas beneath Dump Areas A and
D will be referred to as the source area for the purposes of this remedy.

Because of the complex fracture network in bedrock, contamination may be present in
discontinuous fractures potentially as dense non-aqueous phase liquid (“DNAPL”)1 both in the
vadose and saturated portions of the bedrock and may be sorbed to soil that has infilled these
fractures. Contamination trapped in fractures can act as a source over time due to the flushing
action of groundwater table fluctuations or rainwater infiltration.

In April and August 2014, bedrock cores were collected in areas with the highest contaminant
concentrations and analyzed to determine if contaminant mass has diffused into the bedrock
matrix. The results indicate that the concentrations in the bedrock matrix are low and that any
minor contaminant mass in the bedrock matrix does not appear to provide a source of

1
 A dense non-aqueous phase liquid or DNAPL is a denser-than-water liquid that is immiscible in or does not
dissolve in water readily.

                                                        7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

contamination to groundwater. During the rock core sampling and analysis, the full length of each
core was visually observed for the presence of DNAPL. DNAPL was identified within a rubble
zone at approximately 68 ft bgs in the upper trench of Dump Area A (CB-3).

Contaminants present in the dissolved phase in the groundwater at the site consist primarily of
TCE and cis-1,2-DCE. The distribution of cis-1,2-DCE is similar to that of TCE; however, cis-
1,2-DCE was observed at concentrations largely below the state and federal drinking water
standards of 70 µg/L. The highest TCE concentrations underlying the former dump areas in the
shallow bedrock (approximately 65–80 ft bgs) are 320 µg/L on the ridge and 130 µg/L in the
deepest bedrock monitoring well port (approximately 460–475 ft bgs).

Other VOCs detected at elevated concentrations in groundwater include 1,1,1-TCA, 1,1-DCA, and
chlorobenzene. 1,4-dioxane is widespread and was detected in 36 of 42 groundwater samples
during the third RI sampling event. Concentrations of 1,4 dioxane are generally below standards,
with a maximum recorded concentration of 7.3 µg/L, exceeding NJ GWQS of 0.4 µg/L. Lead,
which is present in shallow soil, exceeded NJ GWQS of 5 µg/L in groundwater in two of four
samples in the third sampling event, with a maximum concentration of 9.5 µg/L. Overall
groundwater metals data do not suggest significant impacts related to site dumping, but rather
natural background conditions.

Groundwater Downgradient of Source Area

Groundwater flow through the bedrock is mostly restricted to connected, water-bearing fractures
and conductive zones. Geophysical studies of monitoring well boreholes were used to evaluate
these bedrock fractures. Contaminated groundwater in bedrock appears to migrate laterally into
overburden north and northwest of the former source area as the bedrock surface drops off along
Brookwood Road.

Previous investigations included installation of overburden groundwater monitoring wells and
multi-level bedrock groundwater monitoring wells to determine the nature and extent of
groundwater contamination. EPA sampled twenty-four monitoring wells in the shallow and deep
groundwater aquifer between March 2014 and December 2015 (Figure 4). Sampling during this
time period found that TCE levels exceeded the NJ GWQS of 1 μg/L in six out of 13 shallow
groundwater samples and 62 out of 94 deep groundwater samples (Figure 6). Concentrations of
TCE ranged between 0.11 μg/L and 320 μg/L. Similar trends were found in the 2017 and 2018
sampling rounds with TCE ranging between 0.24J μg/L and 190 μg/L (Figure 5).

Contaminant concentrations decrease laterally and with depth away from the source areas. Deep
bedrock monitoring wells in the distal plume, extending from the residential area into Cowboy
Creek, showed TCE concentrations ranging from non-detect to 57 μg/L (Figure 7). TCE
concentrations in the deepest bedrock monitoring well ports along Brookwood Road
(approximately 270 to 296 ft. bgs) ranged between 0.33J μg/L and 46 μg/L during the 2017 and
2018 sampling rounds. Cis‐1,2‐DCE was detected in a majority of groundwater samples
collected in November 2017 and January 2018 with concentrations ranging from 0.14J to 240
μg/L. Only two samples in each sampling event exceeded the RI screening criteria of 70 μg/L.
Vinyl chloride was detected as high as 44 μg/L, with 8 out of 89 groundwater samples exceeding

                                               8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

the RI screening criteria of 1 μg/L in the 2017 sampling and 6 out of 78 groundwater samples
exceeding criteria in the January 2018 sampling event.

Natural Attenuation

Data collected at the site indicate natural attenuation mechanisms are actively attenuating
groundwater contaminant concentrations. Evidence for natural attenuation at the site includes:

1) a downward concentration trend was already occuring in residential wells prior to the 2012
excavation;

2) Compound Specific Isotope Analysis (“CSIA”) indicates that degradation is occurring in
groundwater between the shallowest ports of the source zone wells (e.g., where mass may be
discharging to groundwater from the vadose zone source) and the downgradient wells;

3) microbiology sample results indicate that the principal zone of reactivity for destructive
attenuation appears to be under and directly adjacent to the former dump areas;

4) CSIA and microbial data indicate that both microbial reductive dehalogenation and aerobic
cometabolic degradation of TCE are biodegradation mechanisms actively attenuating groundwater
concentrations at the site; and

5) dilution and dispersion are also actively attenuating groundwater concentrations at the site as
evidenced by declining concentrations from the ridge to the distal plume.

Residential Wells and Vapor Intrusion

Based on sampling conducted by residents and NJDEP, 19 residential wells in the site area were
found to contain TCE concentrations above the NJ GWQS of 1 µg/L. EPA performed several
rounds of residential well sampling as part of the RI. NJDEP continues to monitor and maintain
eligible POETS at impacted residences under the state Spill Compensation Fund. The ROD for
OU1 issued by EPA in 2017 selected a remedy that calls for construction of a waterline and
connection to a water supply system to provide a source of potable water to residences with wells
impacted by site-related contamination. Design of this remedy is currently ongoing.

Vapors migrating from the groundwater plume extending beneath the residential area have the
potential to act as a source of indoor air contamination (Figure 8). After initial sampling completed
by NJDEP in 2006, five vapor mitigation systems were installed at impacted properties. Multiple
rounds of sub-slab and indoor air samples collected at properties in the vicinity of impacted
properties (from 2011 to 2019) have been analyzed since then. Recent sub‐slab and indoor air
concentrations at residential properties indicate that installed mitigation systems are effective.

Soil

The highest concentrations of contaminants in soil were found to be confined to the upper two
feet in an area north of Dump Area A, then continuing downslope into the rear (southern) portion

                                                 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

of a residential property on Brookwood Road. In the residential area PCBs were detected in soil
in 20 out of 38 samples at a maximum concentration of 2.8 milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg)
(Aroclor 1254) and detected at 23 out of 92 samples in the former dump areas at a maximum of
2.4 mg/kg (Aroclor 1260). The EPA residential soil screening level for both Aroclor 1254 and
Aroclor 1260 is 0.24 mg/kg. Lead was detected at a maximum of 1,460 mg/kg, exceeding the
state residential soil standard of 400 mg/kg in 7 out of 38 samples in the residential area and 1
out of 92 samples in the former dump areas. Similar to lead, chromium detections in soil are
found primarily in surface soils; however, they are generally found at concentrations similar to
background. Further, previous groundwater and pre-excavation waste sampling concluded
chromium was in the trivalent form in both media. Other metals detected in soil include arsenic
and antimony, both of which were limited to one exceedance of screening criteria which was co-
located with the maximum lead exceedance.

Polyaromatic hydrocarbons (“PAHs”) were detected above screening criteria in 2 out of 82
samples in the 2014 investigation and in 1 out of 16 samples in the 2017 investigation. PAH data
suggest only minor isolated impacts related to site dumping. The highest concentrations of PAHs
found in the former railroad bed area are likely related to the rail ties or other processes that left
behind these materials and are not site‐related. Sampling of former dump area soils revealed
limited detections of VOCs above applicable screening criteria. 1,4-Dichlorobenzene was
detected in Dump Area D subsurface soil above screening criteria at one location. Sampling of
the residential area soil did not reveal any VOCs above applicable screening criteria. Pesticides
did not exceed screening criteria in site soils.

The slope where the highest concentrations of PCBs are found is generally steep and only has a
few feet of overburden soil above the bedrock surface. The extent of contamination is confined to
the slope with samples collected in a residential backyard. Samples from the adjacent properties
were below the EPA residential soil screening level. This data and topography suggest PCB‐
containing materials were dumped in or around Dump Area A and have migrated via surficial
runoff or movement of fine-grained materials down the steep slope and onto a portion of the
residential property. Some very limited areas of soils with elevated PCBs were found in former
Dump Areas B and E. PCBs were not detected in other site media including sediments, surface
water, or groundwater during the 2014 or 2017 investigations.

Sediment and Surface Water Contamination

The sediment samples collected from Cowboy Creek, residential catch basins and a drainage
swale. Lead and chromium data do not suggest significant impacts related to site dumping, but
rather natural background conditions. In sediment, lead and chromium were detected at
concentrations up to 76.8 mg/kg and 16.1 mg/kg, respectively, but all detections were below levels
naturally found in the area.

PAHs exceeded the sediment screening criteria and background in one sediment sample from the
drainage swale adjacent to a former railroad bed. However, the PAH concentrations observed in
this sample were an order of magnitude higher than those found in site soil, suggesting non-site
related impacts from rail ties or other processes are the sources of PAHs. Three pesticides (gamma-
chlordane, 4,4’-DDE, and 4,4’-DDT) were detected in the same sample, but the low concentration

                                                 10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

suggests the contamination in the sediment sample is likely non-site related. No PCBs were
detected in sediments. Sampling of the residential catch basin sediments did not reveal any VOCs
above applicable screening criteria. No other site-related contaminants were detected in sediment.

In surface water, TCE was detected at 0.15 μg/L at one location in Cowboy Creek (SW‐03), below
the state and federal criteria for surface water quality for fresh water (1 μg/L and 2.5 μg/L
respectively). Other site-related contaminants were similarly detected at low concentrations (1,4-
dioxane at up to 0.12J μg/L).

Several metals were detected above the RI screening criteria in surface water samples. Lead
exceeded screening criteria in surface water at one location and was detected in 3 out of 21
samples. Several metals, including arsenic, manganese, aluminum, and iron, exceeded the
screening criteria in multiple samples, but concentrations were all below the background threshold
values (“BTVs”) calculated based on the background surface water samples collected. Cadmium
was detected in 2 of 21 samples at low levels.

Shallow aquifer seep sampling was also performed in the residential area where seeps had been
observed after large rain events. TCE and cis-1,2-DCE were detected in the results from the
groundwater seep; TCE exceeded NJ GWQS (1 μg/L) and federal MCL (5 μg/L) at a maximum
concentration of 34 μg/L.

Since there is a direct pathway from groundwater to surface water, by remediating the
contaminated groundwater, site-related contamination in surface water (primarily the TCE and
1,4-dioxane from groundwater discharge) are expected to be addressed.

Based on analytical results from the completed investigations chemicals of concern at the site
include PCBs and lead in soil and VOCs in groundwater.

CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES

Land Use

A public pedestrian and bicycle path passes through the site to the east of the former dump areas
and continues along the east side of the Cowboy Creek area. Dirt paths extend from this trail and
continue past the upper dump areas or down into the railroad cut and the whole area appears to
be used intermittently as trails for four-wheel drive vehicles. Currently there is no fencing around
the former dump. The Cowboy Creek area north of the Brookwood Road residences appears to
have some use as a recreation area, as several tree forts or tree stands were observed in the area.

The primary land use downgradient of the former dump areas is residential. It is anticipated that
the future land use for this area will remain consistent with current use. The property containing
the former dump areas is currently zoned as residential, however, because of the geography and
power line, the current and anticipated future use of the property is non-residential. The Cowboy
Creek Area to the northwest of the site is owned by the nearby school and is expected to remain
undeveloped, with some recreational use.



                                                11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Groundwater Uses

Area groundwater is classified by NJDEP as a Class IIA resource; it is a current source of
drinking water, and it is expected to remain a source of drinking water in the future. Properties
with potable wells with sampling results above NJ GWQSs have been referred to NJDEP for
further evaluation and action, which includes confirmation sampling, and the installation and
maintenance of POETS, until EPA has implemented the OU1 remedy which is currently in the
design phase.

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS

As part of the OU2 RIFS, EPA conducted a Human Health Risk Assessment (“HHRA”) and
Ecological Risk Assessment to estimate the current and future effects of contaminants on human
and ecological receptors. A baseline risk assessment is an analysis of the potential adverse
human health and ecological effects of releases of hazardous substances from a site in the
absence of any actions or controls to mitigate such releases, under current and future land and
groundwater uses. It provides the basis for taking action and identifies the contaminants and
exposure pathways that need to be addressed by the remedial action. This section of the ROD
summarizes the results of the baseline human health and ecological risk assessments for the site.

Human Health Risk Assessment

A four-step process is utilized for assessing site-related human health risks for a reasonable
maximum exposure scenario:

   •   Hazard Identification – uses the analytical data collected to identify the contaminants of
       potential concern at the site for each medium, with consideration of a number of factors
       explained below;
   •   Exposure Assessment - estimates the magnitude of actual and/or potential human
       exposures, the frequency and duration of these exposures, and the pathways (e.g.,
       ingesting contaminated well-water) by which humans are potentially exposed;
   •   Toxicity Assessment - determines the types of adverse health effects associated with
       chemical exposures, and the relationship between magnitude of exposure (dose) and
       severity of adverse effects (response); and
   •   Risk Characterization - summarizes and combines outputs of the exposure and toxicity
       assessments to provide a quantitative assessment of site-related risks. The risk
       characterization also identifies contamination with concentrations which exceed
       acceptable levels, defined by the NCP as an excess lifetime cancer risk greater than 1 x
       10-6 – 1 x 10-4 or a Hazard Index greater than 1; contaminants at these concentrations are
       considered chemicals of concern (“COCs”) and are typically those that will require
       remediation at the site. Also included in this section is a discussion of the uncertainties
       associated with these risks.




                                                12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Hazard Identification

In this step, the chemicals of potential concern (“COPCs”) in each medium were identified based
on such factors as toxicity, frequency of occurrence, fate and transport of the contaminants in the
environment, concentrations, mobility, persistence and bioaccumulation. The risk assessment for
OU2 focused on groundwater, soil and sediment related to the site which may pose significant
risk to human health. Analytical information that was collected to determine the nature and
extent of contamination revealed the presence of VOCs in groundwater and PCBs and lead in
soils at concentrations of potential concern.

This ROD focuses on the site-related groundwater contamination plume in the area immediately
downgradient of the former dump site, and surface soils in the residential area that were
impacted by the former dump. Groundwater onsite is used by residents for drinking water
purposes. Although POETS have been installed within impacted homes, if additional wells
become contaminated or the POETS are not maintained, exposure to contaminated groundwater
could occur. A comprehensive list of all COPCs can be found in the HHRA in the
Administrative Record. Only the COCs, or the chemicals requiring remediation at the site, are
listed in Table 1.

Exposure Assessment

Consistent with Superfund policy and guidance, the HHRA is a baseline human health risk
assessment and therefore assumes no remediation has been performed or institutional controls
established to mitigate or remove hazardous substance releases. Cancer risks and noncancer
hazard indices were calculated based on an estimate of the reasonable maximum exposure
(“RME”) expected to occur under current and future conditions at the site. The RME is defined
as the highest exposure that is reasonably expected to occur at a site.

The primary land use downgradient of the former dump areas is residential. It is anticipated that
the future land use for this area will remain consistent with current use. The property containing
the former dump areas is currently zoned as residential, however, because of the geography and
power line, the current and anticipated future use of the property is non-residential.

Exposure pathways were identified for each potentially exposed population and each potential
exposure scenario for exposure to groundwater. Exposure pathways assessed in the HHRA are
presented in Table 2 and include exposure of residents to groundwater via ingestion, dermal
contact with groundwater and inhalation of volatiles while showering and residential exposure to
surface soils via ingestion and dermal contact. Adult and child residents have been identified as
potentially exposed populations. Typically, exposures are evaluated using a statistical estimate of
the exposure point concentration, which is usually an upper-bound estimate of the average
concentration for each contaminant, but in some cases may be the maximum detected
concentration. Consistent with EPA guidance, for lead exposures, the arithmetic mean of all
samples collected from the surface soil interval (0-2 feet) was used as the exposure point
concentration (“EPC”). A summary of the EPCs for the site-related COCs can be found in Table
1, while a comprehensive list of the EPCs for all COPCs can be found in the HHRA.



                                                13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Toxicity Assessment

In this step, the types of adverse health effects associated with contaminant exposures and the
relationship between magnitude of exposure and severity of adverse health effects were
determined. Potential health effects are contaminant-specific and may include the risk of
developing cancer over a lifetime or other noncancer health effects, such as changes in the
normal functions of organs within the body (e.g., changes in the effectiveness of the immune
system). Some contaminants are capable of causing both cancer and noncancer health effects.

Under current EPA guidelines, the likelihood of carcinogenic risks and noncancer hazards due to
exposure to site chemicals are considered separately. Consistent with current EPA policy, it was
assumed that the toxic effects of the site-related chemicals would be additive. Thus, cancer and
noncancer risks associated with exposures to individual COPCs were summed to indicate the
potential risks and hazards associated with mixtures of potential carcinogens and
noncarcinogens, respectively.

Toxicity data for the human health risk assessment were provided by the Integrated Risk
Information System (IRIS) database, the Provisional Peer Reviewed Toxicity Database
(PPRTV), or another source that is identified as an appropriate reference for toxicity values
consistent with EPA’s directive on toxicity values. This information for the site-related COCs is
presented in Table 3 (noncancer toxicity data summary) and Table 4 (cancer toxicity data
summary). Additional toxicity information for all COPCs is presented in the HHRA.

Risk Characterization

This step summarized and combined outputs of the exposure and toxicity assessments to provide
a quantitative assessment of site risks. Exposures were evaluated based on the potential risk of
developing cancer and the potential for noncancer health hazards. Exposure from lead was
evaluated using blood lead modeling and is discussed in more detail later in this section.

Noncarcinogenic risks were assessed using a hazard index (“HI”) approach, based on a
comparison of expected contaminant intakes and benchmark comparison levels of intake
(reference doses, reference concentrations). Reference doses (“RfDs”) and reference
concentrations (“RfCs”) are estimates of daily exposure levels for humans (including sensitive
individuals) which are thought to be safe over a lifetime of exposure. The estimated intake of
chemicals identified in environmental media (e.g., the amount of a chemical ingested from
contaminated drinking water) is compared to the RfD or the RfC to derive the hazard quotient
(“HQ”) for the contaminant in the particular medium. The HI is obtained by adding the HQs for
all compounds within a particular medium that impacts a particular receptor population.

The HQ for oral and dermal exposures is calculated as below. The HQ for inhalation exposures
is calculated using a similar model that incorporates the RfC, rather than the RfD.

HQ = Intake/RfD

Where:         HQ = hazard quotient

                                                14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

               Intake = estimated intake for a chemical (mg/kg-day)
               RfD = reference dose (mg/kg-day)

The intake and the RfD will represent the same exposure period (i.e., chronic, subchronic, or
acute).

As previously stated, the HI is calculated by summing the HQs for all chemicals for likely
exposure scenarios for a specific population. An HI greater than 1 indicates that the potential
exists for noncarcinogenic health effects to occur as a result of site-related exposures, with the
potential for health effects increasing as the HI increases. When the HI calculated for all
chemicals for a specific population exceeds 1, separate HI values are then calculated for those
chemicals which are known to act on the same target organ. These discrete HI values are then
compared to the acceptable limit of 1 to evaluate the potential for noncancer health effects on a
specific target organ. The HI provides a useful reference point for gauging the potential
significance of multiple contaminant exposures within a single medium or across media. A
summary of the noncarcinogenic hazards associated with these chemicals for each exposure
pathway is contained in Table 5.

Table 5 shows that the HI for noncancer effects is 94 for the adult resident and 81 for the child
resident from exposure to cis-1,2 DCE, TCE, and vinyl chloride in groundwater and PCB
Aroclor 1254 in soils (HQ of 1). The noncarcinogenic risks for both populations were
attributable primarily to TCE in groundwater.

For carcinogens, risks are generally expressed as the incremental probability of an individual
developing cancer over a lifetime as a result of exposure to a carcinogen, using the cancer slope
factor (“SF”) for oral and dermal exposures and the inhalation unit risk (“IUR”) for inhalation
exposures. Excess lifetime cancer risk for oral and dermal exposures is calculated from the
following equation, while the equation for inhalation exposures uses the IUR, rather than the SF:

Risk = LADD x SF

Where:         Risk = a unitless probability (1 x 10-6) of an individual developing cancer
               LADD = lifetime average daily dose averaged over 70 years (mg/kg-day)
               SF = cancer slope factor, expressed as [1/(mg/kg-day)]

These risks are probabilities that are usually expressed in scientific notation (such as 1 x 10-4).
An excess lifetime cancer risk of 1 x 10-4 indicates that one additional incidence of cancer may
occur in a population of 10,000 people who are exposed under the conditions identified in the
exposure assessment. Current Superfund guidance identifies the range for determining whether a
remedial action is necessary as an individual lifetime excess cancer risk of 1 x 10-4 to 1 x 10-6
(corresponding to a one-in-ten-thousand to a one-in-a-million excess cancer risk), with 1 x 10-6
being the point of departure.

A summary of the estimated cancer risks is presented in Table 6. The results indicated that the
cancer risks exceeded the acceptable risk range for residential exposure to tap water and shower
vapors primarily due to groundwater concentrations of TCE and vinyl chloride.

                                                15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Elevated concentrations of lead were detected in OU2 residential surface soils. Since there are no
published quantitative toxicity values for lead, it is not possible to evaluate risks from lead
exposure using the same methodology as other COCs. However, because the toxicokinetics (the
absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion of toxins in the body) of lead are well
understood, lead is regulated based on blood lead level (“BLL”). In lieu of evaluating risk using
typical intake calculations and toxicity criteria, EPA developed models which are used to predict
blood lead concentration and the probability of a child’s BLL exceeding specific target
concentrations based on a given multimedia exposure scenario. The risk reduction goal for OU2
is to limit the probability of a typical child's (or that of a group of similarly exposed individual’s)
BLL exceeding 5 micrograms per deciliter (µg/dL) to 5 percent or less. For this HHRA, lead
risks were evaluated using EPA’s Integrated Exposure Uptake Biokinetic (IEUBK) model for the
child residents as the most conservative receptor.

As summarized in Table 7, the predicted probabilities of a child’s BLL exceeding 5 µg/dL
surpassed EPA’s risk reduction goal of 5 percent for one residential property. More than 32
percent of children living on the residential property most impacted by the former dump area
contamination would have BLLs greater than 5 μg/dL.

Ecological Risk Assessment

A screening level ecological risk assessment (“SLERA”) was conducted for the site to determine
the potential for risk to ecological receptors based upon exposure to contaminants in soil, surface
water, and sediment. Site media were screened against values protective of ecological receptors
and food chain modeling was conducted to determine risks to trophic level receptors. The results
of the SLERA identified contaminants of potential ecological concern (“COPECs”) and therefore
the risk assessment process continued on to a Step 3a analysis. The objective of the Step 3a analysis
was to determine if COPECs identified in the SLERA pose risk under more realistic assumptions.
During the Step 3a, refined exposure point concentrations were calculated based upon 95% UCL
values and background inorganic results were considered. Screening of soil, sediment and surface
water media contaminants indicated exceedances of screening values. Further, food chain
modeling was conducted using more realistic exposure frequency and ingestion variables. The
results of the Step 3a evaluation indicated fewer risks from exposure to chemicals detected in site
media when compared to the SLERA. Overall, food chain modeling results indicated no risk to
terrestrial soil receptors based upon the calculation of lowest observed adverse effect level
(LOAEL) HQs. In the aquatic environment, risk was identified to the invertivorous bird (the
spotted sandpiper) from exposure to zinc. However, based upon a comparison of the range of site
sediment zinc concentrations to background sediment zinc concentrations it is unclear whether
zinc sediment concentrations are site-related. In addition, a preliminary remediation goal for zinc
was calculated based upon risk to the spotted sandpiper. This value was less than site background
concentrations and therefore it was determined that action to address zinc in sediment was not
warranted.

Uncertainties




                                                  16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The procedures and inputs used to assess risks in this evaluation, as in all such assessments, are
subject to a wide variety of uncertainties. In general, the main sources of uncertainty include:

        •   environmental chemistry sampling and analysis;
        •   environmental parameter measurement;
        •   fate and transport modeling;
        •   exposure parameter estimation; and,
        •   toxicological data.

Uncertainty in environmental sampling arises in part from the potentially uneven distribution of
chemicals in the media sampled. Consequently, there is significant uncertainty as to the actual
levels present. Environmental chemistry-analysis error can stem from several sources including
the errors inherent in the analytical methods and characteristics of the matrix being sampled.

Uncertainties in the exposure assessment are related to estimates of how often an individual
would actually come in contact with the COCs, the period of time over which such exposure
would occur, and in the models used to estimate the concentrations of the COCs at the point of
exposure.

Uncertainties in toxicological data occur in extrapolating both from animals to humans and from
high to low doses of exposure, as well as from the difficulties in assessing the toxicity of a
mixture of chemicals. These uncertainties are addressed by making conservative assumptions
concerning risk and exposure parameters throughout the assessment. As a result, the risk
assessment provides upper-bound estimates of the risks to populations near OU2 and is highly
unlikely to underestimate actual risks related to OU2.

More specific information concerning uncertainty in the health risks is presented in the human
health risk assessment report.

Basis for Taking Action

Based on the results of the RI and quantitative human health risk assessment, the response action
selected in this OU2 ROD is necessary to protect the public health or welfare or the environment
from actual or threatened releases of contaminants into the environment.

REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES

Remedial action objectives (“RAOs”) are specific goals to protect human health and the
environment. These objectives are based on available information and standards such as
applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (“ARARs”) and risk-based levels established
in the risk assessment.

The RAOs for the Mansfield Trail Dump OU2 are:

Soil:



                                                17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Reduce or eliminate exposure of human receptors to contaminated soil at concentrations
      exceeding remedial goals.
     Prevent or minimize contaminated soil from serving as a source of contamination to
      sediment, surface water, and groundwater.
Groundwater:
     Restore the impacted aquifer to its most beneficial use as a source of drinking water by
      reducing contaminant levels to the remedial goals.
     Prevent or minimize unacceptable risk from exposure (via direct contact, ingestion, or
      inhalation) to contaminated groundwater attributable to the site.
     Minimize the potential for further migration of groundwater containing site contaminants
      at concentrations greater than remediation goals.
     Prevent or minimize contaminated groundwater from serving as sources of current and
      future vapor intrusion.
To achieve the RAOs, site-specific final RGs will be used, derived from Preliminary
Remediation Goals (“PRGs”), which are based on such factors as ARARs, risk, and background.
EPA and NJDEP have promulgated MCLs and NJDEP has promulgated NJ GWQSs, which are
enforceable, health-based, protective standards for various drinking water contaminants. For this
remedy, EPA selected the more stringent of the MCLs and/or NJ GWQSs as the PRGs for COCs
in site groundwater. EPA has identified RGs that are consistent the NJDEP residential direct
contact soil remediation standards (RDCSRS) for unsaturated soil.

The lists of RGs for soil and groundwater may be found in Tables 8 and 9 respectively. A list of
ARARs can be found in Tables 11 through 13.

The sub-slab contaminant-screening criteria and indoor air concentration requiring mitigation
were based on EPA’s vapor intrusion screening levels (VISLs) guidance for residential
properties. However, the VISLs are frequently updated based on evolving toxicity information.
Therefore, the screening criteria may be subject to change. The latest screening criteria for vapor
intrusion will be used to evaluate vapor intrusion data collected in the future. Current Vapor
Intrusion Screening Levels are shown in Table 10.

DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

CERCLA requires that remedial actions be protective of human health and the environment, be
cost-effective, attain a level or standard of control of the hazardous substances, pollutants and
contaminants, which at least attains ARARs unless a waiver can be justified, and utilize
permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies and resource recovery alternatives to
the maximum extent practicable. In addition, CERCLA includes a preference for the use of
treatment as a principal element to reduce the toxicity, mobility, or volume of the hazardous
substances, pollutants and contaminants at a site permanently and significantly.



                                                18

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Potential technologies applicable to groundwater remediation were identified and screened by
effectiveness, implementability, and cost criteria, with emphasis on effectiveness.

Detailed descriptions of the remedial alternatives for OU2 are presented below. Capital costs are
those expenditures that are required to construct a remedial alternative. O&M costs are those
post-construction costs necessary to ensure or verify the continued effectiveness of a remedial
alternative and are estimated on an annual basis. Present worth is the amount of money which, if
invested in the current year, would be sufficient to cover all the costs over time associated with a
project, calculated using a discount rate of seven percent and up to a 30-year time interval.
Construction time is the time required to construct and implement the alternative and does not
include the time required to design the remedy, negotiate performance of the remedy with the
responsible parties, or procure contracts for design and construction. Detailed information
regarding the alternatives can be found in the final OU2 FS Report.

Institutional Controls

Institutional controls are administrative and legal controls that help to minimize the potential for
human exposure to contaminants. Institutional controls may include a classification exception
area/well restriction area (“CEA/WRA”) for groundwater and a deed notice for capped areas. A
CEA/WRA is an institutional control provided for under NJDEP regulations that documents the
area where water quality standards cannot be met and limits installation of groundwater extraction wells,
and a deed notices would prevent disturbance of the engineered cover and identify use restrictions for the
capped area.

Common Elements

For Groundwater Alternatives GW-2 through GW-5, a PDI would be performed to refine the
vertical and horizontal extents of the areas requiring remediation. Surface water monitoring
within Cowboy Creek and vapor intrusion monitoring in the residential area would also be
performed to ensure contaminated groundwater is not impacting surface water and residents are
protected from potential vapor intrusion. Maintenance of existing VI mitigation systems and
installation of new systems would be performed as necessary. Monitoring of the residential
wells within the distal plume will be conducted as part of the OU1 remedial action. To the extent
necessary, additional monitoring would be added to the monitoring program consistent with the
OU2 remedial action. Monitoring requirements for sub-slab and indoor air will be developed
during the design phase. In all alternatives, site restoration would be completed as necessary to
restore affected properties to as close as reasonably possible to pre-existing condition after
construction activities are completed. Institutional controls, such as a CEA/WRA, would be
required to restrict the installation of wells in the contaminated groundwater plume, at least while
the remedy is being implemented. A deed notice would be required for capped areas (which do
not include any residential properties).

Five-Year Reviews

Except for the no action alternative, all groundwater alternatives are expected to allow for
unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, however all will take more than five years to attain the
RGs. Pursuant to Section 121(c) of CERCLA, policy reviews will be conducted no less often

                                                    19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

than once every five years after the completion of construction to ensure that the remedy is, or
will be, protective of human health and environment. Five-year review requirements for the soil
alternatives are discussed below.

Soil Alternatives:

Alternative S-1 - No Action

The NCP requires that a “No Action” alternative be evaluated to establish a baseline for
comparison with other remedial alternatives. Under the no action alternative, no remedial actions
would be implemented as part of the No Action Alternative. Furthermore, this alternative would
not involve any monitoring of groundwater or institutional controls. Any improvement of
groundwater quality would be through natural attenuation processes.

Total Capital Cost:                                  $0
Operation and Maintenance:                           $0
Total Present Net Worth:                             $0
Construction Timeframe:                              0 years

Alternative S-2 – Capping

Alternative 2 includes the capping of the contaminated soil in the residential area and targeted
excavation of residual contaminated soil in the former dump areas to eliminate exposure
pathways to receptors.

A PDI would further delineate the soil contamination and confirm the extent of the cap in the
residential area. The cap would include erosion control fabric for stabilization on the steep slope
and new drainage pathways would be incorporated into the cap to allow for surface runoff from
the dump areas upgradient to discharge safely and in a controlled manner. Limited excavation
would be performed in the former dump areas where contaminant levels were identified
exceeding RGs. This would prevent any future migration of contaminants in soil through surface
runoff. After excavation and appropriate disposal, confirmation sampling would be conducted to
verify that soil concentrations meet RGs.

O&M would include regular inspection to ensure the cap is stable and intact over time.
Engineering controls including diversion structures and temporary fencing may also be needed in
the remediation areas. Institutional controls in the form of a deed notice would be implemented
to restrict disturbance to the soil cover identify use restrictions. Since CERCLA contaminants
would be left on the site above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure,
five-year reviews would be conducted to ensure that the action remained protective of human
health and the environment.

Capital Cost:                                        $ 1,796,000
Present Worth of O&M Cost:                           $ 54,000
Present-Worth Cost:                                  $ 2,467,000
Estimated Construction Time Frame:                   9 months

                                                20

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative S-3 – Excavation and Off-Site Disposal

Alternative 3 includes the excavation and off-site disposal of contaminated soil in the residential
and former dump areas (Figure 9). A PDI would further delineate the soil contamination to
confirm the extent of excavation. It is assumed excavation would be conducted with a
combination of small excavation equipment and hand excavation. After excavation and
appropriate disposal, confirmation sampling would be conducted to verify that soil
concentrations meet RGs. If confirmation sampling reveals additional contamination above RGs,
further excavation would be performed in the area where the contamination is identified.

After site soil is confirmed to meet RGs, excavated areas would be backfilled with imported
clean fill and topsoil, compacted, and graded. Drainage pathways, if previously disturbed during
excavation activities, would be restored to original conditions.

Since this alternative would result in levels of hazardous substance, pollutants or contaminants
that would allow for unlimited use and exposure, no five-year reviews would be required after
the implementation of the action.

Capital Cost:                                        $ 2,399,000
Present-Worth Cost:                                  $ 2,399,000
Estimated Construction Time Frame:                   10 months

Groundwater and Bedrock Vadose Zone Alternatives

Alternative GW-1 – No Action

As with the soil alternatives, regulations governing the Superfund program generally require that
the “no action” alternative be evaluated to establish a baseline for comparison. Under this
alternative, EPA would take no action to address contaminated groundwater within the OU2 to
prevent human exposure and restore the groundwater aquifer.

Capital Cost:                                        $0
O&M Cost:                                            $0
Present Worth Cost:                                  $0
Estimated Construction Time Frame: 0 years

Alternative GW- 2 – Capping of Source Area Vadose Zone and MNA of Source Area Saturated
Zone and Distal Plume

Under this alternative, the contaminated source area bedrock vadose zone would be capped to
reduce infiltration of rainwater, thus limiting the migration of vadose zone contamination into
groundwater. MNA would be implemented for the groundwater contamination in the source area
and the distal plume. An extensive monitoring program would be conducted to evaluate
groundwater contaminant concentrations over time to ensure that attenuation mechanisms, such



                                                21

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

as biodegradation, are reducing concentrations at an acceptable rate throughout the plume. The
cap would remain in place and require O&M until groundwater is restored to RGs.

Capital Cost:                                         $ 2,167,000
Present Worth of Cap O&M Cost:
    Year 1 to 5:                                     $ 194,000
    Year 6 to 10:                                    $ 103,000
    Year 11 to 30:                                   $ 126,000
Present Worth of Monitoring:                         $ 1,564,000
Total Present Worth Cost:                            $ 4,154,000
Estimated Construction Time Frame:                    11 months

Alternative GW- 3 – Capping and Soil Vapor Extraction (“SVE”) of Source Area Vadose Zone
and MNA of Source Area Saturated Zone and Distal Plume

The contaminated source area bedrock vadose zone would be capped as described in Alternative
2, while vapor extraction would be implemented to actively treat any residual contamination in
the source area bedrock vadose zone.

Vapor extraction removes contaminant vapors from the subsurface for treatment above ground.
Vapors would be extracted from the bedrock vadose zone above the water table by applying a
vacuum. The cap would serve as an impermeable barrier to enhance the performance of the
vapor extraction system and to prevent rainwater from infiltrating into the treatment zone. A
pilot study would be conducted prior to implementation to determine design parameters for the
vapor extraction system. Vapor extraction wells would be installed within the confirmed extent
of the source area vadose zone and vapor monitoring points would be installed to track the
progress. Extracted vapor would be treated prior to discharge. The system is expected to be run
for approximately 5 years.

MNA would be implemented in the saturated source area and the distal plume. An extensive
monitoring program would be conducted to evaluate groundwater contaminant concentrations
over time to ensure that attenuation mechanisms, such as biodegradation, are reducing
concentrations at an acceptable rate.

If vapor extraction is effective in substantially reducing mass in the subsurface, a multilayered
cap with associated long-term O&M might not be needed. Long-term O&M of a multilayered
cap is included in the cost estimates so costs could be lower if it was found to be unnecessary.

Capital Cost:                                         $ 4,078,000
Present Worth of Cap O&M Cost:
    Year 1 to 5:                                     $ 194,000
    Year 6 to 10:                                    $ 103,000
    Year 11 to 30:                                   $ 126,000
Present Worth of Monitoring:                         $ 1,564,000
Present Worth Cost:                                  $ 6,528,000
Estimated Construction Time Frame: 23 months

                                                22

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative GW- 4 – Capping and SVE of Source Area Vadose Zone, In- Situ Treatment of
Source Area Saturated Zone, and MNA of Distal Plume

For this alternative, vapor extraction and capping would be implemented as described in
Alternative 3 for the contaminated source area bedrock vadose zone. In-situ treatment would also
be conducted to treat the contaminated groundwater plume in the source area saturated zone,
including the injection of amendments such as zero valent iron or bioaugmentation amendments
(Figure 10). The type of amendment would be determined during the remedial design based the
results of a treatability study and on-site pilot testing. Amendment selection criteria would
include performance in the complex geologic setting, including reaction longevity to ensure
sustained reactivity with groundwater contamination in bedrock fractures.

Performance monitoring would be conducted during the operation of active treatment. MNA
would be implemented for groundwater contamination in the distal plume as described in
Alternative GW-3.

Capital Cost:                                       $ 6,410,000
Present Worth of Cap O&M Cost:
    Year 1 to 5:                                    $ 194,000
    Year 6 to 10:                                   $ 103,000
    Year 11 to 30:                                  $ 126,000
Present Worth of Monitoring:                        $ 1,564,000
Present Worth Cost:                                 $ 9,106,000
Estimated Construction Time Frame: 30 months

Alternative GW- 5 – Capping, Dual-Phase Vapor Extraction (“DPE”) of Source Area Vadose
and Saturated Zones, and MNA of Distal Plume

Alternative GW-5 includes combined vapor and groundwater extraction in a DPE remedy to treat
both the contaminated vapors in the source area vadose zone and the groundwater plume in the
source area saturated zone. DPE includes vapor extraction and groundwater extraction to draw
both contaminated vapors and groundwater from the subsurface, with subsequent treatment at the
surface to remove contaminants.

Capping would be implemented as described in Alternative GW-3. Design parameters for a DPE
system would be obtained through the performance of a pilot study during the design phase.
Vapor and groundwater monitoring points would be installed to track the performance of the
system. Extracted vapor and groundwater would be treated prior to discharge. Depending on
groundwater extraction rates, treated water might be discharged to the aquifer or to public sewer
systems. MNA would be implemented for groundwater contamination in the distal plume as
described in GW-3.

Capital Cost:                                       $ 4,837,000
Present Worth of Cap O&M Cost:
   Year 1 to 5:                                     $ 194,000

                                               23

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    Year 6 to 10:                                    $ 103,000
    Year 11 to 30:                                   $ 126,000
Present Worth of Monitoring:                         $ 1,564,000
Present Worth Cost:                                  $ 7,872,000
Estimated Construction Time Frame:                   22 months


COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES

In selecting a remedy, EPA considered the factors set out in CERCLA §121, 42 U.S.C. §9621,
by conducting a detailed analysis of the viable remedial response measures pursuant to the NCP,
40 CFR §300.430(e)(9) and EPA’s Guidance for Conducting Remedial Investigations and
Feasibility Studies, OSWER Directive 9355.3-01. The detailed analysis consisted of an
assessment of each of the individual response measures per remedy component against each of
nine evaluation criteria and a comparative analysis focusing upon the relative performance of
each response measure against the criteria.

Threshold Criteria – The first two criteria are known as “threshold criteria” because they are
the minimum requirements that each response measure must meet in order to be eligible for
selection as a remedy.

1. Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment

Overall protection of human health and the environment addresses whether each alternative
provides adequate protection of human health and the environment and describes how risks
posed through each exposure pathway are eliminated, reduced, or controlled, through treatment,
engineering controls, and/or institutional controls.

The No Action Alternatives (S-1, GW-1) for both soil and groundwater are not protective of
human health and the environment, because they do not reduce contamination, or include
groundwater monitoring to determine the fate and transport of the plume over time and are
without any means to evaluate the time until remediation goals are met. Future exposure to soil
and groundwater contamination could result in unacceptable and uncontrolled risks to the public.

Because S-1 and GW-1 are not protective of human health and the environment, they were
eliminated from consideration under the remaining evaluation criteria.

The remaining two soil alternatives are protective of human health and the environment.
Alternative S-2 uses capping to prevent exposure to contaminated soil and S-3 uses excavation
and off-site disposal to achieve the same result. Alternative S-2 would include an institutional
control in the form of a deed notice for property where soil contamination remained in place
above residential standards.

The remaining groundwater alternatives are protective of human health and the environment.
Alternatives GW-2 through GW-5 have components of natural attenuation with long-term
monitoring for groundwater contamination in the distal plume. Alternatives GW-3 through GW-
5 include vapor extraction for addressing remaining contamination in the source area vadose
                                                24

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

zone. GW-4 and GW-5 include additional active treatment of groundwater contamination in the
shallow bedrock aquifer. All groundwater alternatives would include a CEA/WRA.


2. Compliance with applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs)

Section 121(d) of CERCLA and NCP §300.430(f) (ii) (B) require that remedial actions at
CERCLA sites at least attain legally applicable or relevant and appropriate federal and state
requirements, standards, criteria, and limitations which are collectively referred to as “ARARs,”
unless such ARARs are waived under CERCLA section 121(d)(4).

Applicable requirements are those cleanup standards, standards of control, and other
substantive requirements, criteria, or limitations promulgated under federal environmental or
state environmental or facility siting laws that specifically address a hazardous substance,
pollutant, contaminant, remedial action, location, or other circumstance found at a CERCLA
site. Only those State standards that are identified by a state in a timely manner and that are
more stringent than federal requirements may be applicable. Relevant and appropriate
requirements are those cleanup standards, standards of control, and other substantive
requirements, criteria, or limitations promulgated under federal environmental or state
environmental or facility siting laws that, while not “applicable” to a hazardous substance,
pollutant, contaminant, remedial action, location, or other circumstance at a CERCLA site,
address problems or situations sufficiently similar to those encountered at the CERCLA site that
their use is well-suited to the particular site. Only those State standards that are identified in a
timely manner, and are more stringent than Federal requirements, may be relevant and
appropriate.

Compliance with ARARs address whether a remedy will meet all of the applicable or relevant
and appropriate requirements of other federal and state environmental statutes or provides a
basis for invoking a waiver.

For soil, the New Jersey RDCSRS for PCBs is identified as an ARAR and the RG for PCBs.
Alternatives S-2 and S-3 would meet the chemical-specific ARAR since PCB-contaminated soil
would be contained or removed from the site. Location-specific and action-specific ARARs
would be met by complying with all substantive requirements that apply to the actions, such as
handling of remediation waste and storm water management.

EPA and NJDEP have promulgated MCLs, which are enforceable standards for various drinking
water contaminants (and are chemical-specific ARARs). If any state standard is more stringent
than the federal standard, then compliance with the more stringent ARAR is required. As
groundwater within site boundaries is a source of drinking water, the more stringent of the
federal MCLs, NJ MCLs, and NJ GWQS are evaluated as ARARs and used to develop RGs. In
GW-2, MNA alone would restore the aquifer to meet RGs but in an unreasonable time frame
(greater than 500 years). All alternatives that involve active groundwater treatment, GW-3, GW-
4, and GW-5, would restore the aquifer to RGs in less time than Alternative GW-2. Air treatment
for emissions from treatment plants to meet Clean Air Act and applicable NJDEP ARARs may
be required for GW-3, GW-4, and GW-5, and could be met.

                                                 25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Primary Balancing Criteria – The next five criteria, criteria 3 through 7, are known as
“primary balancing criteria.” These criteria are factors by which tradeoffs between response
measures are assessed so that the best options will be chosen, given site-specific data and
conditions.

3. Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence

Long-term effectiveness and permanence refers to expected residual risk and the ability of a
remedy to maintain reliable protection of human health and the environment over time, once
cleanup levels have been met. This criterion includes the consideration of residual risk that will
remain on-site following remediation and the adequacy and reliability of controls.

Soil Alternative S-2 relies on adequate inspection and maintenance to prevent erosion or damage
of the cap from re-exposing contaminated soil, particularly in the steep slope areas. It would also
rely on implementation of a deed notice. Alternative S-3 would have the least residual risk since
all contaminated soil above RGs would be removed from the site. Control measures would not be
necessary for Alternative S-3, indicating that S-3 has greater long-term protectiveness compared
to Alternative S-2.

Alternatives GW-2 through GW-5 would all provide long-term effectiveness and permanence to
varying degrees. The magnitude of residual risk is greatest for GW-2 since no active removal or
destruction of contaminants would occur. GW-2 would rely on the cap to prevent infiltration of
rainwater that could mobilize VOC mass stored in the vadose zone. GW-3, capping and vapor
extraction, would be next highest in residual risk since active treatment would be limited to the
vadose zone. GW-4 and GW-5 would provide a higher degree of long-term effectiveness because
the area of the most contaminated groundwater would be treated in addition to the vadose zone.

The adequacy and reliability of the caps for GW-2 through GW-5 would rely on routine
inspection and maintenance and institutional controls. Without adequate inspection and
maintenance, erosion or damage to the cap would allow precipitation to enter the vadose zone
adding to the mobilization of contaminants in the vadose zone and groundwater. The requirement
for maintaining the integrity of caps for GW-2 is the most significant since there would be no
additional treatment. The active treatment components (vapor extraction, in-situ treatment, and
DPE) under GW-3 through GW-5 are reliable technologies. However, the adequacy of controls
would need to be determined during the design through PDI and pilot studies since the site has
complex geology (e.g., a complicated fracture network with dead-end fractures) and potential
dense non-aqueous phase liquids (DNAPLs). Alternative GW-4 provides greater long-term
effectiveness compared to Alternative GW-5 because it is expected to result in a greater
reduction in contaminant mass migrating from source area bedrock fractures into groundwater,
therefore, resulting in restoration of the aquifer in a shorter time frame.

In the FS, a model was used for comparison purposes to estimate the length of time it would take
each alternative to restore the aquifer to RGs. (Time estimates would be further refined during
the design phase, with additional investigations and pilot testing.) Due to the complex geology,
Alternatives GW-2, GW-3 and GW-5 are expected to take over 200 years for full restoration of

                                                26

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

aquifer. Under Alternative GW-4, groundwater in the vicinity of the impacted residential wells
located downgradient of the source area, is expected to reach RGs within 30 years and the
shallow contaminated bedrock aquifer in the source area within 150 years.

4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume through Treatment

Reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment refers to the anticipated
performance of the treatment technologies that may be included as part of a remedy.

Neither Alternative S-2 nor S-3 reduce toxicity, mobility or volume through treatment.
Alternative S-2 would reduce the mobility of the contaminants through capping but the toxicity
and volume of contamination would not change. Alternative S-3 would reduce the mobility and
volume of contamination since all contaminated soil would be transported off-site for disposal,
but toxicity would not be changed.

Capping under Alternatives GW-2 through GW-5 would reduce the infiltration of the rainwater,
thereby reducing the mobility of the VOCs in the vadose zone, though not through treatment.
MNA, vapor extraction, amendment injections, and DPE under alternatives GW-2 through GW-5
are all treatment technologies and all have the capability of reducing the toxicity and volume of
VOCs. Although implementing any technology in the fractured bedrock geology at the site
presents significant challenges, alternative GW-4 would achieve reduction of toxicity and
volume the fastest because the transmissive fractures where contamination flux is the greatest
could be identified during a PDI using borehole geophysics and transmissivity testing, and a
long-lasting amendment would be injected into these features. Over time, the amendment in the
transmissive features would be used to treat contaminant mass moving out of fractures before the
contamination has a chance to move downgradient. Pilot testing to maximize the placement of
the amendment in the fractures at the site would be needed.

5. Short-Term Effectiveness

Short-term effectiveness addresses the period of time needed to implement the remedy and any
adverse impacts that may be posed to workers, the community and the environment during
construction and operation of the remedy until cleanup levels are achieved.

Alternatives S-2 and S-3 would both impact local traffic along Brookwood Road during the short-
term if equipment requires access through a residential area to implement the work. S-3 would
have the greatest requirements for transportation of contaminated materials for off-site disposal,
but this could be done via the road along the dump areas rather than on Brookwood Road through
the residential community. S-2 would require the largest quantity of import materials; this also
could be done from the dump areas. Construction would generate noise and dust during the day,
which would be controlled to minimize impact to the residential community. The duration of on-
site construction would be longest for S-3, which reflects the most short-term impact to the
community. Stormwater management would need to be considered for both S-2 and S-3.

Alternative GW-2 would have low to moderate impact in the non-residential area where the
remediation would take place due to the construction of the cap and periodic maintenance. GW-3

                                                27

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

would have low to moderate impacts similar to GW-2 for the cap and a small area of vapor
extraction wells. Alternatives GW-4 and GW-5 would have moderate impacts because of the need
for drilling to install and operate the injection (GW-4) or DPE system (GW-5), which would
continue for several years. The operation of the vapor extraction system (GW-4) and DPE system
(GW-5) is estimated to continue for five years each. In both cases access to the site would be
required and temporary facilities would need to be located nearby.

6. Implementability

Implementability addresses the technical and administrative feasibility of a remedy from design
through construction and operation. Factors such as availability of services and materials,
administrative feasibility, and coordination with other governmental entities are also considered.

Alternative S-3 is implementable because equipment and experienced vendors for excavation
and backfilling are readily available. Limited entry to the residential area would make excavation
slightly difficult. S-2 would has greater complexity in design, implementation, and long-term
monitoring since it would involve the design and construction of a cap along a steep slope. The
cap installation of over an acre may trigger stormwater management requirements such as
installation of a stormwater retention pond. This is problematic since there is no suitable space
for the pond. Additionally, a long-term inspection and maintenance plan would need to be
developed for S-2 to maintain the cap to ensure continued protection of human health and the
environment. Stormwater management would need to be considered for S-3 but to a lesser extent
as excavation would not increase runoff at the residential area as much as capping under S-2
would. There are no O&M requirements under S-3. A deed notice would be required for S-2 to
prevent disturbance of the cap; no such deed notice would be required for S-3.

Of the active alternatives, alternative GW-2 would be the easiest to implement since the capping
work would be conducted on the surface, with minimal constructability concerns. GW-3, GW-4,
and GW-5 share a common implementability challenge due to difficulty of addressing
contamination in the fractured rock subsurface: the complexity of the fracture network with
variations in transmissivity of fractures means that it would potentially be difficult to effectively
identify and target the transmissive fractures for each technology. Alternatives GW-2 through
GW-5 may trigger the need to install a stormwater retention pond due to disturbance of ground
surface and/or installation of an impermeable cap. The vapor extraction system, in-situ treatment,
and DPE components of Alternatives GW-3 through GW-5, respectively, are estimated to require
operation for five years.

In the case of GW-5, given the low storativity of the fractured bedrock aquifer and the observed
large fluctuation in the potentiometric surface, it may be difficult to operate a long-term
groundwater extraction system effectively in order to extract and treat mass coming out of
fractures in the bedrock. In Alternative GW-4, the amendment injected into the saturated zone of
bedrock would remain in the subsurface for a longer period of time and therefore have more
interaction with contaminants. It is expected that GW-4 would be able to reduce mass migrating
from fractures in the bedrock in the source area to a greater degree and faster than GW-5.




                                                 28

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

7. Cost

Includes estimated capital and O&M costs, and net present worth value of capital and O&M
costs.

The present-worth costs for all alternatives are calculated using a discount rate of 7 percent.
Costs are calculated based on a 30-year timeframe. The estimated capital, annual O&M, and
present-worth costs for each of the alternatives are presented in the following table.

                      Alternative   Capital Cost    Total Present-Worth Cost
                      S-1           $0              $0
                      S-2           $1,796,000      $2,467,000
                      S-3           $2,399,000      $2,399,000
                      GW-1          $0              $0
                      GW-2          $2,167,000      $4,154,000
                      GW-3          $4,078,000      $6,528,000
                      GW-4          $6,410,000      $9,106,000
                      GW-5          $4,837,000      $7,872,000



Modifying Criteria – The final two evaluation criteria, criteria 8 and 9, are called “modifying
criteria” because new information or comments from the state or the community on the
Proposed Plan may modify the preferred response measure or cause another response measure
to be considered.

8. State Acceptance

Indicates whether based on its review of the RI/FS reports and the Proposed Plan, the state
supports, opposes, and/or has identified any reservations with the selected response measure.

The State of New Jersey conditionally concurs with the selected remedy. The State concurs on
all aspects of the remedy except for MNA. This portion of the remedy will be further reviewed
by NJDEP upon collection of additional data.

9. Community Acceptance

Summarizes the public’s general response to the alternatives described in the Proposed Plan and
the RI/FS reports. This assessment includes determining which of the response measures the
community supports, opposes, and/or has reservations about.

EPA solicited input from the community on the remedial response alternative proposed for the
site. Oral comments presented at the public meeting were recorded, and EPA received written
comments during the public comment period. The Responsiveness Summary addresses all public
comments received by EPA during the public comment period. Overall, the community
members, elected officials, and stakeholders were in favor of EPA’s preferred alternative.

                                                   29

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE

The NCP, which governs EPA cleanups, at 40 C.F.R. § 300.430(a)(1)(iii), states that EPA
expects to use “treatment to address the principal threats posed by a site, wherever practicable”
and “engineering controls, such as containment, for waste that poses a relatively low long-term
threat” to achieve protection of human health and the environment. This expectation is further
explained in an EPA fact sheet (OSWER #9380.3-06FS), which states that principal threat
wastes are source materials considered to be highly toxic or highly mobile that generally cannot
be reliably contained or would present a significant risk to human health or the environment
should exposure occur. Low-level threat wastes are source materials that generally can be
reliably contained and that would present only a low risk in the event of exposure.

The concept of principal threat and low-level threat waste is applied on a site-specific basis when
characterizing source material. Source material is defined as material that includes or contains
hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants that act as a reservoir for migration of
contamination to groundwater, surface water, air, or act as a source of direct exposure.

Site soil, contaminated with lead and PCBs, is not considered a principal threat waste as it is not
considered source material and is not highly mobile. Groundwater is not considered principal
threat waste. The completed removal action addressed source material which was principal threat
waste within the dump areas. Residual DNAPL, though infrequently found at the site in the RI or
observed in the confirmation samples from the removal action, may still be present in the
subsurface in low-transmissivity fractures in the underlying bedrock and could potentially act as
a source of contamination to groundwater. Additional work will be conducted in the PDI to
further investigate whether DNAPL remains in the subsurface. The mobility of any residual
source material would be limited if it is present in low-transmissivity fractures.

SELECTED REMEDY

Based upon consideration of the results of the site investigations, the requirements of CERCLA,
the detailed analysis of the remedial alternatives, and public comments, EPA has determined that
Alternatives S-3 and GW-4 is the appropriate remedy for OU2. The remedy best satisfies the
requirements of CERCLA Section 121 and the NCP’s nine evaluation criteria for remedial
alternatives, 40 CFR § 300.430(e)(9). The major components of the selected remedy include:

   •   Capping and vapor extraction in the source area vadose zone,
   •   Treatment of groundwater contamination in the source area saturated zone through
       amendment injection,
   •   MNA in the distal groundwater plume,
   •   Excavation and off-site disposal of contaminated soil in the former dump areas,
   •   Excavation of residual soil contamination and restoration of the affected residential area,
   •   Installation of additional and maintenance of existing vapor intrusion mitigation systems
       as needed, and


                                                30

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   •   Institutional controls for capped areas and to prevent the installation of wells in the
       contaminated plume.

The selected remedy alternative for soil, Alternative S-3,was selected over the other soil
alternatives because excavation of soil will prevent risks from direct contact to contaminated
media and minimize leaching of contaminants to groundwater, and limit erosion of contaminated
soil through excavation of contaminated soil above RGs, thereby eliminating the need for long-
term monitoring or institutional controls, such that future use of the areas after completion of the
remedial action need not be restricted.

The selected remedy alternative for groundwater, Alternative GW-4, would reduce risk within a
reasonable time frame, as compared to the other groundwater alternatives, with greater long-term
effectiveness, reducing mass migrating from fractures in the bedrock in the source area to a
greater degree and faster than Alternative GW-5 at a comparable cost, and it will provide a long-
term reliable remedy.

Based on the information available at this time, the selected remedy provides the best balance of
trade-offs among the response measures with respect to the nine evaluation criteria.

Summary of the Rationale for the Selected Remedy

The selection of Alternatives S-3 and GW-4 provides the best alternative for OU2with respect to
the evaluation criteria. The selected alternative will be protective of human health and the
environment, complies with federal and state requirements that are legally applicable or relevant
and appropriate to the remedial action, is cost-effective, and will utilize permanent solutions to
the maximum extent practicable.

Summary of the Estimated Remedy Costs

The estimated capital and total present-worth cost for the selected soil and groundwater remedies
are $2,399,000 and $9,106,000 respectively. Table 14 and Table 15 provides the basis for the
cost estimate for Alternative S-3, GW-4.

It should be noted that these cost estimates are order-of-magnitude engineering cost estimates
that are expected to be within plus 50 to minus 30 percent of the actual project cost. These cost
estimates are based on the best available information regarding the anticipated scope of the
selected remedy. Changes in the cost estimates are likely to occur as a result of new information
and data collected during the engineering design of the remedy.

Green Remediation

Consistent with EPA Region 2’s Clean and Green policy, EPA will evaluate the use of
sustainable technologies and practices with respect to implementation of all components of the
selected remedy.




                                                31

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

As was previously noted, CERCLA §121(b)(1) mandates that remedial actions must be
protective of human health and the environment, cost-effective, and utilize permanent solutions
and alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery technologies to the maximum extent
practicable. Section 121(b)(1) also establishes a preference for remedial actions which employ
treatment to permanently and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity or mobility of the
hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants at a site. CERCLA §121(d) further specifies
that a remedial action must attain a degree of cleanup that satisfies ARARs under federal and
state laws, unless a waiver can be justified pursuant to §121(d)(4).

Protection of Human Health and the Environment

The selected remedy, Alternatives S-3 and GW-4, will be protective of human health and the
environment through the excavation of contaminated soil and treatment of contaminated
groundwater.

The remedy will, once complete, eliminate all significant risks to human health associated with
the exposure to contaminated soils and groundwater. This action will result in the reduction of
potential exposure to contaminated soil and groundwater to within EPA's generally acceptable
risk range. Implementation of the selected remedy will not pose unacceptable short-term risks or
adverse cross-media impacts.

Compliance with ARARs

The selected remedy will comply with chemical-specific, action-specific and location-specific
ARARs.

The selected remedy for groundwater and soil has been developed to meet federal and state
ARARs. A comprehensive ARAR discussion is included in the final FS and a complete listing of
ARARs for the selected remedy is included in Tables 11 through 13 (see Appendix I).

Cost Effectiveness

EPA has determined that the selected remedy is cost-effective and represents a reasonable value.
In making this determination, the following definition was used: "A remedy shall be cost-
effective if its costs are proportional to its overall effectiveness." (NCP §300.430 (f) (1) (ii) (D)).
EPA evaluated the "overall effectiveness" of those alternatives that satisfied the threshold criteria
(i.e., were both protective of human health and the environment and ARAR-compliant). Overall
effectiveness was evaluated by assessing three of the five balancing criteria in combination
(long-term effectiveness and permanence; reduction in toxicity, mobility, or volume through
treatment; and short-term effectiveness). Overall effectiveness was then compared to costs to
determine cost-effectiveness. The relationship of the overall effectiveness of the selected remedy
was determined to be proportional to costs and hence, this alternative represents a reasonable
value for the money to be spent.



                                                  32

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Each of the alternatives has undergone a detailed cost analysis. In that analysis, capital and
annual O&M costs have been estimated and used to develop present-worth costs. In the present-
worth cost analysis, annual O&M costs were calculated for the estimated life of an alternative
using a 7% discount rate. The estimated present-worth cost of the selected OU2 soil and
groundwater remedy is $11,505,000. EPA believes that the cost of the selected alternative is
proportional to its overall effectiveness because it eliminates exposure to contaminated soil,
prevents further migration of contaminated groundwater and actively treats contamination in the
source area, providing greater protectiveness than other Alternatives.

Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment Technologies

EPA has determined that the selected remedy represents the maximum extent to which
permanent solutions and treatment technologies can be utilized in a practicable manner at the
site. Of those alternatives that are protective of human health and the environment and comply
with ARARs (or provide a basis for invoking a waiver), EPA has determined that the selected
remedy provides the best balance of trade-offs in terms of the five balancing criteria, while also
considering the statutory preference for treatment as a principal element and State and
community acceptance.

The selected remedy will provide adequate long-term control of risks to human health and the
environment through excavation of residual soil contamination, capping of the source area and
monitored natural attenuation of the downgradient plume. The selected remedy does not present
short-term risks different from the other alternatives.

Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element

The statutory preference for remedies that employ treatment as a principal element is satisfied
under the selected groundwater remedy since the SVE wells in the source area vadose zone and
injection wells in the source area saturated zone will be actively treating contamination in the
groundwater aquifer. EPA’s prior removal actions at the site addressed hazardous materials and
soils in the former waste disposal trenches that were considered principal threat waste.

Five-Year Review Requirements

Although this remedy will not result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants
remaining at the site above levels that would allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, it
may take more than five years to attain the RGs. Pursuant to Section 121(c) of CERCLA, policy
reviews will be conducted no less often than once every five years after the completion of
construction to ensure that the remedy is, or will be, protective of human health and
environment.

DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES

The Proposed Plan for OU2 was released for public comment on July 15th, 2019. The comment
period closed on August 13, 2019. The Proposed Plan identified Alternative S-3, GW-4 as the
preferred alternative to address contaminated soil and groundwater at the site. Upon review of all

                                                33

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

comments submitted, EPA has determined that no significant changes to the preferred
alternative, as it was presented in the Proposed Plan, are warranted.




                                             34

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX I - Tables & Figures

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                TABLE 1
                                                  Summary of Chemicals of Concern and
                                               Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
Scenario Timeframe: Current/Future
Medium:             Groundwater
Exposure Medium:    Groundwater

                                                      Concentration
                                                                                                                Exposure Point
                                                        Detected            Concentration       Frequency                             EPC
   Exposure Point           Chemical of Concern                                                                 Concentration                    Statistical Measure
                                                                               Units           of Detection                           Units
                                                                                                                   (EPC)
                                                      Min         Max

Groundwater                cis-1,2-Dichloroethene      1.7         90            µg/L             10/10                53             ug/L      95% Student’s-t UCL

                                                                                 µg/L                                                          95% Adjusted Gamma
                           Trichloroethylene           3.8        270                             10/10               184             ug/L
                                                                                                                                                      UCL

                           Vinyl Chloride             0.18 J       50            µg/L              6/10               19.7            ug/L        95% KM (t) UCL

Scenario Timeframe: Current/Future
Medium:             Soil
Exposure Medium:    Surface Soil (0-2 feet)


                                                      Concentration
                                                                                                                Exposure Point
                                                        Detected            Concentration       Frequency                             EPC
   Exposure Point           Chemical of Concern                                                                 Concentration                    Statistical Measure
                                                                               Units           of Detection                           Units
                                                                                                                   (EPC)
                                                      Min         Max

Residential Area           Aroclor 1254                                          µg/kg
                                                      32 J        2800                            14/19               1184           µg/kg        95% KM (t) UCL
Surface Soil

                           Aroclor 1260               65 J       1800 J          µg/kg            12/19               782            µg/kg        95% KM (t) UCL

                           Lead                        4.8        1460          mg/kg             19/19               320            mg/kg        Arithmetic mean



J – qualifier for estimated value
95% Student’s-t UCL – 95% upper confidence limit, Student’s-t statistic (mean, STD)
95% Adjusted Gamma-UCL – 95% upper confidence limit, Adjusted Gamma statistic (mean, STD)
95% KM (t)-UCL – 95% upper confidence limit, Kaplan Meier statistic (mean, STD)


                                     Summary of Chemicals of Concern and Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
This table presents the chemicals of concern (COCs) and exposure point concentrations (EPCs) for the COCs in groundwater and residential area surface soil. The table
 includes the range of concentrations detected for each COC, as well as the frequency of detection (i.e., the number of times the chemical was detected in the samples
                                                         collected at the site), the EPC and how it was derived.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              TABLE 2. Selection of Exposure Scenarios


     Scenario                                                                                  Receptor
                            Medium           Exposure Medium         Exposure Point                                Receptor Age         Exposure Route        Type of Analysis
    Timeframe                                                                                 Population

                                                                    Tap Water/Shower                              Adult and Child
  Current/Future          Groundwater             Tap Water                                    Resident                                    Ing/Der/Inh           Quantitative
                                                                         Head                                    (birth to <6 years)



                                                                     Residential Area                             Adult and Child
  Current/Future              Soil            Surface Soil (0-2’)                              Resident                                      Ing/Der             Quantitative
                                                                      Surface Soil                               (birth to <6 years)


Ing – Ingestion
Der – Dermal
Inh – Inhalation


                                                                Summary of Selection of Exposure Pathways
     This table describes the exposure pathways that were evaluated for the risk assessment. Exposure media, exposure points, and characteristics of receptor populations are
                                                                                     included.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                TABLE 3

                                                    Non-Cancer Toxicity Data Summary
Pathway: Oral/Dermal
                                                                                                                               Combined
                                     Oral                           Absorp.      Adjusted      Adj.                                              Sources of
    Chemical of        Chronic/                    Oral RfD                                                     Primary        Uncertainty                          Dates of
                                      RfD                          Efficiency       RfD       Dermal                                                RfD:
     Concern          Subchronic                    Units                                                     Target Organ     /Modifying                            RfD:
                                     Value                         (Dermal)      ( Dermal)   RfD Units                                          Target Organ
                                                                                                                                Factors

cis-1,2-
                        Chronic     2.0E-01      mg/kg-day             1          2.0E-01    mg/kg-day           Kidney            3,000            IRIS            9/30/2010
Dichloroethene

                                                                                                              Heart, Immune
                                                                                                                 System,
Trichloroethylene       Chronic     5.0E-04      mg/kg-day             1          5.0E-04    mg/kg-day
                                                                                                              Developmental
                                                                                                                                10 to 1,000         IRIS            9/28/2011
                                                                                                                , Kidney

Vinyl Chloride          Chronic     3.0E-03      mg/kg-day             1          3.0E-03    mg/kg-day            Liver             30              IRIS            8/7/2000

                                                                                                               Eye, Finger,
                                                                                                                Toe Nail,
Aroclor 1254            Chronic     2.0E-05      mg/kg-day             1          2.0E-05    mg/kg-day
                                                                                                                Immune
                                                                                                                                   300              IRIS            10/1/1994
                                                                                                                 System

Aroclor 1260              NA          NA             NA                NA           NA         NA                  NA              NA               NA                 NA

Lead                      NA          NA             NA                NA           NA         NA                  NA              NA               NA                 NA

Pathway: Inhalation
    Chemical of        Chronic/       Inhalation          Inhalation        Primary Target   Combined Uncertainty             Sources of RfC:               Dates:
     Concern          Subchronic         RfC               RfC Units            Organ         /Modifying Factors               Target Organ


cis-1,2-
                          NA             NA                   NA                 NA                      NA                        NA                          NA
Dichloroethene

                                                                            Heart, Immune
Trichloroethylene       Chronic        2.0E-03              mg/m3
                                                                            System, Liver
                                                                                                    10 to 100                      IRIS                    9/28/2011


Vinyl Chloride          Chronic        1.0E-01              mg/m3               Liver                    30                        IRIS                    8/7/2000

Key

NA: No information available
IRIS: Integrated Risk Information System

                                                              Summary of Toxicity Assessment
This table provides non-carcinogenic risk information which is relevant to the contaminants of concern. When available, the chronic toxicity data have been
used to develop oral reference doses (RfDs) and inhalation reference concentrations (RfCs).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                    TABLE 4

                                               Cancer Toxicity Data Summary
Pathway: Oral/Dermal

                                                                   Adjusted Cancer                       Weight of Evidence/
                               Oral Cancer                                               Slope Factor
     Chemical of Concern                           Units            Slope Factor                          Cancer Guideline         Source        Date
                               Slope Factor                                                 Units
                                                                    (for Dermal)                            Description

                                                                                                         Inadequate information
cis-1,2-Dichloroethene             NA               NA                   NA                  NA           to assess carcinogenic    IRIS      9/30/2010
                                                                                                                 potential

                                 4.6E-02       (mg/kg-day)-1           4.6E-02           (mg/kg-day)-1      Carcinogenic to
Trichloroethylene                                                                                              humans
                                                                                                                                    IRIS      9/28/2011


Vinyl Chloride                   7.2E-01       (mg/kg-day)-1           7.2E-01           (mg/kg-day)-1             A                IRIS       8/7/2000

Aroclor 12541                    2.0E+00       (mg/kg-day)-1          2.0E+00            (mg/kg-day)-1             B2               IRIS      10/1/1996

               1                 2.0E+00       (mg/kg-day)    -1
                                                                      2.0E+00            (mg/kg-day)-1
                                                                                                                   B2               IRIS      10/1/1996
Aroclor 1260

Lead                               NA               NA                  NA                   NA                   NA                NA           NA

Pathway: Inhalation
                                                                           Weight of Evidence/
     Chemical of Concern        Unit Risk          Units                                                                Source                Date
                                                                       Cancer Guideline Description

cis-1,2-Dichloroethene             NA               NA                Inadequate information to assess
                                                                                                                         IRIS               9/30/2010
                                                                           carcinogenic potential

Trichloroethylene                4.1E-06         (ug/m3)-1                Carcinogenic to humans                         IRIS               9/28/2011

                                                       3 -1
Vinyl Chloride                   4.4E-06         (ug/m )                             A                                   IRIS               8/7/2000

Key:
A: Human Carcinogen
B2: Probable human carcinogen – indicates sufficient evidence in animals and inadequate or no evidence in humans
1
    – based on upper-bound slope factor for high risk and persistence polychlorinated biphenyls
NA: No information available
IRIS: Integrated Risk Information System

                                                     Summary of Toxicity Assessment

This table provides carcinogenic risk information which is relevant to the contaminants of concern. Toxicity data are provided for both the
oral and inhalation routes of exposure.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                       TABLE 5
                                      Risk Characterization Summary - Noncarcinogens
Scenario Timeframe:              Current/Future
Receptor Population:             Site Resident
Receptor Age:                    Adult
                                                                                                                       Non-Carcinogenic Risk
                  Exposure                                                           Primary Target
  Medium                            Exposure Point        Chemical of Concern                                                                      Exposure
                  Medium                                                                 Organ
                                                                                                          Ingestion     Dermal      Inhalation      Routes
                                                                                                                                                    Total

                                                          cis-1,2-Dichloroethene          Kidney             0.8          NA            NA             0.8

                                                                                      Heart, Immune
                                   Tap water/shower                                      System,
Groundwater      Groundwater                                Trichloroethylene         Developmental,
                                                                                                             11           1.9           80             93
                                        head
                                                                                       Kidney, Liver

                                                              Vinyl Chloride               Liver             0.2         0.01           0.2            0.4

                                                                                      Eye, Finger, Toe
                                                               Aroclor 1254            Nail, Immune         0.07         0.04           NA             0.1
                                    Residential Area                                      System
Soil             Surface Soil
                                     Surface Soil
                                                               Aroclor 1260                 NA               NA           NA            NA            NA

                                                                                                                         Hazard Index Total=           94
Scenario Timeframe:              Current/Future
Receptor Population:             Site Resident
Receptor Age:                    Child
                                                                                                                       Non-Carcinogenic Risk
                  Exposure                                                           Primary Target
  Medium                            Exposure Point        Chemical of Concern                                                                      Exposure
                  Medium                                                                 Organ
                                                                                                          Ingestion     Dermal      Inhalation      Routes
                                                                                                                                                    Total

                                                          cis-1,2-Dichloroethene          Kidney             1.3          NA            NA             1.3

                                                                                      Heart, Immune
                                   Tap water/shower                                      System,
Groundwater      Groundwater                                 Trichloroethylene        Developmental,
                                                                                                             18           3.1           57             78
                                        head
                                                                                       Kidney, Liver

                                                              Vinyl Chloride               Liver             0.3         0.02           0.1            0.4

                                                               Aroclor 1254           Eye, Finger, Toe
                                                                                       Nail, Immune          0.8          0.3           NA             1.1
                                    Residential Area                                      System
Soil             Surface Soil
                                     Surface Soil
                                                               Aroclor 1260                 NA               NA           NA            NA            NA

                                                                                                                           Hazard Index Total          81

                                              Summary of Risk Characterization - Non-Carcinogens

 The table presents hazard quotients (HQs) for each route of exposure and the hazard index (sum of hazard quotients) for exposure to groundwater and surface
  soil containing site-related chemicals. The Risk Assessment Guidance for Superfund states that, generally, a hazard index (HI) greater than 1 indicates the
                                                           potential for adverse non-cancer effects.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                    TABLE 6
                                      Risk Characterization Summary - Carcinogens
Scenario Timeframe:               Future
Receptor Population:              Site Resident
Receptor Age:                     Lifetime (Adult/child)

  Medium            Exposure        Exposure Point            Chemical of Concern                                Carcinogenic Risk
                    Medium
                                                                                              Ingestion       Dermal       Inhalation      Exposure
                                                                                                                                          Routes Total

                                                              cis-1,2-Dichloroethene              NA            NA             NA               NA
                                   Tap water/shower
Groundwater       Groundwater                                   Trichloroethylene              1.6E-04        2.6E-05       3.2E-04           5E-04
                                        head
                                                                  Vinyl Chloride               9.2E-04        4.9E-05       2.8E-03           4E-03

                                                                   Aroclor 1254                 3E-06          1E-06           NA             5E-06
                                    Residential Area
Soil              Surface Soil
                                     Surface Soil
                                                                   Aroclor 1260                 2E-06          9E-07           NA             3E-06

                                                                                                                         Total Risk =         1E-02

                                              Summary of Risk Characterization – Carcinogens

The table presents site-related cancer risks for groundwater exposure. As stated in the National Contingency Plan, the point of departure is 10-6 and the
acceptable risk range for site-related exposure is 10-6 to 10-4. The cancer risk from trichloroethylene and vinyl chloride in groundwater exceeds the
acceptable risk range, indicating an unacceptable risk from exposure to groundwater.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                      TABLE 7
                                          Risk Characterization Summary – Lead
                                       Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentration
Scenario Timeframe:                 Current/Future
Receptor Population:                Site Resident
Receptor Age:                       Child

                                                                                                                            Geometric
                                                                                      Exposure Point
                     Exposure                                      Chemical of                                              Mean Blood
    Medium                               Exposure Point                               Concentration            Units                          Lead Risk3
                     Medium                                         Concern                                                 Lead Level
                                                                                         (EPC)1
                                                                                                                             (µg/dL)2

Soil               Surface Soil      Residential Surface Soil          Lead                  320              mg/kg              4.2             32.1%
1
    – The lead EPC was the arithmetic mean of all samples collected from the surface soil interval (0-2ft)
2
 – Consistent with the EPA Superfund Lead-Contaminated Residential Site Handbook, lead risks were evaluated for the child using the Integrated
Exposure and Uptake Biokinetic Model
3
  – Lead risks are expressed as the probability of having a blood lead level greater than 5 µg/dL; EPA’s risk reduction goal is to limit the probability of
a child’s blood lead concentration exceeding 5 µg/dL to 5% or less.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                               Table 8: Soil Remediation Goals

                                       NJDEP Residential
                                                               Background
                                       Direct Contact                              Remediation
Chemical Name        Unit                                      Threshold
                                       Soil Remediation                            Goals
                                                               Value (3)
                                       Standards (1)
Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs)
PCBs (4)          mg/kg                         0.2                  NA                    0.2
Inorganics
Lead (5)          mg/kg                        400                  155.2                  400

Notes:
(1) NJDEP 2012. Residential Direct Contact Health-Based Criteria and Soil Remediation Standards. Last amended September 18,

2017; http://www.nj.gov/dep/rules/rules/njac7_26d.pdf
(2) Background threshold values (BTVs) displayed are surface soils BTVs developed by EES JV for SVOCs and metals based on a

statistical evaluation of background analytical results using EPA’s ProUCL, version 5.0 and EPA's Technical Guide - Statistical
Software for Environmental Applications for Data Sets with and without Nondetect Observations, September 2013.
(3) PCBs Maximum Concentrations Observed is based on combined concentrations of detected aroclors at any one location.
(4) EPA Region 2 recently indicated lead concentrations at residential properties (in addition to meeting the 400 mg/kg

maximum concentration PRG) shall be subject to meeting a 200 mg/kg property wide average cleanup goal.
mg/kg = milligrams per kilogram                                              BTV = background threshold value
NA = not applicable                                                          PRG = preliminary remediation goal
NJDEP = New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      Table 9: Groundwater Remediation Goals

                                 National Primary
                                                             NJ Groundwater         NJ Drinking
                                 Drinking Water                                                        Remediation
Chemical Name             Unit                               Quality Standards      Water
                                 Standards                   (2)                                       Goals (4)
                                                                                    Standards (3)
                                 (EPA MCLs) (1)
Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs)
1,1,1-Trichloroethane     µg/L          200                           30                  30                   30
1,1-Dichloroethane        µg/L          NL                            50                  50                   50
1,1-Dichloroethene        µg/L           7                            1                    2                   1
Chlorobenzene             µg/L          100                           50                  50                   50
cis-1,2-Dichloroethene    µg/L           70                           70                  70                   70
Trichloroethene           µg/L           5                            1                    1                   1
Vinyl Chloride            µg/L           2                            1                   2                    1
Semi-Volatile Organic Compounds (SVOCs)
1,4-Dioxane               µg/L          NL                           0.4                  NL                   0.4

Notes:
(1) EPA 2009. National Primary Drinking Water Standards (EPA 816-F-09-004, May 2009);

    http://water.epa.gov/drink/contaminants/upload/mcl-2.pdf.
(2) NJDEP 2018. New Jersey Ground Water Quality Standards Class IIA (N.J.A.C. 7:9C, August 9, 2018);

    https://www.nj.gov/dep/rules/rules/njac7_9c.pdf.
(3) NJDEP 2018. New Jersey Drinking Water Standards (September 4, 2018);

    http://www.nj.gov/dep/standards/drinking%20water.pdf.
(4) Remediation Goals (RGs) were selected from the lowest of the EPA MCLs, NJ Groundwater Quality Standards,

    and NJ Drinking Water Standards.

µg/L = micrograms per liter
EPA = United States Environmental Protection Agency
MCL = Maximum Contaminant Level
NJ = New Jersey
NJDEP = New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
NL = not listed

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                Table 10: Vapor Intrusion Screening Levels (VISLs)


                                                                                      Regional Screening Level (RSL) Resident
   Chemical Name                                                          Unit        Ambient Air Table (TR=1E-06, HQ=1)
                                                                                      April 2019 (1)


   1,1,1-Trichloroethane                                                 µg/m3                           5200
   1,1-Dichloroethane                                                    µg/m3                            1.8
   1,1-Dichloroethene                                                    µg/m3                            210
   Chlorobenzene                                                         µg/m3                            52
   cis-1,2-Dichloroethene                                                µg/m3                            NL
   Trichloroethene                                                       µg/m3                           0.48
   Vinyl Chloride                                                        µg/m3                           0.17
   1,4-Dioxane                                                           µg/m3                           0.56
Notes:
(1) EPA Generic Regional Screening Level (RSL) Resident Ambient Air Table (TR=1E-06, HQ=1) April 2019;

https://semspub.epa.gov/work/HQ/199444.pdf

µg/m3= micrograms per cubic meter
EPA = United States Environmental Protection Agency
NL = not listed

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                 Table 11
                                                                                     Chemical‐specific ARARs and TBCs
                                                                                    Mansfield Trail Dump, Operable Unit 2
                                                                                       Byram Township, New Jersey

Regulatory Level                       Citation                         Status                        Requirement Synopsis                                                     Comment




                      Safe Drinking Water Act; National                                       Establishes federal MCLs, maximum
                                                                                          permissible levels of contaminants in water               The standards were used in to developing the RGs for site
    Federal           Primary Drinking Water Standards               Applicable
                                                                                            that is delivered to any user of a public                                   groundwater.
                          (40 CFR 141.50-52) - MCLs
                                                                                                     drinking water systems.




                          New Jersey Residential Direct                                                                                          The standards were used to develop the RGs for PCBs. The lead
                                                                                             Establishes standards for remediation of
                                                                                                                                              standard is not ARAR, but the RGs developed for OU2 are consistent with
                           Contact Soil Remediation                  Applicable                        contaminated soil .
     State                                                                                                                                                                  the standard.
                            Standards (NJAC 7:26D)



                     New Jersey Impact to Groundwater
     State                                                                  TBC                                                                        The criteria were evaluated in developing the RGs.
                     Soil Screening Levels (NJAC 7:26D)
                                                                                              Establishes criteria for soil cleanups.


                                                                                          Establishes the water quality standards for
                                                                                         the State's groundwater cleanups based on
                      New Jersey Ground Water Quality
     State                                                            Applicable        the type of groundwater use. Groundwater at           The standards were used in developing the RGs for site groundwater.
                       Standards Class IIA (NJAC 7:9C)
                                                                                          the site is classified as Class IIA, suitable for
                                                                                                        drinking water use.


                      New Jersey Drinking Water Quality                                  Establishes drinking water standards (MCLs)
     State                                                           Applicable                                                               The standards were used in developing the RGs for site groundwater.
                           Standards (NJAC 7:10)                                                         for the State.


              Acronyms:
              ARARs - Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements                            RGs - Remediation Goals
              TBC - To be considered                                                                 RSL - regional screening level
              CFR - Code of Federal Regulations MCLs - Maximum Contaminant Levels                    TSCA - Toxic Substances Control Act
              N.J.A.C. - New Jersey Administrative Code

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                  Table 12
                                                                    Location‐specific ARARs and TBCs
                                                                   Mansfield Trail Dump, Operable Unit 2
                                                                      Byram Township, New Jersey


Regulatory Level                Citation                  Status                   Requirement Synopsis                                               Comment

Wetlands and Floodplains Standards and Regulations

                      Statement of Procedures on                           This Statement of Procedures sets forth    The Site has both freshwater forested/shrub wetlands and floodplains
                     Floodplain Management and                           Agency policy and guidance for carrying out    surrounding Cowboy Creek and Lubbers Run, downgradient of the
     Federal                                               TBC
                     Wetlands Protection (40 CFR 6                      the provisions of Executive Orders (EO) 11988    dump areas. Remedial design and remedial action will take into
                             Appendix A)                                                  and 11990.                     consideration floodplain management and wetlands protection.


                    Policy on Floodplains and Wetland                   Superfund actions must meet the substantive The Site has both freshwater forested/shrub wetlands and floodplains
     Federal         Assessments for CERCLA Actions                     requirements of EO 11988, EO 11990, and 40    surrounding Cowboy Creek and Lubbers Run, downgradient of the
                                                           TBC                                                         dump areas. Remedial design and remedial action will take into
                   (OSWER Directive 9280.0-12, 1985)                              CFR part 6, Appendix A.
                                                                                                                       consideration floodplain management and wetlands protection.


                                                                                                                         Freshwater forested/shrub wetlands are present downgradient of the
                                                                        Federal agencies are required to minimize the      Site in the vicinity of Cowboy Creek and Lubbers Run. A freshwater
   Federal (Non-     Wetlands Executive Order (EO                       destruction, loss, or degradation of wetlands     pond is mapped in the National Wetlands Inventory near the dump
    Regulatory)                11990)                      TBC            and to preserve and enhance natural and         areas, however, was not confirmed during site reconnaissance. The
                                                                                beneficial values of wetlands.            remedial design and remedial action will include best management
                                                                                                                                     practices to avoid or minimize harm to wetlands.


                                                                                                                          The potential effects of any action (e.g. construction of impervious
                                                                         Federal agencies are required to reduce the      surface) will be evaluated to ensure that the planning and decision
   Federal (Non-   Floodplain Management (EO 11988)                      risk of flood loss, to minimize the impact of
                                                           TBC                                                               making reflect consideration of flood hazards and floodplains
    Regulatory)                                                             floods, and to restore and preserve the         management, including restoration and preservation of natural
                                                                         natural and beneficial values of floodplains.                          undeveloped floodplains.


                                                                                                                         Freshwater forested/shrub wetlands are present downgradient of the
                                                                        Regulates discharge of dredged and fill material   Site in the vicinity of Cowboy Creek and Lubbers Run. A freshwater
                                                                            into the “waters of the United States”.
                    Clean Water Act Section 404 (40     Potentially                                                       pond is mapped in the National Wetlands Inventory near the dump
     Federal                                                            Implemented through the 404(b)(1) guidelines,
                            CFR 230- 233)               Applicable                                                       areas, however, was not confirmed during site reconnaissance. During
                                                                                       40 CFR Part 230.
                                                                                                                          remedial design effect on wetlands will be evaluated and addressed
                                                                                                                                            consistent with these requirements.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Table 12
                                                                         Location‐specific ARARs and TBCs
                                                                        Mansfield Trail Dump, Operable Unit 2
                                                                           Byram Township, New Jersey


 Regulatory Level                Citation                      Status                       Requirement Synopsis                                                Comment

                                                                                                                                 Freshwater forested/shrub wetlands are present downgradient of the
                                                                                    This act establishes requirements for          Site in the vicinity of Cowboy Creek and Lubbers Run. A freshwater
                     New Jersey Freshwater Wetlands                              regulated activity disturbing wetlands (e.g.     pond is mapped in the National Wetlands Inventory near the dump
       State         Protection Act Rules (NJAC 7:7A,   Potentially Applicable
                                                                                     any excavation, dredging, drainage,             areas, however, was not confirmed during site reconnaissance.
                              NJSA 13:98-1)                                                   construction, etc.).               Remedial Design and Remedial Action will take into account any effect
                                                                                                                                                               on wetlands.

Wildlife Habitat Protection Standards and Regulations


                                                                                    This act establishes standards for the        The USFWS reported that the site is located within areas that provide
                      Endangered Species Act (16 USC    Potentially Applicable    protection of threatened and endangered        habitat for several federally listed threatened and endangered species.
      Federal            1531 et seq.; 40 CFR 400)                                                  species.                       The potential effects of federally listed endangered and threatened


                                                                                                                                   The USFWS provided a list of birds that exist on the USFWS Birds of
                                                                                    This act establishes standards for the
                                                                                                                                 Conservation Concern list and are known to have vulnerabilities within
                    Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA, 1 Potentially Applicable        protection of migratory bird species,
      Federal                                                                                                                    the project area. The potential effect on these birds will be considered
                             USC 03 et seq .)                                     including individual birds or their nests or
                                                                                                                                                       during the Remedial Design.
                                                                                                     eggs.


                                                                                                                                  The NJDEP's Natural Heritage Program identified a natural heritage
                                                                                                                                  priority site that is approximately 0.5 mile northeast of the Cowboy
                                                                                 This act protects and conserves endangered
       State           New Jersey Endangered and     Potentially Applicable                                                       Creek area (downgradient of the site). The potential effects on New
                                                                                            and nongame species.
                    Nongame Species Conservation Act                                                                               Jersey listed endangered and nongame species will be considered
                          (NJSA 23:2A-1 - 15)                                                                                                            during the Remedial Design.



                                                                                                                                  The NJDEP Natural Heritage Program reported that the site contains
                       New Jersey Endangered Plant                                                                                populations of two unnamed plant species that are imperiled in the
       State                                            Potentially Applicable This act protects endangered plant species.
                        Species List Act (NJAC 7:5B)                                                                                state. The effects on endangered plant species will be evaluated
                                                                                                                                                       during the Remedial Design.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                         Table 12
                                                                                           Location‐specific ARARs and TBCs
                                                                                          Mansfield Trail Dump, Operable Unit 2
                                                                                             Byram Township, New Jersey



 Regulatory Level                        Citation                                Status                        Requirement Synopsis                                            Comment

Cultural Resources, Historic Preservation Standards and Regulations


                                                                                                This requirement establishes procedures to
                                                                                                  provide for preservation of historical and
                         National Historical Preservation                                       archeological data that might be destroyed
      Federal                                                                                                                                         The impact of proposed remedy on historical and archeological
                        Act Regulations (36 CFR Part 800)                     Potentially       through alteration of terrain as a result of a         sensitive areas will be evaluated during the Remedial Design.
                                                                              Applicable         federal construction project or a federally
                                                                                                        licensed activity or program.




                           New Jersey Highlands Water                                                                                           Since the site is located within the preservation area, remedial
                                                                                                This requirement preserves open space and
      Federal              Protection and Planning Act                                                                                       alternatives that are considered "major Highlands development" as
                                                                              Applicable       natural resources (including water resources)
                             (N.J.S.A. 13:20-1 et seq.)                                                                                           defined by this act. Consultation with NJDEP will establish
                                                                                                within the Highlands Region of New Jersey.
                                                                                                                                                                           compliance.

          Acronyms:
          ARARs - Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements                          NJAC - New Jersey Administrative Code
          CERCLA - Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act         NJSA - New Jersey Statues Annotated
          CFR - Code of Federal Regulations                                                    OSWER - Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response
          EO - executive order                                                                 USC - United States Code
          MBTA - Migratory Bird Treaty Act                                                     USFWS - United States Fish and Wildlife Service
          NEPA - National Environmental Policy Act                                             TBC - To Be Considered

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Table 13
                                                                          Action‐specific ARARs and TBCs
                                                                        Mansfield Trail Dump, Operable Unit 2
                                                                           Byram Township, New Jersey

 Regulatory Level                Citation                   Status                   Requirement Synopsis                                              Comment

General ‐ Site Remediation

                    RCRA Identification and Listing of    Potentially         This regulation describes methods for    This regulation is applicable to the identification of hazardous wastes,
     Federal                                                              identifying hazardous wastes and lists known     if any, that are generated, treated, stored, or disposed during
                     Hazardous Wastes (40 CFR 261)        Applicable
                                                                                        hazardous wastes.                                         remedial activities.

                     RCRA Standards Applicable to
                                                                          Describes standards applicable to generators
                    Generators of Hazardous Wastes        Potentially                                                  Standards will be followed if any hazardous wastes are generated on-
     Federal                                                                          of hazardous wastes.
                             (40 CFR 262)                 Applicable                                                                                    site.


                      New Jersey Hazardous Waste
                                                                              This regulation describes methods for    This regulation will be applicable to the identification of hazardous
                     Regulations - Identification and     Potentially
       State                                                              identifying hazardous wastes and lists known wastes, if any, that are generated, treated, stored, or disposed of
                    Listing of Hazardous Waste (NJAC      Applicable
                                                                                        hazardous wastes.                                    during remedial activities.
                                 7:26G-5)



                                                                            This regulation sets the requirements for
                        New Jersey Stormwater             Potentially                                                       Applicable if remedial activities include total land disturbance
       State                                                                    stormwater management during
                      Management Rule (NJAC 7:8)          Applicable                                                                        exceeding regulatory threshold.
                                                                                          construction.



                      New Jersey Soil Erosion and
                                                          Potentially      This act outlines the requirements for soil   Applicable to remedial construction activities that result in total land
       State        Sediment Control Act (NJAC 2:90,
                                                          Applicable        erosion and sediment control measures.                   disturbance greater than or equal to 5000 sf.
                             NJSA 16:52A)




                     New Jersey Noise Control (NJAC      Relevant and     This standard provides the requirements for This standard will be applied to establish limits on noise that can be
       State
                                 7:29)                   Appropriate                     noise control.                              generated during remedial activities.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                      Table 13
                                                                         Action‐specific ARARs and TBCs
                                                                       Mansfield Trail Dump, Operable Unit 2
                                                                          Byram Township, New Jersey
 Regulatory Level                 Citation                 Status                  Requirement Synopsis                                              Comment
Waste Transportation

                      Department of Transportation
                                                         Potentially      This regulation outlines procedures for the
      Federal       (DOT) Rules for Transportation of
                                                         Applicable          packaging, labeling, manifesting, and      Applicable to transport hazardous material from the site, if any.
                    Hazardous Materials (49 CFR Parts
                                                                               transporting hazardous materials.
                       107, 171, 172, 177 to 179)


                      RCRA Standards Applicable to
                                                         Potentially      Establishes standards for hazardous waste     Applicable to transport hazardous material from the site, if any.
      Federal       Transporters of Hazardous Waste      Applicable                      transporters.
                              (40 CFR 263)


                        New Jersey Transportation of                       This regulation establishes recordkeeping
                                                         Potentially      requirements and standards related to the     Applicable to transport hazardous material from the site, if any.
       State            Hazardous Materials (N.J.A.C.    Applicable
                                  16:49)                                    manifest system for hazardous wastes.

Water Discharge or Subsurface Injection

                                                                         NPDES requirements govern compliance with Vapor extraction system may generate small amount of waste
                         National Pollutant Discharge    Potentially        water quality standards, a discharge   water, which may discharge to surface water. In New Jersey,
      Federal          Elimination System (NPDES) (40   Relevant and
                               CFR 100 et seq.)                               monitoring system, and records      EPA has delegated the authority to regulate pollutant discharges
                                                        Appropriate
                                                                                       maintenance.                                under this program to NJDEP.

                                                                         This regulation governs the discharge of any Vapor extraction system may generate small amount of waste
                          The New Jersey Pollutant
                                                         Potentially      pollutants into or adjacent to State waters water, which may discharge to surface water, in which case the
       State            Discharge Elimination System
                           (NJPDES) (NJAC 7:14A)         Applicable        that may alter the physical, chemical, or  project will meet substantive NJPDES requirements for regulated
                                                                             biological properties of State waters.                       surface water discharges.
Off‐Gas Management

                                                                            These provide air quality standards for      During remediation and treatment, if any such air emissions are
                       Clean Air Act (CAA)—National      Potentially
      Federal          Ambient Air Quality Standards                      particulate matter, lead, NO2, SO2, CO, and   generated, they will be controlled and monitored to comply with
                                                         Applicable
                           (NAAQs) (40 CFR 50)                                      volatile organic matter.                                      these standards.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                              Table 13
                                                                                 Action‐specific ARARs and TBCs
                                                                               Mansfield Trail Dump, Operable Unit 2
                                                                                  Byram Township, New Jersey

  Regulatory Level                   Citation                   Status                           Requirement Synopsis                                            Comment


                          Standards of Performance for                                                                              During operation of any equipment that comprises a “new stationary
                                                              Potentially
      Federal            New Stationary Sources (40 CFR                             Set the general requirements for air quality.       source”, regulated air emissions, if any, will be controlled and
                                                              Applicable
                                       60)                                                                                                       monitored to comply with these standards.



                         National Emission Standards for                                                                             During remediation, if any regulated hazardous air pollutants are
                                                              Potentially                These provide air quality standards for
       Federal           Hazardous Air Pollutants (40 CFR                                                                           emitted, emissions will be controlled and monitored to comply with
                                                              Applicable                       hazardous air pollutants.
                                       61)                                                                                                                    these standards.



                         New Jersey Air Pollution Control     Potentially           This regulation describes requirements and         During remediation, if any regulated air pollutants are emitted,
        State                                                                         procedures that govern the emission of
                                Act (NJAC 7:27)               Applicable                                                                  emissions will comply with substantive requirements. .
                                                                                   contaminants into the ambient atmosphere.



                         New Jersey Ambient Air Quality       Potentially           This standard provides the requirements for        During remediation, if any regulated air pollutants are emitted,
        State
                           Standards (NJAC 7:27-13)           Applicable                     ambient air quality control.                   emissions will comply with substantive requirements



Acronyms:
ARARs - Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements       NO2 - Nitrogen dioxide
TBC - To Be Considered                                            NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
CAA - Clean Air Act                                               OSHA - Occupational Safety and Health Administration
CAMU - Corrective Action Management Units                         OSWER - Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations                                 PCB - polychlorinated biphenyl
CO - Carbon monoxide                                              RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
EPA - Environmental Protection Agency                             SO2 - Sulfur dioxide
LDR - Land Disposal Restrictions                                  TSCA - Toxic Substances control Act
NAAQS - National Ambient air Quality Standards                    UIC - Underground Injection Control
NJPDES - New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             Table 14: Cost Estimate Summary – S-3
                               Mansfield Trail Dump Site – OU2
                           Byram Township, Sussex County, New Jersey


No.                                          Description                                                Cost
               Remedial Action
01             General Requirements                                                                           $532,000
02             Site Preparation/Site Work                                                                     $111,300
03             Excavation and Backfill of Contaminated Soils                                                  $501,290
05             Transportation and Disposal of Excavated Soils                                                 $505,000
06             Post-excavation Sampling                                                                        $28,000
               Subtotal                                                                               $1,677,590
               Contingency (30%: 20% scope + 10% bid contingency)                                             $503,277
               Subtotal                                                                               $2,180,867
               General Contractor Markup (profit) 10%                                                         $218,087
               Total Remedial Action Capital Costs                                                          $2,399,000

               PRESENT WORTH
               Total Capital Cost                                                                          $2,399,000
               Total Present Worth                                                                         $2,399,000

      Notes:   1. Percentages used for indirect costs are based on guidance from Section 5.0 of "A Guide to Developing
                  and Documenting Cost Estimates During the Feasibility Study", EPA 2000.
               2. The project cost presented herein represents only feasibility study level, and is
               thus subject to change pending the results of the pre-design investigation, which
               is intended to collect sufficient data to assist in the development of remedial
               design and associated detailed cost estimate. Expected accuracy range of the cost
               estimate is -30% to +50%. Present worth calculation assumes 7% discount rate
               after inflation is considered.
               3. Total present worth is rounded to the nearest $1,000. Inflation and depreciation are excluded from the
                   present value cost.
               4. A detailed cost estimate can be found in the OU2 Feasibility Study.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                     Table 15: Cost Estimate Summary – GW-4
                                         Mansfield Trail Dump Site – OU2
                                    Byram Township, Sussex County, New Jersey

No.                                       Description                                                        Cost
CAPITAL COSTS
01       General Requirements                                                                                $1,787,000
02       Cap Construction (from Alternative GW-2)                                                             $744,000
03       First year Cap O&M (from Alternative GW-2)                                                             $30,000
04       SVE Construction (from Alternative GW-3)                                                             $661,000
05       First year SVE O&M (from Alternative GW-3)                                                           $254,000
06       In Situ Treatment                                                                                   $1,024,000
07       First Year In Situ Treatment Performance Monitoring                                                   $124,000
         Subtotal                                                                                            $4,624,000
         Contingency 20%                                                                                       $925,000
         Subtotal                                                                                            $5,549,000
         General Contractor Bond and Insurance 5%                                                              $278,000
         Subtotal                                                                                            $5,827,000
         General Contractor Costs (Profit) 10%                                                                 $583,000
         Total Remedial Action Capital Costs                                                                 $6,410,000

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS
01      Annual OM&M for Cap (from Alternative GW-2)
          Present Value of Cap OM&M - Years 1 through 5                                                       $193,812
          Present Value of Cap OM&M - Years 6 through 10                                                      $102,916
          Present Value of Cap OM&M - Years 11 through 30                                                     $125,577
          Subtotal                                                                                             $422,305
02      Annual O&M for SVE System Operation Year 2-5 (from Alternative GW-3)                                   $146,000
          Present worth of O&M Years 2-5 Operation (from Alternative GW-3)                                     $463,000
 03     Annual In Situ Treatment Performance Monitoring Year 2-5                                                $77,700
          Present worth of In Situ Treatment Performance Monitoring                                           $246,000
 04     Annual Monitoring Cost for MNA and LTM (from Alternative GW-2)                                        $126,000
          Present worth of Monitoring (30 Years) (from Alternative GW-2)                                     $1,564,000

PRESENT WORTH
        Total Capital Cost                                                                                   $6,410,000
        Total OM&M Cost                                                                                      $2,696,000
        Total Present Worth                                                                                  $9,106,000
     Note:   The project cost presented herein represents only feasibility study level, and is
             thus subject to change pending the results of the pre-design investigation, which is intended
             to collect sufficient data to assist in the development of remedial design and associated
             detailed cost estimate. Expected accuracy range of the cost estimate is -30% to +50%. Present
             worth calculation assumes 7% discount rate after inflation is considered.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

N




Legend
                                                               Mansfield Trail Dump Site
            Former Source Area                        Sussex County, Byram Township, New Jersey
                                                                OU2 Record of Decision
            Former Waste Disposal Trenches

                                                                    FIGURE 1
                                                            Site Location Map
Notes:
Basemaps source: ESRI
                                             EPA Region 2                            September 2019

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

N




N.T.S.




 Legend
                                                                Mansfield Trail Dump Site
             Former Source Area                        Sussex County, Byram Township, New Jersey
                                                                 OU2 Record of Decision
             Former Waste Disposal Trenches

                                                                     FIGURE 2
                                                      Former Source Area Map
 Notes:
 Basemaps source: ESRI                        EPA Region 2                             September 2019

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                   N.T.S.



                                                                                                                Mansfield Trail Dump Site
                                                                                                       Sussex County, Byram Township, New Jersey
                                                                                                                 OU1 Record of Decision


                                                                                                                     FIGURE 3
Notes:                                                                                                          Site Plan Map
1. Aerial photograph from NJ Office of Information Technology (NJOIT), Office of Geographic
Information Systems (OGIS), March/April 2012.
                                                                                              EPA Region 2                             September 2019

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                   N.T.S.


                                                                                                                Mansfield Trail Dump Site
                                                                                                       Sussex County, Byram Township, New Jersey
                                                                                                                 OU1 Record of Decision


                                                                                                                     FIGURE 4
                                                                                                         Monitoring Well Map
Notes:
1. Aerial photograph from NJ Office of Information Technology (NJOIT), Office of Geographic
Information Systems (OGIS), March/April 2012.                                                 EPA Region 2                             September 2019

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                                N.T.S.


                                                                                                                                    Mansfield Trail Dump Site
                                                                                                                           Sussex County, Byram Township, New Jersey
                                                                                                                                     OU1 Record of Decision
Notes:
1. Groundwater results are presented for the November 2017 sampling. The port with the highest concentration
is presented.
                                                                                                                                        FIGURE 5
2. Exceedances of RI screening criteria are highlighted orange.
3. Acronyms:
                                                                                                                                 Deep Bedrock Plume Map
               D - dilution
               J - estimated value
                                                                                                                                    (November 2017)
               ND - non detect
               TCE - Trichloroethene
4. Aerial photograph from NJ Office of Information Technology (NJOIT), Office of Geographic Information Systems
(OGIS), March/April 2012.                                                                                         EPA Region 2                             September 2019

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                  N.T.S.


Notes
1. Groundwater results are presented for the                           Mansfield Trail Dump Site
November 2014 sampling,                                       Sussex County, Byram Township, New Jersey
when a well was not sampled the results from
September 2015 are presented.                                           OU1 Record of Decision
2. Acronyms:
               J- estimated value
               NS - Not Sampled
                                                                           FIGURE 6
               TCE - Trichloroethene                                Deep Bedrock Plume Map
               U- non detect
3. Aerial photograph from NJ Office of Information                     (November 2014)
Technology (NJOIT), Office of Geographic Infor-
mation Systems (OGIS), March/April 2012.

                                                     EPA Region 2                             September 2019

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

U - not detected, detection limit is value to left
J - estimated concentration
NC - not collected
Analytical Results
Trichlorothene (TCE)
cis-1,2-Dichloroethene (cis                             Mansfield Trail Dump Site
-1,2-DCE)                                      Sussex County, Byram Township, New Jersey
Notes:                                                   OU2 Record of Decision
1. All results in mi-
crograms per liter
2. Aerial photograph from
                                                FIGURE 7
NJ Office of Information         Cross Section Groundwater Plume Map
Technology (NJOIT), Office
of Geographic Information                    November 2017
Systems (OGIS), March/
April 2012.
                         EPA Region 2                                        September 2019

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        Mansfield Trail Dump Site
                                               Sussex County, Byram Township, New Jersey
                                                         OU2 Record of Decision

Notes:                                                       FIGURE 8
1. Aerial photograph from NJ Office
of Information Technology (NJOIT),              Conceptual Site Model
Office of Geographic Information
Systems (OGIS), March/April 2012.
                                      EPA Region 2                             September 2019

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                             N.T.S.



                                                                                                          Mansfield Trail Dump Site
                                                                                                 Sussex County, Byram Township, New Jersey
                                                                                                           OU2 Record of Decision

Notes:
1. TRZ - Target Remediation Zone
2. The non-residential TRZs are not to                                                                       FIGURE 9
scale and are assumed to be 20 ft by
20 ft areas. TRZ extents will be
                                                                                                   Selected Soil Alternative (S-3)
confirmed in a pre-design investigation.
3. Aerial photograph from NJ Office of Information Technology (NJOIT), Office of Geo-
graphic Information Systems (OGIS), March/April 2012.                                   EPA Region 2                             September 2019

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                           N.T.S.



                                                                                        Mansfield Trail Dump Site
                                                                               Sussex County, Byram Township, New Jersey
                                                                                         OU2 Record of Decision


                                                                                       FIGURE 10
Notes:                                                                   Selected Groundwater Alternative (GW-4)
1. Conceptual Design shown for Feasibility Purposes only. Modifica-
tions and refinements of specific design components will be made
during the Remedial Design Phase.                                     EPA Region 2                             September 2019

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX II - Administrative Record

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                     ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                   FINAL
                                                                                07/15/2019                                             REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP
          CERCLIS ID: NJN000206345
               OUID: 02
                SSID: A238
              Action:

                                                                     Image
DocID:   Doc Date:   Title:                                          Count:     Doc Type:              Addressee Name/Organization:          Author Name/Organization:
565420   7/15/2019   ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX FOR OU2 FOR THE         2 Administrative Record                                       (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                     MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SITE                                    Index                                                AGENCY)


395977   05/01/2016 REDACTED REVISED DATA EVALUATION SUMMARY           299         Report          (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION        (EES JV)
                    REPORT, VOLUME 1 OF 2 TEXT FOR THE MANSFIELD                                   AGENCY)
                    TRAIL DUMP SITE

565375   02/26/2019 FINAL ECOLOGICAL RISK ASSESSMENT STEP 3A           300         Report          Rosenblatt,Anne (US ENVIRONMENTAL   (CDM SMITH)
                    ANALYSIS FOR OU2 FOR THE MANSFIELD TRAIL                                       PROTECTION AGENCY)
                    DUMP SITE


565376   05/10/2019 REVISED FINAL HUMAN HEALTH RISK ASSESSMENT         543         Report          Rosenblatt,Anne (US ENVIRONMENTAL   (CDM SMITH)
                    FOR OU2 FOR THE MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SITE                                      PROTECTION AGENCY)


565377   05/10/2019 FINAL REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION REPORT FOR OU2        274         Report          Rosenblatt,Anne (US ENVIRONMENTAL   (CDM SMITH)
                    FOR THE MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SITE                                              PROTECTION AGENCY)


565379   05/10/2019 FINAL REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION REPORT FOR OU2 -     3089         Report          Rosenblatt,Anne (US ENVIRONMENTAL   (CDM SMITH)
                    APPENDIX A-2 FOR THE MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SITE                                 PROTECTION AGENCY)



565380   05/10/2019 FINAL REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION REPORT FOR OU2 -     1283         Report          Rosenblatt,Anne (US ENVIRONMENTAL   (CDM SMITH)
                    APPENDICES B - J FOR THE MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP                                  PROTECTION AGENCY)
                    SITE

580487   06/27/2019 THE FINAL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT OU2 FOR THE     236         Report                                              (CDM SMITH)
                    MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SITE

550162   7/15/2019   PROPOSED PLAN FOR OU2 FOR THE MANSFIELD            23       Publication                                           (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                     TRAIL DUMP SITE                                                                                                   AGENCY)




                                                                                 Page 1 of 1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX III - State Letter

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX IV - Responsiveness Summary

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY
Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site
Byram, New Jersey

INTRODUCTION

This Responsiveness Summary provides a summary of the public's comments and concerns
regarding the Proposed Plan for the Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site's (“Site”) Operable
Unit 2 (“OU2”) preferred remedy, and EPA's responses to those comments. All comments
summarized in this document have been considered in EPA's final decision for the selection of
remedial alternatives for the Site.

This Responsiveness Summary is divided into the following sections:

      I.   BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS
           This section provides the history of community involvement and interests regarding the
           Site.

     II.   COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY OF MAJOR QUESTIONS, COMMENTS,
           CONCERNS AND RESPONSES
           This section contains summaries of oral comments received by EPA at the public
           meeting, EPA's responses to these comments, as well as responses to written comments
           received during the public comment period.

III.       ATTACHMENTS

The last section of this Responsiveness Summary includes attachments, which document public
participation in the remedy selection process for this Site. These attachments are:

Attachment A contains the Proposed Plan that was distributed to the public for review and
comment;
Attachment B contains the public notices that appeared in the NJ Herald;
Attachment C contains the transcript of the public meeting; and
Attachment D contains the written comments received by EPA during the public comment
period.

I.         BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS

EPA has worked closely with local residents, public officials, and other interested members of
the community since the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (“NJDEP”)
requested assistance with the Site in the early 2000s. The Site was added to the NPL in March
2011. EPA then completed a removal action, which included excavation and off-site disposal of
contaminated soil and source material from February to May of 2012. A Record of Decision for
OU1 (“OU1 ROD”) selecting installation of a waterline and residential connections for
residential properties with potable wells impacted with site-related contamination was issued in
September 2017. On July 15, 2019, EPA released the Proposed Plan and supporting

                                                  1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

documentation for the OU2, sitewide groundwater and residual soil contamination remedy. The
Proposed Plan and index for the Administrative Record were made available to the public online,
and the Administrative Record files were made available at the EPA Administrative Record File
Room, 290 Broadway, 18th Floor, New York, New York; and the Sussex County Library Louise
Childs Branch, 21 Sparta Road, Stanhope, New Jersey.

On July 15, 2019, EPA published a Public Notice in the NJ Herald newspaper that provided
information about the public comment period, the public meeting for the Proposed Plan, and the
availability of the Administrative Record for the Site. EPA also published a press release on July
15, 2019, to announce the release of the Proposed Plan. The public comment period closed on
August 13, 2019.

A public meeting was held on July 23, 2019, at the Byram Township Municipal Building at 10
Mansfield Drive, Stanhope, New Jersey. The purpose of this meeting was to inform residents,
local officials, and interested members of the public about the Superfund process, present details
about EPA’s remedial plan, receive comments on the Proposed Plan, and respond to questions
from area residents and other interested parties.

II.    COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY OF MAJOR QUESTIONS, COMMENTS,
       CONCERNS, AND RESPONSES

Part 1: Verbal Comments

This section provides a summary of verbal comments received from the public during the public
comment period and EPA’s responses.

A. SUMMARY OF QUESTIONS AND EPA’S RESPONSES FROM THE PUBLIC
   MEETING CONCERNING THE MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SITE – July 23, 2019

A public meeting was held on July 23, 2019, at the Byram Township Municipal Building. In
addition to a presentation of the investigation findings, EPA presented the Proposed Plan and
preferred alternatives for the Site, received comments from meeting participants, and responded
to questions regarding the remedial alternatives under consideration. A transcript of the public
meeting is provided in Attachment C.

A summary of comments raised by the public following EPA’s presentation are categorized by
relevant topics and presented below:

General Comments

       Comment 1: One commenter asked what was meant by institutional controls and whether
       these controls were maintained by the state or local government.

       EPA response: Institutional controls provide a mechanism for documenting and
       informing future users of an area or site of contamination that remains at that location
       and/or restricting use at the Site. A classification exemption area (“CEA”) is normally put
                                                2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

in place by the state as a mechanism to provide notice that constituent standards for a
given aquifer classification are not or will not be met in a localized area due to natural
water quality or anthropogenic influences, and to suspend use of the aquifer. In some
scenarios where a CEA is needed and the aquifer use includes potable use, a well
restriction area (“WRA”) designation is also needed. A deed notice is usually required
when contaminated soil is going to be left in place above residential standards and/or
when a cap that will need future maintenance is left in place.

Comment 2: A commenter asked how water runoff and drainage associated with the
remedy would be dealt with.

EPA response: Additional water runoff caused by new drainage pathways from either
soil excavation or capping in the former dump areas will be taken into account during
design of the remedy. Although not stated at the meeting, EPA expects that drainage
swales would be constructed along with the engineered caps in order to prevent excess
runoff. If additional infrastructure will be needed, it will be included in the design and
implemented during remedial action.

Comment 3: A commenter asked in what order the remedy for OU1 and OU2 would be
implemented.

EPA response: The OU1 design is already underway so it is anticipated that the OU1
remedy will be implemented before the OU2 remedy. The OU2 Remedial Design is
expected to begin in Fall 2019 and will progress concurrently with implementation of the
OU1 remedy.

Comment 4: A commenter asked how the contaminants were naturally attenuating,

EPA response: Natural attenuation occurs when natural processes, such as
biodegradation or chemical reactions for example, decrease concentrations of
contaminants in soil or groundwater over time. Certain characteristics of the Site and of
Site contaminants can help determine if these processes are occuring. During the
Remedial Investigation, data were collected to determine if these processes were occuring
in the bedrock groundwater aquifer at the Site. The data indicated that degredation and
destruction is occuring at the Site, along with a slight general decline in concentrations in
residential wells over time.

Comment 5: A commenter asked what was meant by no action warranted for ecological
receptors.

EPA response: Based on the ecological risk assessment that was performed using Site
data and Site exposure scenarios, no unacceptable risks to ecological receptors were
found at the Site. A list of ecological receptors including animals that would be expected
to be exposed to Site related contamination were analyzed as part of the ecological risk
assessment.



                                          3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       Comment 6: A commenter asked if EPA would be cleaning up to NJDEP or EPA
       standards.

       EPA response: For this remedy, the more stringent of the state and federal drinking
       water standards are used as remedial goals for contaminants of concern in Site
       groundwater. EPA used the NJDEP residential direct contact soil remediation standards
       as the remediation goals for soil.

       Comment 7: A commenter asked if monitoring of the area soil and groundwater was
       ongoing.

       EPA response: Residential wells are being monitored in accordance with the OU1
       ROD. Site-wide groundwater will be monitored in the long term as part of the OU2
       remedy to ensure that Remedial Action Objectives are achieved. The extent of the soil
       excavation portion of the OU2 remedy will be further refined during Remedial Design.

       Comment 8: A commenter asked about the reasoning for capping only certain dump
       areas.

       EPA response: The dump areas to be capped as a portion of the OU2 groundwater
       remedy were identified based on groundwater concentrations directly below and
       surrounding the dump areas. EPA considers specific dump areas to be acting as sources
       of contamination to the Site based on continuing detection of elevated groundwater
       concentrations in these areas. In addition, the soil portion of the OU2 remedy provides for
       the contaminated soil in the residential and dump areas to be excavated and disposed
       offsite.

       Comment 9: A commenter asked about the current health impacts at the Site and what
       they were based on.

       EPA response: Risk at the Site is mainly due to the potential for contaminated
       groundwater to be consumed. The baseline human health risk assessment calculates risk
       at the Site using the conservative assumption that a resident is using the groundwater as
       their primary drinking water source without any treatment. It is important to note,
       however, that residents in the area whose wells have been impacted by contaminated
       groundwater have point of entry treatment systems (POETS) installed. Those homes
       impacted by contaminants volatizing off of the groundwater have vapor intrusion
       mitigation systems in place. Therefore, there is no current exposure to contaminated
       groundwater at the Site.

Part 2: Other Written and Verbal Comments Received During the Public Comment Period

Written comments were received from various people and organizations during the public
comment period. They are included below, followed by EPA's responses. Responses are divided
into sections, as needed, for clarity.



                                                4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

1. An email was submitted and is included in Attachment D. The email contained
   concerns as to organization and possible preferential treatment of members within the
   Community Advisory Group (“CAG”) and made a request for a copy of the letter that
   was submitted as part of the public comment period. The email asked for EPA to
   define the role of the CAG guidelines and how they would apply to members of the
   CAG. The letter requested is attached as Attachment D.

EPA Response: The CAG is intended to be made up of representatives of diverse
community interests, and to provide a forum for community members to discuss Site-
related issues both amongst themselves and with EPA and NJDEP representatives. The
CAG meetings give EPA the opportunity to provide Site updates as well as hear
community concerns throughout the Superfund process.

2. A letter was submitted for the record by a member of the public and is attached as
   Attachment D. The letter asked that EPA continue to move forward with remediation
   of the Site as quickly as possible to alleviate the burden of the homeowners in the
   area.

EPA Response: EPA is committed to advancing the cleanup of the Site and will continue
to seek input from the community throughout the process.

3.    A commenter called in asking who owns the lots where the former dump areas are
     located.

EPA Response: Currently, the properties containing the former waste disposal trenches
are owned by two parties: the estate of Anna McConnell (who, along with her husband
Dennis J. McConnell owned the Site when it was in operation) and the Hopatcong Land
Development Company, Inc., which purchased part of the Site from the McConnells in
1990.




                                        5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Attachment A
Proposed Plan

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                Program                                              ron                         Agency


                        Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund
                                     Byram Township, New Jersey


    Proposed Plan                                                                         July 15th, 2019


EPA ANNOUNCES PROPOSED PLAN                                MARK YOUR CALENDARS
This Proposed Plan identifies the Preferred                Public Comment Period
Alternative to address groundwater and residual soil       July 15th, 2019 to August 13th, 2019.
contamination at the Mansfield Trail Dump                  EPA will accept written comments on the
Superfund Site (site) located in Byram Township,           Proposed Plan during the public comment period.
Sussex County, New Jersey (Figure 1). This action
for groundwater and soil is referred to as Operable        Public Meeting
Unit 2 (OU2). Impacted potable wells at the site           July 23rd, 2019 at 7:00 P.M.
were addressed as part of OU1.                             EPA will hold a public meeting to explain the
                                                           Proposed Plan and all of the alternatives
The Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA)                presented in the Feasibility Study. Oral and
Preferred Alternative to address the contaminated          written comments will also be accepted at the
groundwater and soil at the site is Alternative S3-        meeting. The meeting will be held at the Byram
GW4, which includes excavation of residual                 Township Municipal Building at 10 Mansfield
contaminated soil, capping and vapor extraction            Drive, Stanhope, New Jersey.
(VE) of the source area vadose zone, in situ
treatment of the source area saturated zone 1, and         EPA’s website for the Mansfield Trail Dump
monitored natural attenuation (MNA) of the distal          site: https://www.epa.gov/superfund/mansfield-
groundwater plume.                                         trail
This Proposed Plan includes a summary of all               For more information, see the Administrative
cleanup alternatives evaluated for OU2 at the site.        Record at the following locations:
This document is issued by EPA, the lead agency
for the site. EPA, in consultation with the New            EPA Records Center, Region 2
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection              290 Broadway, 18th Floor
(NJDEP), the support agency, will select a final           New York, New York 10007-1866
remedy for the contaminated groundwater aquifer            (212) 637-4308
and soils at the Site after reviewing and                  Hours: Monday-Friday – 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
considering all information submitted during a 30-
day public comment period. EPA, in consultation            Sussex County Library Louise Childs Branch
with NJDEP, may modify the Preferred Alternative           21 Sparta Road
or select another response action presented in this        Stanhope, New Jersey 07874
Proposed Plan based on new information or public           (973) 770-1000
comments. Therefore, the public is encouraged to           Please refer to website for hours:
review and comment on all the alternatives                 http://sussexcountylibrary.org/
presented      in     this     Proposed      Plan.

1
 The source area vadose zone comprises the             the source area saturated zone is comprised of the
unsaturated subsurface above the water table – both    subsurface within the water table which occurs in the
unconsolidated materials and the upper bedrock - and   deeper bedrock.
                                                       1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       excess of state drinking water standards. Further
EPA is issuing this Proposed Plan as part of its       sampling of the residential wells in the Brookwood
public participation responsibilities under Section    and Ross Roads neighborhood conducted by
117(a) of the Comprehensive Environmental              NJDEP in March 2006 indicated the presence of
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act              TCE concentrations that ranged from 3.9 to 70
(CERCLA        or    Superfund)      and    section    µg/L. Currently, 19 homes are known to be
300.430(f)(2) of the National Oil and Hazardous        impacted and were equipped with POETS to
Substances Pollution Contingency Plan. This            remove the contamination. Monitoring of
Proposed Plan summarizes information that can be       residential wells is being performed as part of the
found in greater detail in the OU2 Feasibility         OU1 remedy. Impacted homes will be connected
Study report, Remedial Investigation report, Data      to an existing water supply as part of the OU1
Evaluation Summary report and other documents          remedy, which is currently in the design phase.
contained in the Administrative Record file for this   Vapor intrusion (VI) investigations conducted by
site.                                                  NJDEP from 2006 to 2008 in the residential area
                                                       also lead to the installation of vapor mitigation
SITE DESCRIPTION                                       systems on five affected residences. Upgrades to
                                                       systems were made as needed.
The site consists of former waste disposal trenches
and impacted soil in a wooded area and associated      Initial Dump Area Investigations
groundwater contamination. EPA believes that the
site was used as a dump for septic wastes and other    NJDEP first identified the former waste disposal
wastes from the late 1950s through at least the        trenches at the site in 2009 during an effort to
early 1970s.                                           determine the source of the TCE contamination
                                                       detected in the nearby residential wells. Further
The site was added to the National Priorities List     investigation conducted by NJDEP and EPA in
(NPL) in March 2011 and consists of two OUs            December 2009 and May 2010 resulted in the
covering long-term remedial work.                      discovery of disposal trenches that were
                                                       designated Dump Areas A, B, C, D and E (Figure
OU1 addresses private drinking water wells             1). The Dump Areas consisted of contaminated
impacted by site contaminants. A ROD for OU1           soil and sludge-like-waste from unknown origins.
was issued in September 2017 and the remedy is         NJDEP installed two groundwater monitoring
currently in design. OU2 addresses shallow and         wells in 2009 and sampling showed elevated
deep groundwater contamination and residual soil       concentrations of TCE, 1,2-dichloroethylene (1,2-
contamination.                                         DCE), and vinyl chloride. Soil samples in the
                                                       dump areas indicated the presence of TCE, cis-1,2-
SITE HISTORY                                           dichloroethylene      (cis-1,2-DCE),    benzene,
                                                       ethylbenzene, toluene, and xylene (BTEX)
Residential Area                                       compounds, as well as various chlorinated
                                                       benzene compounds. EPA collected soil and
In May 2005, the Sussex County Department of           sludge-like-waste,       groundwater      (on-site
Health and Human Services and NJDEP became             monitoring wells), and residential well samples
aware of trichloroethylene (TCE) contamination,        from February to May 2010. EPA also installed a
at levels greater than the NJDEP’s groundwater         background monitoring well (MW-3) south of
quality standards (NJ GWQS) and the New Jersey         NJDEP’s monitoring wells (MW-1 and MW-2)
maximum contaminant level (MCLs) for TCE of            (Figure 3). Analytical results documented the
1.0 micrograms per liter (ug/L), in residential        presence of TCE and other volatile organic
wells serving homes on Brookwood and Ross              compounds (VOCs) above NJ GWQSs, MCLs or
Roads and notified residents about the                 background conditions in these on-site wells. The
contamination. NJDEP subsequently installed            TCE groundwater plume was found to begin at the
Point-of-Entry Treatment Systems (POETS) on            former dump areas and extend downgradient
impacted residential properties to provide safe        toward the Brookwood and Ross Road residential
drinking water. By June 2005, POETs were               area (see Figure 2).
installed on 13 residential wells that were known
to be contaminated with TCE at concentrations in       During May and June 2010, EPA collected soil,
                                                       2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

groundwater, and composite waste samples from         surface water sampling, sediment sampling, soil
test borings advanced throughout the Site using       sampling, and three rounds of groundwater
Geoprobe™ direct-push technology. Analytical          sampling. A detailed description of both phases of
results of soil and waste samples collected during    the investigation is included in the 2019 Remedial
the delineation of the dump areas indicated the       Investigation Report.
presence of significantly elevated concentrations
of VOCs, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and         SITE CHARACTERISTICS
various     chlorinated    benzene     compounds
throughout the site. In March 2011, based on the      Setting/ Geology/ Hydrology
impacted on-site and residential areas outlined
above, the site was added to the NPL.                 The site is bordered to the east by a steep, narrow
                                                      valley where an abandoned railroad bed, a bike
Removal                                               trail and a waterway, Cowboy Creek, are located.
                                                      Cowboy Creek flows north to Lubbers Run and the
From February 21 to May 30, 2012, EPA                 Musconetcong River. Both Lubbers Run and the
performed a removal action to address hazardous       Musconetcong River are used for recreation,
waste material at the site. As part of the action,    including fishing, boating, and hiking. Segments
EPA delineated impacted areas, characterized          of the Musconetcong River downstream of the site
waste, excavated and disposed of contaminated         are federally designated as a Wild and Scenic
soil, conducted post-removal confirmation             River. The groundwater at the site is classified as
sampling, and backfilled and graded each              a NJDEP Class II-A aquifer as described in
excavation. EPA excavated contaminated soil           N.J.A.C. 7:9C Ground Water Quality Standards.
from Dump Areas A, B, D and E (see Figure 2).
Dump Area C was not excavated because the             The geology along the top and flanks of the ridge
delineation sampling did not reveal contaminant       at the site consists of a thin (five feet or less)
concentrations exceeding NJDEP soils screening        surficial layer of unconsolidated soil (overburden)
levels. Approximately 11,170 tons of non-             overlying bedrock. The upper five to 10 feet of the
hazardous soil and debris and 383 tons of             bedrock is extremely weathered and the deeper
hazardous soil were removed from the site and         bedrock is consolidated, fractured metamorphic
transported to an EPA approved Resource               and igneous rock (gneiss and pyroxene syenite)
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) Subtitle         with low primary porosity, and thus, a low
D and Subtitle C disposal facilities.                 potential for diffusion of contaminants into the
                                                      rock matrix. The overburden is thicker in the
Remedial Investigation                                residential area below the ridge with a maximum
                                                      thickness of 40 feet. The bedrock underlying the
From August 2013 to December 2015, EPA                overburden in this area is also fractured igneous
performed the first phase of remedial investigation   and metamorphic rock (gneiss and pyroxene
activities at the site. Ten multilevel system (MLS)   syenite).
groundwater wells and eleven conventional
(screened or open-hole) groundwater wells were        Along the ridge, the overburden and the shallow
installed. Wells in the shallow and deep              bedrock is mostly unsaturated, with the depth to
groundwater aquifer were sampled between March        groundwater approximately 60 to 80 feet below
2014 and December 2015. During this phase EPA         ground surface (ft bgs). In the residential area west
also collected overburden soil samples, subsurface    and north of the site, the depth to groundwater
soil samples, rock core samples, groundwater          ranges from approximately 12.5 ft bgs near the
samples, soil gas and indoor air samples. Samples     ridge to 15.5 ft bgs toward the west northwest.
were taken from both the former dump area and
the downgradient residential neighborhood.            Groundwater flow occurs primarily in the
                                                      weathered shallow bedrock and through
A second phase of remedial investigation was          interconnected fractures in the deeper consolidated
performed between 2017 and 2018. Additional           bedrock aquifer. Groundwater moves from the
groundwater monitoring wells were installed at the    higher-elevation former dump areas to the north-
site including three MLS wells and two
                                                      northwest and discharges to surficial seeps and the
conventional wells. This phase also included
                                                      3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

overburden in the lower areas or flows deeper into       NAPL was identified within a rubble zone at
the bedrock system. Shallow groundwater may              approximately 68 ft bgs in the upper trench of
discharge from seeps in the exposed bedrock face         Dump Area A (CB-3). Additional work will be
along the downward slope toward the northeast.           conducted in the predesign investigation (PDI) to
Groundwater at intermediate depths may                   further investigate any NAPL in the subsurface.
discharge in seeps further downgradient or into the
wetland area. Bedrock groundwater continues to           Contaminants present in the dissolved phase in the
flow towards the northwest as the fracture network       groundwater at the site consist primarily of TCE
becomes more confined. The hydraulic                     and cis-1,2-DCE. The distribution of cis-1,2-DCE
conductivity of the bedrock measured at the site         is similar to that of TCE; however, cis-1,2-DCE
ranges from less than 0.001 ft/day to 23 ft/day (or      was observed at concentrations largely below the
                                                         state and federal drinking water standards of 70
a transmissivity of 345 square feet/day).
                                                         µg/L. The highest TCE concentrations underlying
                                                         the former dump areas in the shallow bedrock
Groundwater Contamination                                (approximately 65–80 ft bgs) on the ridge are 320
                                                         ug/L and 130 µg/L in the deepest bedrock
Groundwater was sampled by the EPA in 2014,              monitoring well port (approximately 460–475 ft
2017, and 2018. The highest concentrations of            bgs). TCE concentrations decline in the
contaminants in groundwater at the site are seen in      overburden and bedrock aquifers downgradient of
the shallow bedrock aquifer directly beneath the         the ridge in the residential and Cowboy Creek
former dump areas. The areas beneath Dump Area           areas (distal plume) and range from 1.6 ug/L to 36
A and D will be referred to as the source area for       ug/L, where detected.
the purposes of this remedy.
                                                         Other VOCs detected at elevated concentrations in
Because of the complex fracture network in               groundwater include 1,1,1-TCA, 1,1-DCA, and
                                                         chlorobenzene. 1,4-dioxane is widespread and was
bedrock, contamination may be present in
                                                         detected in 36 of 42 groundwater samples during
discontinuous fractures potentially in the dense         the third RI sampling event. Concentrations of 1,4
non-aqueous phase liquid (DNAPL) 2 phase both in         dioxane are generally below standards, with a
the vadose and saturated portions of the bedrock         maximum recorded concentration of 7.3 µg/L,
and may be sorbed to soil that has infilled these        exceeding NJ GWQS of 0.4 µg/L. Lead, which is
fractures. Contamination trapped in fractures can        present in shallow soil, exceeded NJ GWQS of 5
act as a source over time from the flushing action       µg/L in groundwater in two of four samples in the
of groundwater table fluctuations or rainwater           third sampling event, with a maximum
infiltration.                                            concentration of 9.5 µg/L.

                                                         Data collected at the site indicate natural
In April and August 2014, bedrock cores were
                                                         attenuation mechanisms are actively attenuating
collected in areas with the highest contaminant          groundwater     contaminant     concentrations.
concentrations and analyzed to determine if              Evidence for natural attenuation at the site
contaminant mass has diffused into the rock              includes:
matrix. The results indicate that the concentrations
in the rock matrix are low and that any minor             1) a downward trend is observed in residential
contaminant mass in the bedrock matrix does not          well concentrations prior to the 2012 excavation,
appear to provide a source of contamination to           2) Compound Specific Isotope Analysis (CSIA)
groundwater.                                             indicates that degradation is occurring in
                                                         groundwater between the shallowest ports of the
                                                         source zone wells (e.g., where mass may be
During the rock core sampling and analysis, the
                                                         discharging to groundwater from the vadose zone
full length of each core was visually observed for       source) and the downgradient wells, 3)
the presence of nonaqueous phase liquid (NAPL).

2
 A dense non-aqueous phase liquid or DNAPL is a          not dissolve in water readily.
denser-than-water liquid that is immiscible in or does
                                                         4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

microbiology sample results indicate that the          1254) and detected at 23 out of 92 samples in the
principal zone of reactivity for destructive           former dump areas at a maximum of 2.4 mg/kg
attenuation appears to be under and directly           (Aroclor 1260).       The EPA residential soil
adjacent to the former dump areas, 4) CSIA and         screening level for both Aroclor 1254 and Aroclor
microbial data indicate that both microbial            1260 is 0.24 mg/kg. Lead was detected at a
reductive dehalogenation and aerobic cometabolic       maximum of 1,460 mg/kg, exceeding the state
degradation of TCE are biodegradation                  residential soil standard of 400 mg/kg in 7 out of
mechanisms actively attenuating groundwater            38 samples in the residential area and 1 out of 92
concentrations at the site, and 5) dilution and        samples in the former dump areas.
dispersion are also actively attenuating
groundwater concentrations at the site as              The slope where the highest concentrations of
evidenced by declining concentrations from the         PCBs are found is generally steep and only has a
ridge to the distal plume.                             few feet of overburden soil above the bedrock
                                                       surface. The extent of contamination is confined to
Residential Wells and Vapor Intrusion                  the slope with samples collected in the residence’s
                                                       backyard. Samples from the adjacent properties
Based on sampling conducted by residents and           were below the EPA residential soil screening
NJDEP, 19 residential wells in the site area were      level. This data and topography suggest PCB‐
found to contain TCE concentrations above the NJ       containing materials were dumped in or around
GWQS of 1 µg/L. EPA performed several rounds           Dump Area A and have migrated via surficial
of residential well sampling as part of the remedial   runoff or movement of fine-grained materials
investigation. NJDEP continues to monitor and          down the steep slope and onto a portion of the
maintain eligible POETS at impacted residences         residential property. Some very limited areas of
under the state Spill Compensation Fund. A             soils with elevated PCBs were found in former
Record of Decision was signed in 2017 to provide       dump areas B and E. PCBs were not detected in
a waterline to assure a source of potable water to     other site media including sediments, surface
impacted residences at the site. Design of this        water, or groundwater during the 2014 or 2017
remedy is currently ongoing.                           investigations.

Vapors migrating from the groundwater plume            Sampling in the residential area soil and sediments
extending beneath the residential area have the        did not reveal any VOCs above the federal and
potential to act as a source of indoor air             state standards. Concentrations of polyaromatic
contamination. After initial sampling completed        hydrocarbons (PAHs) in soil exceeded screening
by NJDEP in 2006, five vapor mitigation systems        criteria in 2 of 82 samples in the former dump
were installed at impacted residences. Multiple        areas and in 1 of the 16 samples in the residential
rounds of sub-slab and indoor air samples              area during the 2014 investigation. PAH data
collected at residences associated with the            suggest only minor isolated impacts related to site
residential wells (from 2011 to 2019) were             dumping. The highest concentrations of PAHs
analyzed since then. Recent sub‐slab and indoor        found in the former railroad bed area are likely
air concentrations at residential properties           related to the rail ties or other processes that left
indicate that installed mitigation systems are         behind these materials and are not site‐related.
effective.
                                                       The lead and chromium data from the media other
Soil, Sediment         and      Surface     Water      than soil do not suggest significant impacts related
Contamination                                          to site dumping, but rather natural background
                                                       conditions. In sediment, lead and chromium
The highest concentrations of contaminants in soil     (trivalent in dump waste and in groundwater
were found to be confined to the upper two feet in     samples) were detected at concentrations up to
an area north of Dump Area A, then continuing          76.8 mg/kg and 16.1 mg/kg, respectively, but all
downslope into the rear (southern) portion of a        detections were below levels naturally found in the
residential property on Brookwood Road. In the         area. PAHs exceeded the federal and state
residential area PCBs were detected in soil in 20      standards and background in one sediment sample
out of 38 samples at a maximum concentration of        adjacent to a former railroad bed. However, the
2.8 milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg) (Aroclor           PAH concentrations observed in this sample were
                                                       5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

an order of magnitude higher than those found in        material is defined as material that includes or
site soil, suggesting non-site related impacts from     contains hazardous substances, pollutants, or
rail ties or other processes. Three pesticides          contaminants that act as a reservoir for migration
(gamma-chlordane, 4,4’-DDE, and 4,4’-DDT)               of contamination to groundwater, surface water,
were detected in the same sample, but the low           air, or act as a source of direct exposure.
concentration suggests the contamination in the
sediment sample is likely non-site related. No          Site soil, contaminated with lead and PCBs, is not
other site-related contaminants were detected in        considered a principal threat waste as it is not
sediment.                                               considered source material and is not highly
                                                        mobile. Groundwater is not considered principal
In surface water, TCE was detected at 0.15 μg/L at      threat waste. The completed removal action
one location (SW‐03), below the state and federal       addressed source material which was principal
criteria for surface water quality for fresh water (1   threat waste within the dump areas. Residual
μg/L and 2.5 μg/L respectively). Other site-related     DNAPL, though not detected in the RI or
contaminants were similarly detected at low             observed in the confirmation samples from the
concentrations (1,4-dioxane at up to 0.12J μg/L         removal action, may still be present in the
and lead at up to 6.1 μg/L). Shallow aquifer seep       subsurface in low-transmissivity fractures in this
sampling was also performed in the residential          underlying bedrock and could potentially act as a
area where seeps had been observed after large          source of contamination to groundwater. The
rain events. TCE and cis-1,2-DCE were detected          mobility of any residual source material would be
in the results from the groundwater seep, TCE           limited if it is present in low-transmissivity
exceeded state and federal screening criteria at a      fractures.
maximum concentration of 34 μg/L. Since there is
a direct pathway from groundwater to surface            SCOPE AND ROLE OF THE ACTION
water, by remediating the contaminated
groundwater, site-related contamination in surface      This Proposed Plan presents the Preferred
water (primarily the TCE and 1,4-dioxane from           Alternative for the final action to addresses
groundwater discharge) are expected to be               residual soil contamination and contaminated
addressed.                                              groundwater (OU2) at the site. A ROD issued by
                                                        EPA in 2017 selected an action to provide potable
Principal Threat Waste                                  water to impacted residents through connection to
                                                        a public water supply (OU1). The OU1 remedy is
The NCP, which governs EPA cleanups, at 40              currently in the design phase.
C.F.R. § 300.430(a)(1)(iii), states that EPA
expects to use “treatment to address the principal      SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS
threats posed by a site, wherever practicable” and
“engineering controls, such as containment, for         Human Health Risks
waste that poses a relatively low long-term
threat” to achieve protection of human health and       The baseline human health risk assessment
the environment. This expectation is further            (HHRA) for the site quantified risks and hazards
explained in an EPA fact sheet (OSWER                   to human health associated with exposure to media
#9380.3-06FS), which states that principal threat       present in OU2. The four-step process is
wastes are source materials considered to be            comprised of: Hazard Identification, Exposure
highly toxic or highly mobile that generally            Assessment, Toxicity Assessment, and Risk
cannot be reliably contained or would present a         Characterization (see adjoining box “What is Risk
significant risk to human health or the                 and How is it Calculated”).
environment should exposure occur. Low-level
threat wastes are source materials that generally       The HHRA included evaluation of risks to
can be reliably contained and that would present        potential receptors, including utility workers and
only a low risk in the event of exposure.               trespassers in the former dump area, recreational
                                                        users of the bike trail, nearby residents,
The concept of principal threat and low-level           recreational users of Cowboy Creek, and future
threat waste is applied on a site-specific basis        construction workers in the former dump area if
when characterizing source material. Source             the site is redeveloped.
                                                        6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         WHAT IS RISK AND HOW IS IT CALCULATED?
Elevated potential risks/hazards were identified
                                                         A Superfund baseline human health risk assessment is an analysis of
for future residents exposed to untreated                the potential adverse health effects caused by hazardous substance
groundwater from the most contaminated area of           releases from a site in the absence of any actions to control or mitigate
                                                         these under current- and future-land uses. A four-step process is
the site and current/future exposure to surface soil     utilized for assessing site-related human health risks for reasonable
in the residential area. Cancer risks for future         maximum exposure scenarios.
residents exceeded EPA’s target risk range of 1 x        Hazard Identification: In this step, the chemicals of potential concern
10-4 (one-in-ten thousand) to 1 x 10-6 (one-in-one       (COPCs) at the site in various media (i.e., soil, groundwater, surface
million), primarily due to groundwater used as tap       water, and air) are identified based on such factors as toxicity,
                                                         frequency of occurrence, and fate and transport of the contaminants in
water. The estimated excess lifetime cancer risks        the environment, concentrations of the contaminants in specific media,
for vinyl chloride and TCE in groundwater are 4 x        mobility, persistence, and bioaccumulation.

10-3 and 5 x 10-4 respectively. Noncancer hazards        Exposure Assessment: In this step, the different exposure pathways
for future residents were driven primarily by TCE,       through which people might be exposed to the contaminants identified
                                                         in the previous step are evaluated. Examples of exposure pathways
and to a lesser extent cobalt and cis-1,2-DCE, in        include incidental ingestion of and dermal contact with contaminated
groundwater. The calculated hazard index (HI) for        soil and ingestion of and dermal contact with contaminated
                                                         groundwater. Factors relating to the exposure assessment include, but
residential exposure to groundwater is 111 for both      are not limited to, the concentrations in specific media that people
an adult and child, which exceeds EPA’s hazard           might be exposed to and the frequency and duration of that exposure.
                                                         Using these factors, a “reasonable maximum exposure” scenario,
threshold (HI of 1). Risks due to lead exposure          which portrays the highest level of human exposure that could
from contaminated soil and groundwater were              reasonably be expected to occur, is calculated.

evaluated using the Integrated Exposure Uptake           Toxicity Assessment: In this step, the types of adverse health effects
Biokinetic (IEUBK) model, which predicted 41%            associated with chemical exposures, and the relationship between
                                                         magnitude of exposure and severity of adverse effects are determined.
of children age 12-72 months could have blood            Potential health effects are chemical-specific and may include the risk
lead concentrations above the reference value of 5       of developing cancer over a lifetime or other noncancer health
                                                         hazards, such as changes in the normal functions of organs within the
µg/dL. Lead concentrations at the site represent an      body (e.g., changes in the effectiveness of the immune system). Some
elevated risk exceeding EPA’s risk reduction goal        chemicals are capable of causing both cancer and noncancer health
                                                         hazards.
of 5%.
                                                         Risk Characterization: This step summarizes and combines outputs of
                                                         the exposure and toxicity assessments to provide a quantitative
Potential risks/hazards associated with soil in the      assessment of site risks for all COPCs. Exposures are evaluated based
former dump area and bike trail area and with            on the potential risk of developing cancer and the potential for
                                                         noncancer health hazards. The likelihood of an individual developing
sediment and surface water in cowboy creek were          cancer is expressed as a probability. For example, a 10-4 cancer risk
not elevated. Although the property containing the       means a “one in ten thousand excess cancer risk;” or one additional
                                                         cancer may be seen in a population of 10,000 people as a result of
former dump areas is currently zoned as                  exposure to site contaminants under the conditions identified in the
residential, current and anticipated future use of       Exposure Assessment. Current Superfund regulations for exposures
                                                         identify the range for determining whether remedial action is
the property is expected to remain non-residential.      necessary as an individual excess lifetime cancer risk of 10-4 to 10-6,
When conservatively assuming residential                 corresponding to a one in ten thousand to a one in a million excess
                                                         cancer risk. For noncancer health effects, a “hazard index” (HI) is
exposures in the former dump areas, the cancer           calculated. The key concept for a noncancer HI is that a “threshold”
risk and noncancer HI for adult residents are at or      (measured as an HI of less than or equal to 1) exists below which
                                                         noncancer health hazards are not expected to occur. The goal of
below EPA's risk thresholds. The total noncancer         protection is 10-6 for cancer risk and an HI of 1 for a noncancer health
HI for child residential receptors to soil in the        hazard. Chemicals that exceed a 10-4 cancer risk or an HI of 1 are
                                                         typically those that will require remedial action at the site and are
former dump areas is 2 and exceeds EPA's target          referred to as chemicals of concern, or COCs, in the final remedial
of 1, however no hazard quotient for an individual       decision document, or Record of Decision.
chemical or target organ exceeds 1 and therefore       relative to human health screening levels.
noncancer health effects would be unlikely.            Therefore, vapor intrusion may also be a source of
                                                       risk to receptors at the site if mitigation systems
The HHRA included a screening evaluation of            are removed or not maintained, or if the shallow
potential health risks from future exposure to         groundwater plume migrates below houses that do
vapors migrating from contaminated groundwater         not have mitigation systems.
into houses via vapor intrusion. This exposure
pathway is currently incomplete because                Ecological Risk Assessment
mitigation systems are in place for residences that
were affected by vapor intrusion. Based on vapor       A screening level ecological risk assessment
intrusion screening, TCE and chloroform present        (SLERA) was conducted for the site to determine
in the vadose zone below houses are elevated           the potential for risk to ecological receptors based
                                                       upon exposure to contaminants in soil, surface
                                                       7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

water, and sediment. Site media were screened            The RAOs for contaminated soil are:
against values protective of ecological receptors
and food chain modeling was conducted to                      Reduce or eliminate exposure of human
determine risks to trophic level receptors. The                receptors to contaminated soil at
results of the SLERA identified contaminants of                concentrations exceeding remedial goals.
potential ecological concern (COPECs) and
therefore the risk assessment process continued on            Prevent or minimize contaminated soil from
to a Step 3a analysis. The objective of the Step 3a            serving as a source of contamination to
analysis was to determine if chemicals of potential            sediment, surface water, and groundwater.
COPECs identified in the SLERA pose risk under
                                                         The RAOs for contaminated groundwater are:
more realistic conservative assumptions. During
the Step 3a, refined exposure point concentrations            Restore the impacted aquifer to its most
were calculated based upon 95% UCL values and                  beneficial use as a source of drinking water
background inorganic results were considered.                  by reducing contaminant levels to the
Screening of soil, sediment and surface water                  remedial goals
media contaminants indicated exceedances of
screening values. Further, food chain modeling                Prevent or minimize unacceptable risk from
was conducted using more realistic exposure                    exposure (via direct contact, ingestion, or
frequency and ingestion variables. The results of              inhalation) to contaminated groundwater
the Step 3a evaluation indicated fewer risks from              attributable to the site
exposure to chemicals detected in site media when
compared to the SLERA. Overall, food chain                    Minimize the potential for further migration
modeling results indicated no risk to terrestrial soil         of    groundwater        containing      site
receptors based upon the calculation of lowest                 contaminants at concentrations greater than
observed adverse effect level (LOAEL) hazard                   remedial goals
quotients. In the aquatic environment, risk was
identified to the invertivorous bird (the spotted             Prevent or minimize contaminated
sandpiper) from exposure to zinc. However, based               groundwater from serving as sources of
upon a comparison of the range of site sediment                current and future vapor intrusion.
zinc concentrations to background sediment zinc
concentrations it is unclear whether zinc sediment       Achieving the RAOs relies on the remedial
concentrations are site related. In addition, a          alternatives’ ability to meet final remediation
preliminary remedial goal for zinc was calculated        goals derived from Preliminary Remediation
based upon risk to the spotted sandpiper. This           Goals (PRGs), which are based on such factors as
value was less than site background concentrations       Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate
and therefore it was determined that action to           Requirements (ARARs), risk, and background.
address zinc in sediment was not warranted.              EPA and NJDEP have promulgated MCLs and
                                                         NJDEP has GWQSs which are enforceable,
The Preferred Alternative identified in the              health-based, protective standards for various
Proposed Plan, or one of the other active measures
                                                         drinking water contaminants. In this Proposed
considered in this Proposed Plan, is necessary to
protect public health or welfare or the environment      Plan, EPA selected the more stringent of the MCLs
from actual or threatened releases of hazardous          and GWQSs as the PRGs for COCs in site
substances into the environment.                         groundwater. EPA used the more stringent of the
                                                         NJDEP residential direct contact soil remediation
REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES                               standards and the NJDEP impact to groundwater
                                                         soil screening levels as the PRGs for the
Remedial Action Objectives (RAOs) were                   unsaturated soils.
developed for soil and groundwater. The
remediation of contaminated soil and groundwater         The Lists of PRGS for groundwater and soil may
is expected to decrease site related contaminant         be found in Tables 1 and 2 respectively. PRGs
concentrations in vapor to meet remediation goals        may be further modified through the evaluation of
for indoor air.                                          alternatives and are used to select the clean-up
                                                         goals in the Record of Decision.
                                                         8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The suitable sub-slab contaminant-screening             are based on a 30-year timeframe in accordance
criteria and indoor air concentration requiring         with EPA guidance.
mitigation were based on EPA’s vapor intrusion
screening levels (VISLs) guidance for residential       The time frames presented below for construction
properties. However, the VISLs are frequently           do not include the time for pre-design
updated based on evolving toxicity information.         investigations, remedial design, or contract
Therefore, the screening criteria may be subject to     procurements. Detailed descriptions of the
change. The latest screening criteria for vapor         remedial alternatives for OU2 can be found in the
intrusion will be used to evaluate vapor intrusion      FS report.
data collected in the future.
                                                        Institutional Controls
SUMMARY                 OF            REMEDIAL
ALTERNATIVES                                            Institutional controls are administrative and legal
                                                        controls that help to minimize the potential for
CERCLA, Section 121(b)(1), 42 U.S.C. Section            human exposure to contaminants. Institutional
9621(b)(1), mandates that remedial actions must         controls may include a classification exception
be protective of human health and the                   area/well restriction area (CEA/WRA) for
environment, cost-effective and utilize permanent       groundwater and a deed notice for capped areas.
solutions and alternative treatment technologies        These institutional controls limit future use of the
and resource recovery alternatives to the               site soil and groundwater and are common
maximum extent practicable. Section 121(b)(1)           components of each of the alternatives.
also establishes a preference for remedial actions
which employ, as a principal element, treatment to      Soil Alternatives
permanently and significantly reduce the volume,
toxicity, or mobility of the hazardous substances,      Alternative S-1 – No Action
pollutants, and contaminants at a site. CERCLA,
Section 121(d), 42 U.S.C. Section 9621(d) further       The No Action Alternative is presented, as required
specifies that a remedial action must attain a level    by the NCP, and provides a baseline for
or standard of control of the hazardous substances,     comparison with other alternatives. No remedial
pollutants, and contaminants, which at least attains    actions would be implemented as part of the No
ARARs under federal and state laws, unless a            Action Alternative. Furthermore, this alternative
waiver can be justified pursuant to CERCLA              would not involve any monitoring of groundwater
Section 121(d)(4), 42 U.S.C. Section 9621(d)(4).        or institutional controls.

In accordance with the Superfund program, a             Capital Cost:                            $0
preliminary screening evaluation of the soil and        O&M Cost:                                $0
groundwater remedial alternatives was completed         Present-Worth Cost:                      $0
to assess whether alternatives could be screened        Estimated Construction Time Frame:       0 years
out prior to a detailed evaluation. The alternatives
that were screened out were removed from                Alternative S-2 – Capping
consideration and not evaluated as part of the
detailed analysis of alternatives. Additional details   Alternative 2 includes the capping of the
on the rationale for screening out technologies are     contaminated soil in a residential area and targeted
mentioned in the FS.                                    excavation of residual contaminated soil in the
                                                        former dump areas to eliminate exposure
Eight alternatives were retained for a detailed         pathways to receptors.
evaluation against the seven National Contingency
Plan (NCP) evaluation criteria. Three alternatives      A Preliminary Design Investigation (PDI) would
were retained to address contaminated soil and          further delineate the soil contamination and
five alternatives were retained to address              confirm the extent of the cap. The cap would
contaminated groundwater. The sections below            include erosion control fabric for stabilization on
present a summary of the alternatives that were         the steep slope and new drainage pathways would
retained and evaluated. The Present-Worth Costs         be incorporated into the cap to allow for surface
                                                        runoff from the dump areas upgradient to
                                                        9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

discharge safely and in a controlled manner.
Limited excavation would be performed in the            Capital Cost:                    $ 2,399,000
former dump areas where contaminant levels were         Present-Worth Cost:              $ 2,399,000
identified as not meeting PRGs. This would              Estimated Construction Time Frame: 10 months
prevent any future migration of contaminants in
soil through surface runoff. After excavation and       Groundwater and Bedrock Vadose Zone
appropriate disposal, confirmation sampling             Alternatives
would be conducted to verify that soil
concentrations meet remedial goals.                     Common Elements

Operation and maintenance would include regular         For Groundwater Alternatives GW-2 through
inspection to ensure the cap is stable and intact       GW-5 a PDI would be performed to refine the
over time. Engineering controls including               vertical and horizontal extents of the areas
diversion structures and temporary fencing may          requiring remediation. Surface water monitoring
also be needed in the remediation areas.                and vapor monitoring in the residential area would
Institutional controls in the form of a deed notice     also be performed to ensure contaminated
would be implemented to restrict disturbance to         groundwater is not impacting surface water and
the soil cover and intrusive activities near a          residents are protected from potential vapor
residential area for the duration of construction       intrusion. Maintenance of existing VI mitigation
and O&M of the cap. Since CERCLA wastes                 systems and installation of new systems would be
would be left on the site above levels that allow for   completed as necessary. Monitoring of the
unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, five-year      residential wells within the distal plume will be
reviews would be conducted to monitor the               conducted through the OU1 remedial action.
contaminants and evaluate the need for future           Therefore, the OU2 remedial action would
actions.                                                coordinate with OU1 remedial action. Monitoring
                                                        requirements for sub-slab and indoor air will be
Capital Cost:                    $ 1,796,000            developed during the design phase. In all
Present Worth of O&M Cost:       $ 54,000               alternatives site restoration would be completed as
Present-Worth Cost:              $ 2,467,000            necessary to original conditions after construction
Estimated Construction Time Frame: 9 months             activities are completed. Institutional controls,
                                                        such as a CEA/WRA, would be required to prevent
Alternative S-3 – Excavation and Off-Site               the installation of wells in the contaminated
Disposal                                                groundwater plume, at least while the remedy is
                                                        being implemented. A deed notice would be
Alternative 3 includes the excavation and off-site      required for capped areas (which do not include
disposal of contaminated soil in the residential and    any residential properties). Where CERCLA
former dump areas. A PDI would further delineate        wastes are left in place above levels that allow for
the soil contamination to confirm the extent of         unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, a five-
excavation. It is assumed excavation would be           year review is required to monitor the
conducted with a combination of small excavation        contaminants and evaluate the need for future
equipment and hand excavation. After excavation         actions.
and appropriate disposal, confirmation sampling
would be conducted to verify that soil                  Alternative GW-1 – No Action
concentrations meet PRGs. If confirmation
sampling reveals additional contamination, further      As with the soil alternatives, regulations governing
excavation would be performed in the area where         the Superfund program generally require that the
the contamination is identified.                        “no action” alternative be evaluated to establish a
                                                        baseline for comparison. Under this alternative,
After site soil is confirmed to meet PRGs,              EPA would take no action to address contaminated
excavated areas would be backfilled with imported       groundwater within the OU2 Study Area to prevent
clean fill and topsoil, compacted, and graded.          human exposure and restore the groundwater
Drainage pathways, if previously disturbed during       aquifer.
excavation activities, would be restored to original
conditions.
                                                        10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Capital Cost:                            $0           installed within the confirmed extent of the source
O&M Cost:                                $0           area vadose zone and vapor monitoring points
Present Worth Cost:                      $0           would be installed to track the progress. Extracted
Estimated Construction Time Frame:       0 years      vapor would be treated prior to discharge. The
                                                      system is expected to be run for approximately 5
Alternative GW- 2 – Capping of Source Area            years.
Vadose Zone and MNA of Source Area Saturated
Zone and Distal Plume                                 Monitored natural attenuation would be
                                                      implemented in the distal plume. An extensive
Under this alternative, the contaminated source       monitoring program would be conducted to
area bedrock vadose zone would be capped to           evaluate groundwater contaminant concentrations
reduce infiltration of rainwater, thus limiting the   over time to ensure that attenuation mechanisms,
migration of vadose zone contamination into           such    as     biodegradation,     are  reducing
groundwater. Monitored natural attenuation would      concentrations at an acceptable rate.
be    implemented       for    the    groundwater
contamination in the source area and the distal       If vapor extraction is effective in substantially
plume. An extensive monitoring program would          reducing mass in the subsurface, a multilayered
be conducted to evaluate groundwater                  cap with associated long-term O&M, may not be
contaminant concentrations over time to ensure        needed. Long-term O&M of a multilayered cap is
that   attenuation      mechanisms,      such    as   currently included in the cost estimates and,
biodegradation, are reducing concentrations at an     therefore, costs may decrease if it is found to be
acceptable rate throughout the plume. The cap         unnecessary.
would require long term O&M.
                                                      Capital Cost:                    $ 4,078,000
Capital Cost:                    $ 2,167,000          Present Worth of Cap O&M Cost:
Present Worth of Cap O&M Cost:                            Year 1 to 5:                 $ 194,000
    Year 1 to 5:                 $ 194,000                Year 6 to 10:                $ 103,000
    Year 6 to 10:                $ 103,000                Year 11 to 30:               $ 126,000
    Year 11 to 30:               $ 126,000            Present Worth of Monitoring:     $ 1,564,000
Present Worth of Monitoring:     $ 1,564,000          Present Worth Cost:              $ 6,528,000
Total Present Worth Cost:        $ 4,154,000          Estimated Construction Time Frame: 23 months
Estimated Construction Time Frame: 11 months
                                                      Alternative GW- 4 – Capping and Soil Vapor
Alternative GW- 3 – Capping and SVE of Source         Extraction (SVE) of Source Area Vadose Zone, In
Area Vadose Zone and MNA of Source Area               Situ Treatment of Source
Saturated Zone and Distal Plume                       Area Saturated Zone, and MNA of Distal Plume

The contaminated source area bedrock vadose           For this alternative vapor extraction and capping
zone would be capped as described in Alternative      would be implemented as described in Alternative
2, while vapor extraction would be implemented        3 for the contaminated source area bedrock vadose
to actively treat any residual contamination in the   zone. In situ treatment would also be conducted to
source area bedrock vadose zone.                      treat the shallow bedrock groundwater plume in
                                                      the source area, including the injection of
Vapor extraction removes contaminant vapors           amendments such as zero valent iron or
from the subsurface for treatment above ground.       bioaugmentation amendments. This type of
Vapors would be extracted from the bedrock            amendment would be decided on during the
vadose zone above the water table by applying a       remedial design and selected based on ability to
vacuum. The cap would serve as an impermeable         treat contaminants in the aquifer.
barrier to enhance the performance of the vapor
extraction system and to prevent rainwater from       A treatability study would be conducted to
infiltrating into the treatment zone. A pilot study   determine the amendment that would be the most
would be conducted prior to implementation to         effective for the site contaminants and complex
determine design parameters for the vapor             geologic setting. The amendment would be
extraction system. Vapor extraction wells would be    designed to have long-term interaction with
                                                      11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

groundwater contamination in bedrock fractures               THE NINE SUPERFUND EVALUATION
for sustained reactivity.                                               CRITERIA

Performance monitoring would be conducted              1. Overall Protectiveness of Human Health and the
                                                       Environment evaluates whether and how an alternative
throughout operation of active treatment. MNA          eliminates, reduces, or controls threats to public health and
would be implemented for groundwater                   the environment through institutional controls, engineering
contamination in the distal plume as described in      controls, or treatment.
Alternative GW-3.
                                                       2. Compliance with Applicable or Relevant and
                                                       Appropriate Requirements (ARARs) evaluates whether the
Capital Cost:                    $ 6,410,000           alternative meets federal and state environmental statutes,
Present Worth of Cap O&M Cost:                         regulations, and other requirements that pertain to the site, or
    Year 1 to 5:                 $ 194,000             whether a waiver is justified.
    Year 6 to 10:                $ 103,000
                                                       3. Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence considers
    Year 11 to 30:               $ 126,000             the ability of an alternative to maintain protection of human
Present Worth of Monitoring:     $ 1,564,000           health and the environment over time.
Present Worth Cost:              $ 9,106,000
Estimated Construction Time Frame: 30 months           4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume (TMV) of
                                                       Contaminants through Treatment evaluates an alternative's
                                                       use of treatment to reduce the harmful effects of principal
Alternative GW- 5 – Capping, Dual Phase Vapor          contaminants, their ability to move in the environment, and
Extraction (DPE) of Source Area Vadose and             the amount of contamination present.
Saturated Zones, and MNA of Distal Plume
                                                       5. Short-term Effectiveness considers the length of time
                                                       needed to implement an alternative and the risks the
Alternative GW-5 includes combined vapor and           alternative poses to workers, the community, and the
groundwater extraction in a dual-phase extraction      environment during implementation.
(DPE) remedy to treat both the contaminated
vapors in the source area bedrock vadose zone and      6. Implementability considers the technical and
                                                       administrative feasibility of implementing the alternative,
the groundwater plume in the source area. DPE          including factors such as the relative availability of goods and
includes vapor extraction to draw both                 services.
contaminated vapors and groundwater from the
subsurface, with subsequent treatment at the           7. Cost includes estimated capital and annual operations
surface to remove contaminants.                        and maintenance costs, as well as present worth cost.
                                                       Present worth cost is the total cost of an alternative over time
                                                       in terms of today's dollar value. Cost estimates are expected
Capping and vapor extraction would be                  to be accurate within a range of +50 to -30 percent.
implemented as described in Alternative GW-3.
Design parameters for a DPE system would be            8. State/Support Agency Acceptance considers whether
                                                       the State agrees with the EPA's analyses and
obtained through the performance of a pilot study      recommendations, as described in the RI/FS and Proposed
during the design phase. Vapor monitoring points       Plan.
would be installed to track the performance of the
vapor extraction system. Extracted vapor and           9. Community Acceptance considers whether the local
groundwater would be treated prior to discharge.       community agrees with EPA's analyses and preferred
                                                       alternative. Comments received on the Proposed Plan are an
Depending on groundwater extraction rates,             important indicator of community acceptance.
treated water might be discharged to the aquifer or
to public sewer systems. MNA would be
implemented for groundwater contamination in
the distal plume as described in GW-3.

Capital Cost:                    $ 4,837,000          EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES
Present Worth of Cap O&M Cost:
    Year 1 to 5:                 $ 194,000            Nine criteria are used to evaluate the different
    Year 6 to 10:                $ 103,000            remediation alternatives individually and against
    Year 11 to 30:               $ 126,000            each other in order to select a remedy. The criteria
Present Worth of Monitoring:     $ 1,564,000          are described in the box above. This section of the
Present Worth Cost:              $ 7,872,000          Proposed Plan profiles the relative performance of
Estimated Construction Time Frame: 22 months          each alternative against seven of the nine criteria,
                                                      12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

noting how it compares to the other options under      contained or removed from the site. Location-
consideration. The evaluation criteria are discussed   specific and action-specific ARARs would be met
below. A detailed analysis of each alternative can     by complying with all substantive requirements
be found in the FS.                                    that apply to the actions, such as handling of
                                                       remediation waste and storm water management.
Overall Protection of Human Health and the
Environment                                            EPA and NJDEP have promulgated MCLs, which
                                                       are enforceable standards for various drinking
The No Action Alternatives (GW-1, S-1) for both        water contaminants (and are chemical-specific
soil and groundwater are not protective of human       ARARs). If any state standard is more stringent
health and the environment, because they do not        than the federal standard, then compliance with the
reduce contamination, or include groundwater           more stringent ARAR is required. As groundwater
monitoring to determine the fate and transport of      within site boundaries is a source of drinking water,
the plume over time and are without any means to       the more stringent of the federal MCLs, NJ MCLs,
evaluate the time until remediation goals are met.     and NJ GWQS are evaluated as ARARs. In GW-2,
Future exposure to soil and groundwater                MNA alone would restore the aquifer to meet
contamination could result in unacceptable and         ARARs but in an unreasonable time frame (greater
uncontrolled risks to the public.                      than 500 years). All alternatives that involve active
                                                       groundwater treatment, GW-3, GW-4, and GW-5,
The remaining two soil alternatives are protective     would restore the aquifer to cleanup standards in
of human health and the environment. Soil              less time than Alternative GW-2. Air treatment for
Alternative S-2 uses capping to prevent exposure       emissions from treatment plants to meet Clean Air
to contaminated soil and S-3 uses excavation and       Act and applicable NJDEP ARARs may be
off-site disposal to achieve the same result.          required for GW-3, GW-4, and GW-5, and could
                                                       be met.
The remaining groundwater alternatives are
protective of human health and the environment.        Long Term Effectiveness and Permanence
Groundwater Alternatives GW-2 through GW-5
have components of natural attenuation with long-      Soil Alternative S-2 relies on adequate inspection
term monitoring for groundwater contamination in       and maintenance to prevent erosion or damage of
the distal plume. Alternatives GW-3 through GW-        the cap from re-exposing contaminated soil,
5 include vapor extraction for addressing              particularly in the steep slope areas. Alternative S-
remaining contamination in the source area vadose      3 would have the least residual risk since all
zone. GW-4 and GW-5 include additional active          contaminated soil above PRGs would be removed
treatment of groundwater contamination in the          from the site. Control measures would not be
shallow bedrock aquifer.                               necessary for Alternative S-3, indicating that S-3
                                                       has greater long-term protectiveness compared to
Because S-1 and GW-1 (No Action) are not               Alternative S-2.
protective of human health and the environment,
they were eliminated from consideration under the      Alternatives GW-2 through GW-5 would all
remaining evaluation criteria.                         provide long-term effectiveness and permanence
                                                       to varying degrees. The magnitude of residual risk
Compliance with ARARs                                  is greatest for GW-2 since no active removal or
                                                       destruction of contaminants would occur. GW-2
Actions taken at any Superfund site must meet all      would rely on the cap to prevent infiltration of
ARARs under federal and state laws or provide          rainwater that could mobilize VOC mass stored in
grounds for invoking a waiver of those                 the vadose zone. GW-3, capping and vapor
requirements.                                          extraction, would be next highest in residual risk
                                                       since active treatment would be limited to the
For soil, the New Jersey residential direct contact    vadose zone. GW-4 and GW-5 would provide a
soil remediation standard for PCBs is identified as    higher degree of long-term effectiveness because
an ARAR, and the PRG for PCBs. Alternatives S-         groundwater would be treated in addition to the
2 and S-3 would meet the chemical-specific             vadose zone.
ARAR since PCB contaminated soil would be
                                                       13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The adequacy and reliability of the caps for GW-2       Capping under Alternatives GW-2 through GW-5
through GW-5 would rely on routine inspection           would reduce the infiltration of the rainwater,
and maintenance and the maintenance of the              thereby reducing the mobility of the VOCs in the
institutional controls. Without adequate inspection     vadose zone. MNA, vapor extraction, amendment
and maintenance, erosion or damage to the cap           injections, and DPE under alternatives GW-2
would allow precipitation to enter the vadose zone
                                                        through GW-5 are all treatment technologies and
adding to the mobilization of contaminants in the
vadose zone and groundwater. The requirement            all have capability of reducing the toxicity and
for maintaining the integrity of caps for GW-2 is       volume of VOCs. Although implementing any
the most significant since there would be no            technology in the fractured bedrock geology at the
additional treatment. The active treatment              site presents significant challenges, alternative
components (vapor extraction, in situ treatment,        GW-4 would achieve reduction of toxicity and
and DPE) under GW-3 through GW-5 are reliable           volume the fastest because the transmissive
technologies. However, the adequacy of controls         fractures where contamination flux is the greatest
would need to be determined during the design           could be identified during a pre-design
through PDI and pilot studies since the site has        investigation using borehole geophysics and
complex geology (e.g., a complicated fracture
                                                        transmissivity testing, and a long-lasting
network with dead-end fractures) and potential
non-aqueous phase liquids (NAPLs). Alternative          amendment would be injected into these features.
GW-4 provides greater long-term effectiveness           Over time, the amendment in the transmissive
compared to Alternative GW-5 because it is              features would be used to treat contaminant mass
expected to result in a greater reduction in            moving out of fractures before the contamination
contaminant mass migrating from source area             has a chance to move downgradient. Pilot testing
bedrock fractures into groundwater, therefore,          of the ability to place amendment in the very thin
resulting in restoration of the aquifer in a shorter    fractures at the site would be needed.
time frame.
                                                        Short Term Effectiveness
In the FS, a model was used for comparison
purposes to estimate the length of time it would        Soil Alternatives S-2 and S-3 would both impact
take each alternative to restore the aquifer to         local traffic along Brookwood Road during the
PRGs. Time estimates would be further refined           short-term if equipment requires access through a
during the design phase, with additional                residential area to implement the work. S-3 would
investigations and pilot testing. Due to the            have the greatest requirements for transportation of
complex geology, Alternatives GW-2, GW-3 and            contaminated materials for off-site disposal, but
GW-5 are expected to take over 200 years for full       this could be done via the road along the dump
restoration of aquifer. In Alternative GW-4 the         areas rather than on Brookwood Road through the
distal plume aquifer, in the vicinity of the impacted   residential community. S-2 would require the
residential wells located downgradient of the           largest quantity of import materials; this also could
source area, is expected to reach PRGs within 30        be done from the dump areas. Construction would
years and the shallow contaminated bedrock              generate noise and dust during the day, which
aquifer in the source area within 150 years.            would be controlled to minimize impact to the
                                                        residential community. The duration of on-site
Reduction in Toxicity, Mobility or Volume               construction would be longest for S-3, which
(TMV) through Treatment                                 reflects the most short-term impact to the
                                                        community. Stormwater management would need
Neither Alternative S-2 nor S-3 reduce toxicity         to be considered for both S-2 and S-3.
mobility or volume through treatment. Alternative
S-2 would reduce the mobility of the contaminants       Groundwater Alternative GW-2 would have low to
through capping but the toxicity and volume of          moderate impact in the non-residential area where
contamination would not change. Alternative S-3         the remediation would take place due to the
would reduce the mobility and volume of                 construction of the cap and periodic maintenance.
contamination since all contaminated soil would         GW-3 would have low to moderate impacts similar
be transported off-site for disposal.                   to GW-2 for the cap and a small area of vapor

                                                        14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

extraction wells. Alternatives GW-4 and GW-5             are estimated to require operation for five years
would have moderate impacts because of the need
for drilling to install and operate the injection (GW-   In the case of GW-5, given the low storativity of
4) or DPE system (GW-5), which would continue            the fractured bedrock aquifer and the observed
for several years. The operation of the vapor            large fluctuation in the potentiometric surface, it
extraction system (GW-4) and DPE system (GW-
                                                         may be difficult to operate a long-term
5) is estimated to continue for five years each.
                                                         groundwater extraction system effectively in order
Implementability                                         to extract and treat mass coming out of fractures in
                                                         the bedrock. In Alternative GW-4, the amendment
Alternative S-3 is implementable because                 injected into the saturated zone of bedrock would
equipment and experienced vendors for excavation         remain in the subsurface for a longer period of
and backfilling are readily available. Limited entry     time and therefore have more interaction with
to the residential area would make excavation            contaminants. It is expected that GW-4 would be
slightly difficult. S-2 has the highest complexity in    able to reduce mass migrating from fractures in the
design, implementation, and long-term monitoring         bedrock in the source area to a greater degree and
since it involves the design and construction of a
                                                         faster than GW-5.
cap along a steep slope. The cap installation of over
an acre may trigger stormwater management
requirements such as installation of a stormwater        Cost
retention pond. This could be problematic since
there is no suitable space for the pond.                 The present-worth costs for all alternatives are
Additionally, a long-term inspection and                 calculated using a discount rate of 7 percent. Costs
maintenance plan would need to be developed for          are calculated based on each alternative’s
S-2 to maintain the cap to ensure continued              estimated timeframes to achieve soil remedial
protection of human health and the environment.          action objectives. The estimated capital, annual
Stormwater management would need to be                   O&M, and present-worth costs for each of the
considered for S-3 but to a lesser extent as             alternatives are presented in the following table.
excavation would not increase runoff at the
residential area as much as capping under S-2              Alternative Capital Cost      Total Present-Worth Cost
would. There are no O&M requirements under S-            S-1           $0                $0
3. A deed notice would be required for S-2 to
                                                         S-2           $1,796,000        $2,467,000
prevent disturbance of the cap; no such deed
restriction would be required for S-3.                   S-3           $2,399,000        $2,399,000
                                                         GW-1          $0                $0
Of the active alternatives, alternative GW-2 would
                                                         GW-2          $2,167,000        $4,154,000
be the easiest to implement since the capping work
would be conducted on the surface, with minimal          GW-3          $4,078,000        $6,528,000
constructability concerns. GW-3, GW-4, and GW-           GW-4          $6,410,000        $9,106,000
5 share a common implementability concern due to         GW-5          $4,837,000        $7,872,000
difficulty of addressing contamination in the
fractured rock subsurface: the complexity of the         State/Support Agency Acceptance
fracture network with variations in transmissivity
of fractures means that it would potentially be          EPA’s preferred remedy as presented in this
difficult to effectively identify and target the         Proposed Plan is under review by the State of New
                                                         Jersey.
transmissive fractures for each technology.
Alternatives GW-2 through GW-5 may trigger the
                                                         Community Acceptance
need to install a stormwater retention pond due to
disturbance of ground surface and/or installation of     Community acceptance of the preferred alternative
an impermeable cap. The vapor extraction system,         will be evaluated after the public comment period
in situ treatment, and DPE components of                 ends and will be described in the Record of
Alternatives GW-3 through GW-5, respectively,            Decision, the document that formalizes the
                                                         15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

selection of the remedy for the site.                   In situ treatment will be conducted to remediate
                                                        the contaminated groundwater in the source area
PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE                                   bedrock zone. Pilot studies would be performed as
                                                        part of the remedial design phase to determine
Soil Remedy                                             which amendment would be the most effective for
                                                        the site contaminants and complex geologic
The Preferred Alternative for achieving remedial        setting. Monitored natural attenuation will be
action objectives for contaminated soil is              implemented in the distal plume. An extensive
Alternative S-3, which includes excavation of           monitoring program will be conducted to evaluate
residual soil contamination in the residential and      groundwater contaminant concentrations over
former dump areas. The exact extent of soil             time to ensure that attenuation mechanisms, such
contamination will be determined based on               as biodegradation, are reducing concentrations at
sampling to be performed during the remedial            the expected rate.
design phase. Limited soil in the former dump
areas and a residential area will be excavated and      Institutional controls will be required to prevent the
disposed of off-site in an EPA approved RCRA            installation of wells within the contaminated
Subtitle D or C facility. The excavations will be       groundwater plume, until groundwater is restored
backfilled with certified clean fill material.          to its beneficial use, and a review of the remedy
Confirmation sampling will also be conducted to         every five years would also be required.
verify the remedy meets PRGs.                           Furthermore, potential groundwater users are
                                                        protected by being provided with a public water
Alternative S-3 prevents risks from direct contact      supply as part of the OU1 remedy.
to contaminated media, minimizes leaching of
contaminants to groundwater, and limits erosion of      As previously stated, implementability concerns
contaminated soil by excavating contaminated soil       due to a fractured rock subsurface will require
above cleanup goals.         This alternative will      design phase investigations and pilot studies. EPA
eliminate the need for long-term monitoring or          will perform preliminary design investigations to
institutional controls and will not limit future use    further delineate the soil excavation boundaries
of the areas after completion of the remedial action.   and the extent of bedrock vadose zone
                                                        contamination. A pilot study will be performed
Groundwater Remedy                                      during the design phase to test amendments and
                                                        injection techniques in the saturated bedrock
The Preferred Alternative for achieving remedial        aquifer.
action objectives for contaminated groundwater          Basis for the Remedy Preference
and source area bedrock vadose zone
contamination at the Mansfield Trail Dump site is       The Preferred Alternatives were selected over the
Alternative GW-4. The primary components of             other alternatives because they are expected to
Alternative GW-4 are capping and vapor                  achieve substantial and long-term risk reduction
extraction of the source area bedrock vadose zone,      through treatment and are protective of human
in situ treatment of the source area saturated zone     health and the environment. The Preferred
through the addition of amendments, and MNA of          Alternative for soil would prevent risks from direct
the distal plume.                                       contact to contaminated media and minimize
The contaminated source area bedrock vadose             leaching of contaminants to groundwater, and limit
zone will be capped to reduce infiltration of           erosion of contaminated soil through excavation of
rainwater, thus limiting the migration of vadose        contaminated soil above cleanup goals, thereby
zone contamination into groundwater. Vapor              eliminating the need for long-term monitoring or
extraction wells will be installed to actively treat    institutional controls, such that future use of the
any residual contamination in the vadose zone.          areas after completion of the remedial action need
The cap would also serve as an impermeable              not be restricted.
barrier to enhance the performance of the SVE           The Preferred Alternative for groundwater would
system, which is expected to be run for                 reduce risk within a reasonable time frame, as
approximately 5 years.                                  compared to the other groundwater alternatives,
                                                        with greater long-term effectiveness, reducing
                                                        16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

mass migrating from fractures in the bedrock in the      For further information on Mansfield Trail
source area to a greater degree and faster than          Dump Superfund site, please contact:
Alternative GW-5 at a comparable cost, and it will
provide a long-term reliable remedy.                     Anne Rosenblatt
Consistent with EPA Region 2’s Clean and Green           Remedial Project Manager
policy, EPA will evaluate the use of sustainable         (212) 637-4347
technologies and practices with respect to any           rosenblatt.anne@epa.gov
remedial alternative selected for the site.
                                                         Patricia Seppi
                                                         Community Relations Coordinator
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION                                  (212) 637-3639
                                                         seppi.patricia@epa.gov
EPA encourages the public to gain a more
comprehensive understanding of the site and the          Written comments on this Proposed Plan
Superfund activities that have been conducted            should be addressed to Ms. Rosenblatt.
there. The dates for the public comment period, the
date, location and time of the public meeting, and       U.S. EPA Region 2
the locations of the Administrative Record files,        290 Broadway 19th Floor
are provided on the front page of this Proposed          New York, New York 10007-1866
Plan. Written comments on the Proposed Plan
should be addressed to the Remedial Project              The public liaison for EPA Region 2 is:
Manager, Anne Rosenblatt, at the address                 George H. Zachos Regional Public Liaison
provided. EPA Region 2 has designated a public           Toll-free (888) 283-7626, or (732) 321-6621
liaison as a point-of-contact for the community
concerns and questions about the federal                 U.S. EPA Region 2
Superfund program in New York, New Jersey,               2890 Woodbridge Avenue, MS-211
Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. To             Edison, New Jersey 08837-3679
support this effort, the Agency has established a
24-hour, toll-free number that the public can call to
request information.




                                                        17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

FIGURE 1: SITE MAP




           18

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

FIGURE 2: SITE PLAN




            19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

FIGURE 3: MONITORING WELL LOCATIONS




                   20

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

FIGURE 4: PLUME MAP




            21

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                        TABLE 1: SOILS PRELIMINARY REMEDIATION GOALS

                                 NJDEP                         NJDEP Default
                                 Residential Direct            Impact to              Background          Preliminary
Chemical Name Unit               Contact Soil                  Groundwater Soil       Threshold           Remediation
                                 Remediation                   Remediation            Value (3)           Goals
                                 Standards (1)                 Standards (2)
Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs)
Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs)
PCBs (4)          mg/kg                 0.2                            NA                    NA                    0.2
Inorganics
Lead (5)          mg/kg                400                             NA                   155.2                 400

Notes:
(1) NJDEP 2012. Residential Direct Contact Health-Based Criteria and Soil Remediation Standards. Last amended September 18,

2017; http://www.nj.gov/dep/rules/rules/njac7_26d.pdf
(2) NJDEP 2008. Guidance Document, Development of Site-Specific Impact to Groundwater Soil Remediation Standards Using

the Soil-Water Partition Equation, Version 2.0. November 2013; http://www.nj.gov/dep/srp/guidance/rs/igw_intro.htm
(3) Background threshold values (BTVs) displayed are surface soils BTVs developed by EES JV for SVOCs and metals based on a

statistical evaluation of background analytical results using EPA’s ProUCL, version 5.0 and EPA's Technical Guide - Statistical
Software for Environmental Applications for Data Sets with and without Nondetect Observations, September 2013.
(4) PCBs Maximum Concentrations Observed is based on combined concentrations of detected aroclors at any one location.
(5) EPA Region 2 recently indicated lead concentrations at residential properties (in addition to meeting the 400 mg/kg

maximum concentration PRG) shall be subject to meeting a 200 mg/kg property wide average cleanup goal.
mg/kg = milligrams per kilogram                                              BTV = background threshold value
NA = not applicable                                                          PRG = preliminary remediation goal
NJDEP = New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection




                                                                     22

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                TABLE 2: GROUNDWATER PRELIMINARY REMEDIATION GOALS

                                National Primary
                                                              NJ Groundwater         NJ Drinking         Preliminary
                                Drinking Water
Chemical Name            Unit                                 Quality                Water               Remediation
                                Standards
                                                              Standards (2)          Standards (3)       Goals (4)
                                (EPA MCLs) (1)
Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs)
1,1,1-Trichloroethane    µg/L          200                            30                    30                   30
1,1-Dichloroethane       µg/L          NL                             50                    50                   50
1,1-Dichloroethene       µg/L            7                             1                     2                    1
1,4-Dioxane              µg/L          NL                             0.4                   NL                   0.4
Chlorobenzene            µg/L          100                            50                    50                   50
cis-1,2-Dichloroethene   µg/L           70                            70                    70                   70
Trichloroethene          µg/L            5                             1                     1                    1
Vinyl Chloride           µg/L            2                             1                     2                    1
Inorganics
Lead                     µg/L           15                               5                  15                    5

Notes:
(1) EPA 2009. National Primary Drinking Water Standards (EPA 816-F-09-004, May 2009);

    http://water.epa.gov/drink/contaminants/upload/mcl-2.pdf.
(2) NJDEP 2010. New Jersey Ground Water Quality Standards Class IIA (N.J.A.C. 7:9C, July 22, 2010, readopted without change

on March 4, 2014);
    https://www.nj.gov/dep/rules/rules/njac7_9c.pdf.
(3) NJDEP 2009. New Jersey Drinking Water Standards (February 10, 2009);

    http://www.nj.gov/dep/standards/drinking%20water.pdf.
(4) Preliminary Remediation Goals (PRGs) were selected from the lowest of the EPA MCLs, NJ Groundwater Quality Standards,

    and NJ Drinking Water Standards.

µg/L = micrograms per liter
EPA = United States Environmental Protection Agency
MCL = Maximum Contaminant Level
NJ = New Jersey
NJDEP = New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
NL = not listed




                                                                    23

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Attachment B
     Public Notice




13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                        UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

                          INVITES PUBLIC COMMENT ON THE PROPOSED PLAN

                           FOR THE MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SUPERFUND SITE

                                    BYRAM TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY



The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announces the opening of a 30-day comment period on
the preferred plan to address the contaminated groundwater and soil at the Mansfield Trail Dump
Superfund Site located in Byram Township, Sussex County, New Jersey. The preferred remedy and other
alternatives are identified in the Proposed Plan.

The comment period begins on July 15, 2019. As part of the public comment period, EPA will hold a
public meeting on July 23, 2019 at the Byram Township Municipal Bldg. at 7.p.m. located at 10
Mansfield Drive, Stanhope, N.J. The Proposed Plan is available electronically at the following address:

https://www.epa.gov/superfund/mansfield-trail-dump

Written comments on the Proposed Plan, postmarked no later than close of business August 13, 2019,
may be emailed to Rosenblatt.anne@epa.gov or mailed to Anne Rosenblatt, US EPA, 290 Broadway, 19th
Floor, New York, NY 10007-1866.

The Administrative Record files are available for public review at the following information repositories:

The Sussex County Library, Louise Childs Branch, 21 Sparta Rd. Stanhope, N.J. or at the USEPA – Region
2, Superfund Records Center, 290 Broadway, 19th Floor, New York, NY 10007-1866.

For more information, please contact Pat Seppi, EPA’s Community Liaison, at 646.369.0068 or
seppi.pat@epa.gov

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      Attachment C
Public Meeting Transcripts

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 1
1                                  UNITED STATES
                          ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
2
3     - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
      RE: MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SUPERFUND    :
4     SITE OPERABLE UNIT 2 (OU-2) PROPOSED :                            PUBLIC HEARING
      REMEDIAL ACTION PLAN. BYRAM TOWNSHIP :
5     NEW JERSEY                            :
      - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
6
7                                               Municipal Building
                                                10 Mansfield Drive
8                                               Byram Township, New Jersey
9
                                                July 23, 2019
10                                              Commencing 7:03 p.m.
11
      B E F O R E:
12
                           MS. KIM O'CONNELL, Branch Chief
13                         MS. PATRICIA SEPPI, Commiunity
                             Involvement Coordinator
14                         MS. ANNE ROSENBLATT, Remedial Project
                             Manger for the Site
15                         MS. ABBY STATES, Human Health Risk
                              Assessor for the Site
16                         MR. MARK HERZBERG, Community Relations
                              Coordinator, State DEP
17
18    ALSO IN ATTENDANCE:
19                         MR. LARRY JORDAN
                           Project Manager, CDM Smith
20
21
22                                         WALTER J. PERELLI, CCR, RMR, CRR
                                           Certified Court Reporter
23                                         Lic. No. X100785
24
25


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 108 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 2
1                                                 I N D E X
2     Opening Statement and Introductions
             By Ms. Seppi..................Page 3
3
4
      Presentation
5            By Ms. Rosenblatt.............Page 7
6
7     PUBLIC QUESTIONING
             Mr. Jack Moran...............page 21/38/50
8            Mr. Joe Dolce................page 30
             Mr. Scott Olson..............page 43
9            Mrs. Jeanne Moran............page 48
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 109 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 3
1                          MS. SEPPI:         Why don't we go ahead and get
2     started.        I appreciate you being here on time.                         And if
3     anybody else walks in, then we'll just have to catch
4     them up.        But in the meantime let's get going.
5                          So first of all, I want to thank you for
6     attending our meeting tonight.                       Let's go around and do
7     some introductions, if we could.                       Let's start with EPA,
8     with Kim.
9                          MS. O'CONNELL:            Oh.     I'm Kim O'Connell.              I
10    am Manager in the Superfund Program at the EPA.
11                         MS. ROSENBLATT:             Anne Rosenblatt, Remedial
12    Project Manager for the site.
13                         MS. SEPPI:         Abby.
14                         MS. STATES:          I'm Abby States.             I'm the
15    Human Health Risk Assessor for the site.
16                         MS. SEPPI:         I'm Pat Seppi.            I'm the
17    Community Involvement Coordinator for the site.
18                         And DEP?
19                         MR. HERZBERG:           Mark Herzberg, Community
20    Relations for New Jersey DEP.
21                         MS. SEPPI:         And we also have a
22    representative from CDM.
23                         MR. JORDAN:          Yes.       I'm Larry Jordan.            I
24    was the Project Manager for the Feasibility Study at
25    Mansfield.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 110 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 4
1                          MS. SEPPI:         Okay.       And also, Kellie, I
2     just want to introduce you if you don't mind.                               Or why
3     don't you introduce yourself.
4                          MS. DOUCETTE:           Yes.      Kellie Doucette, I'm
5     the District Director.                 I work with Congresswoman Mikie
6     Sherrill in the 11th District.
7                          MS. SEPPI:         We appreciate you being here.
8                          Why don't we go around too, and since we
9     have a few minutes, we'll let the people in the
10    audience also introduces themselves.
11                         Mr. Shah.
12                         MR. SHAH:         Jitendra Shah, 75 Brookwood
13    Road.
14                         MS. SEPPI:         Jeanne.
15                         MS. MORAN:         Jeanne Moran, resident, 7 East
16    Waterloo Road.
17                         MS. SEPPI:         Okay.       Yes.
18                         MR. MORAN:         Jack Moran, 7 East Waterloo
19    Road.
20                         MS. SEPPI:         That was a good voice.
21                         (Laughter.)
22                         MR. DOLCE:         I'm Joe Dolce, 65 Brookwood
23    Road.
24                         MS. CORISTON:           Mandy Coriston, 908 Duck
25    Pond Road, Newton.              I'm a reporter with Straus News.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 111 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 5
1                          MS. SEPPI:         Thank you.
2                          MS. SHIMAMOTO:            Lisa Shimamoto, 55
3     Brookwood Road.             I'm also on the Planning Board, so I'm
4     here for that.
5                          MS. SEPPI:         Linda.
6                          MS. NATIELLO:           Linda Natiello, 4 Ross
7     Road.       Resident.
8                          MS. SEPPI:         Resident.
9                          Mary.
10                         MS. SCHNEIDER:            Mary Schneider, 64
11    Brookwood Road.
12                         MS. SEPPI:         And, Scott?
13                         MR. OLSON:         Scott Olson.           I'm a Council
14    member for Byram Township.
15                         MS. SEPPI:         I would just like to say a
16    special thank you to Scott and to Doris Flynn who have
17    worked with us.             They've been so cooperative in helping
18    us to set up these meetings in these rooms.                             And I
19    would like to say thank you to the members of our
20    Community Advisory Group who are here tonight.                               I know
21    a couple are on vacation and couldn't be here, which is
22    a shame.        So I said to Linda, sometimes the way things
23    work with our timing -- we have to have these meetings
24    in the summer, you know -- the time isn't always good,
25    but I'm glad to see some representatives.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 112 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 6
1                          We have a very educated, informed
2     Community Advisory Group and they've really added a lot
3     to this whole process, even when we tell them things
4     they probably don't want to hear, but...
5                          So the reason we're here tonight is to
6     present EPA's preferred remedy for the groundwater and
7     the soil to clean up the site.                      The comment period, I
8     hope you're all aware, started July 15th and ends on
9     August 13th.           All the comments from tonight will be a
10    part of the record, and then after tonight if you think
11    of anything else you can certainly always send it in to
12    Anne.
13                         The public participation becomes very
14    important because we really look forward to reading
15    your comments, and then all those comments will be put
16    together at the end in what's called a Responsive
17    Summary, and it will be an addendum to our Record of
18    Decision, which is the final legal document about how
19    we will proceed.
20                         We have Walter Perelli tonight, he's our
21    Certified Court Reporter who is going to be telling us
22    we're not speaking loud enough tonight.
23                         (Laughter.)
24                         Just one other thing I wanted to mention.
25    If possible, if you could hold your questions to the


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 113 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 7
1     end, that would be helpful.                    I mean, I know sometimes
2     you think of something you want to ask, but a lot of
3     times those questions get answered during the
4     presentation.
5                          So I think with that I'll turn it over to
6     Anne.
7                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            Okay.       Thanks again for
8     coming.
9                          I'm just going to kind of give you a quick
10    agenda of what we're going to be going over today.
11    Just a quick intro and background on the site, which a
12    lot of you are familiar with, but just to give you a
13    brief run-through; a summary of the investigations
14    we've been doing; an assessment of risk summary; a
15    feasibility study review, and we'll look at some of the
16    results from that; and then I'll explain the preferred
17    remedy that EPA has selected; and after that we'll talk
18    about the path forward; and then we'll take questions
19    and comments.
20                         So like Pat said, we're here tonight to
21    discuss the proposed plan.                   And we have started the
22    public comment period so this is really the portion
23    where I explain to you what our preferred remedy is.
24    And we're here to take comments, but like she said, we
25    can take comments up to August 13th.                         So you can call


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 114 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 8
1     me, you can email me, however you want to submit your
2     comments, that works as well.
3                          (Utilizing a PowerPoint Presentation.)
4                          This is just a quick run-through of the
5     Superfund process again.                  You might have seen this with
6     the last Operable Unit Record of Decision, but it just
7     gives you kind of the breakdown on how the Superfund
8     process works.
9                          We start with a preliminary assessment and
10    site inspections; we go into the listing on the
11    National Priorities List; then the RI, the Remedial
12    Investigation; the Feasibility Study; the Proposed
13    Plan, which we're in right now; and then we'll have the
14    Record of Decision after that.                      And then we go into the
15    Remedial Design; the Remedial Action; and after that
16    we'll get to the construction and completion, but
17    that's down the road.
18                         The site history.
19                         So as you all know, the initial release
20    was back in the 1950s through the 1970s.                            It was waste
21    that was dumped up on the ridge line.                          The initial
22    identification of the contamination was found around
23    2005 by the Department of Health and the DEP in
24    residential wells.              After that, EPA started some
25    initial investigation in 2010, and into 2011, and had


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 115 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 9
1     it listed on the NPL.                Our investigation started
2     shortly thereafter, and EPA concluded a Source Removal
3     Action back in 2012 to remove most of the waste in the
4     ridge line in the former dump areas.
5                          In 2016, we put out the Data Evaluation
6     Summary report which was just a compilation of all the
7     data that we had collected.                    And now we're getting
8     towards today, which was the RI which was finalized
9     this year and we're putting out that proposed plan for
10    the final remedy of the site.
11                         So just a few maps of where the site is.
12                         You can see 206 over on the left of the
13    larger map.          The former dump areas are up on the ridge
14    line which is outlined in the red.
15                         MS. SEPPI:         They can't see it.
16                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            You guys know where this
17    is though.
18                         And then this is Brookwood Road and the
19    residences along Brookwood Road.
20                         So, the way that EPA decided to go about
21    the site was, initially we did the Removal Action back
22    in 2012 to remove the waste, and then we broke up the
23    site into Operable Unit 1 and 2.                       And 1 was the
24    impacted wells, and we selected a remedy for that which
25    I'll go over in a little bit later, but that was to


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 116 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 10
1     address the residential contamination right away
2     because we knew that this was going to be kind of a
3     longer, more complex remedy for restoration of the
4     groundwater aquifer, and so we pushed that to the
5     second Operable Unit which we're here to talk about
6     tonight.
7                          So, I've talked about this before, but
8     because of the fractured bedrock setting and the
9     geology at the site, we know that this is going to be
10    kind of a drawn out remediation process just because of
11    the complexity of the geology.                      You can see the ridge
12    line is mostly made up of fractured bedrock -- and I
13    can use this.           Here, the blue line here is the water
14    table, and right here is the residential road and some
15    of the residential wells (indicating).                          So we have
16    extensive monitoring wells around the area to try to
17    get a handle on what's going on in the groundwater
18    aquifer, but because of the fractures in the bedrock
19    it's really hard to know exactly where all the
20    groundwater is flowing and where the contamination
21    might be.
22                         So just another quick overview.
23                         Generally, groundwater flows northwest of
24    the site.         The surface runoff is northwest towards the
25    residential area, and then the deeper bedrock aquifer


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 117 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 11
1     is also flowing towards the northwest.
2                          So, the OU-1 remedy, the Record of
3     Decision was signed back in 2017, and it selected a
4     water line for the impacted residents.                          So that would
5     include an installation of a water main down the road
6     and connections to the residential properties.
7                          So, the first step that EPA takes in
8     moving towards a remedy decision is to do a risk
9     assessment.          And what we do is to try to characterize
10    the risk to human health and the environment at the
11    site.       And this is based on the type of contamination,
12    the amount of contamination, and the exposure with
13    receptors, human and ecological receptors.                             And so from
14    the human health risk assessment as part of this part
15    of the site, we found that the risk stresses for
16    groundwater were vinylchoride, TCE, and cis-1, 2-DCE,
17    or trichloroethylene or cis-1, 2-dichloroethane.                                And
18    so the risk drivers for soil were lead and also PCBs,
19    but PCBs were just detected above the New Jersey
20    standards.          They were outside of EPA's risk range.
21                         For the screening level ecological risk
22    assessment, which is kind of our first baseline eco
23    risk assessment that we do, we found that we needed to
24    do a little bit additional work to figure out what the
25    risks to ecological receptors were for the area.                                And


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 118 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 12
1     so that we do by completing a Step 3A, which is not too
2     important what that is, but at the end the conclusion
3     was that there was no action warranted for ecological
4     receptors.
5                          So the conception site model -- you've
6     seen this a couple of times before -- I have it up
7     there also if you want to take a closer look at it
8     after the presentation.                 Generally, the ridge is up
9     here (indicating).              You have surface runoff moving away
10    from the ridge.             You also have groundwater flowing down
11    because of rainwater infiltration, and you have the
12    contamination which starts up near the former source
13    areas and moves down towards the residential wells in
14    the groundwater aquifer.                  Generally, again, this is a
15    cross-section.            So it's moving northwest away from the
16    ridge.
17                         So, EPA puts together remedial action
18    objectives for each of our remedies, and these are
19    specific goals for the cleanup and to ensure protection
20    of human health and the environment.
21                         For soil, the RAOs are to reduce or
22    eliminate exposure to human receptors to contaminated
23    soil at concentrations exceeding remedial goals and to
24    prevent or minimize the contaminated soil from serving
25    as a source of contamination to other media.                              And I'm


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 119 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 13
1     not going to go through all of these, but the RAOs for
2     contaminated groundwater achieve the same sort of
3     goals:       Preventing and minimizing the spread of the
4     groundwater and reducing exposure.
5                          So I just wanted to quickly go through
6     kind of the target remediation zones that we're looking
7     at for the site.             It's a little complex because of the
8     geology, and I just wanted to explain that we're going
9     to be talking about certain areas that we're focusing
10    our remedial technologies on, and one of them is going
11    to be called the Vadose Zone, the source area Vadose
12    Zone.       And that is just the area underneath some of
13    these former dump areas where you have fractured
14    bedrock, you have some soil, a little bit of soil on
15    top but mostly fractured bedrock that is above the
16    saturated zone or where the groundwater is.                             So above
17    the water table there's this Vadose Zone in the
18    fractured bedrock.              And then you are also going to have
19    the source area Saturated Zone which would be, again,
20    underneath some of these former dump areas but further
21    down vertically; so within the bedrock, or within the
22    bedrock water table.                So there's going to be water
23    flowing through that area.
24                         And this I think is a better depiction
25    because you can see the fractures in the bedrock.                                 You


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 120 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 14
1     have this Vadose Zone up here, and then you have this
2     Saturated Zone underneath where there is groundwater
3     running through it.               And we can talk about that more
4     later if you have questions, and I'll show you a little
5     bit more to explain.
6                          And then the down-gradient distal plume is
7     anything moving away from the ridge.                         It's generally
8     the deeper groundwater aquifer.
9                          Okay.      So this is the slide that just lays
10    out all of our groundwater alternatives and our soil
11    alternatives that were put into the Feasibility Study
12    to analyze and to start figuring out which one would be
13    the best for the site, the most applicable.
14                         So like I said before, we have three
15    different distinct areas for the groundwater:                               There's
16    the Source Area Vadose Zone; the Source Area Saturated
17    Zone; and the Dilute Plume Saturated Zone.
18                         So this is just the area underneath those
19    dump areas that does not have groundwater flowing
20    through it; this is area that is underneath the water
21    table, underneath the former dump areas where there is
22    groundwater; and then this is moving away from the
23    ridge line and in the bedrock aquifer.
24                         And so our first alternative for both the
25    soil and the groundwater is no action.                          We always


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 121 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 15
1     compare our alternatives to a baseline, which would be
2     do nothing.
3                          The second alternative for groundwater
4     would just be to cap the source area, the Vadose Zone.
5     So this would be putting a cover on top of particular
6     dump areas on the ridge line to prevent infiltration of
7     groundwater through the contaminated fractures in the
8     ridge line.          And I have some more depictions so we can
9     talk about it a little bit more.                       And then in the
10    Source Area Saturated Zone and the Dilute Plume
11    Saturated Zone, we would be doing monitored natural
12    attenuation, which we will talk about also.
13                Groundwater 3 is similar, but adding SVE, which
14    would be a soil vapor extraction system up in that
15    Vadose Zone; and Source Area 4 would be the capping and
16    the SVE, and then also adding an amendment injection
17    into the saturated area underneath the sources; and
18    then the fifth groundwater alternative is to do capping
19    on top of those former dump areas and then adding a
20    dual-phase extraction system, which would be the SVE
21    plus the groundwater extraction component into that
22    Saturated Source Area.
23                         For the soils we looked at three
24    alternatives:           The first being the baseline, no action;
25    the second being capping, which would be a soil cover


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 122 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 16
1     to prevent exposure; and then excavation of the
2     contaminated soils.
3                          And so now I'm going to just go through
4     these a little bit in more depth and show you some
5     things that are more helpful for understanding what it
6     actually means.
7                          So Groundwater 2 would be the capping and
8     monitored natural attenuation.                      And you can see here
9     these red and yellow areas are capped, and it would be
10    on top of former Dump Area A and D.                         And the idea of
11    the cap is to reduce the water infiltrating through
12    that area, so minimizing the spread of the
13    contamination further down-gradient.                         And the idea
14    down-gradient of this would be to do monitoring and
15    natural attenuation.                Which means that it doesn't mean
16    that we're doing nothing, it means that we're
17    monitoring and we're also, you know, checking to see if
18    the natural processes, biological, chemical reactions
19    that are happening in the subsurface are degrading the
20    contaminants over time.                 And so that would involve lots
21    of extensive monitoring.                  And we already have some
22    significant evidence that these processes already are
23    happening, and so that's why it would be something that
24    we would select as a remedy here.
25                         For Groundwater 3, we have that same


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 123 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 17
1     capping, which you can't see because it's covered up by
2     these vapor extraction wells in those areas as well.
3     And so what would happen here would be that you would
4     be applying a vacuum to that area.                        You'd be like
5     sucking up the contaminated vapors from that Vadose
6     Zone and pulling out the vapors and treating them
7     off-site.
8                          Groundwater 4 is the same as 3 and 2.                          You
9     would have -- this cross-section is good for
10    understanding because you can see the caps are on top
11    here.       You'd have the SVE here and this Vadose Zone,
12    and then you would have injections down below the water
13    table into the fractures beneath the Source Area, and
14    again, down-gradient would be monitored natural
15    attenuation.           The idea of the injections is to inject
16    an amendment that would be decided during a pilot
17    testing or during the design phase, and the idea would
18    be to break down or degrade the contaminants that are
19    down in the fractures below the water table.
20                         And so for Groundwater 5, again, similar
21    SVE and capping above the water table, but beneath the
22    water table, instead of injections you would have
23    groundwater extraction wells.                     So similar to a
24    pump-and-treat, if you've heard of that.                            You would be
25    extracting groundwater to try to treat the


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 124 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                        Page 18
1     contamination that way.
2                          Okay.      So to look at our soil remedial
3     alternatives.           Again, so 1 would be no action.                      So
4     baseline;
5                          2 is capping in the areas where there is
6     contaminated soil just to prevent exposure to any
7     contaminated soil; and then
8                          3 would be excavation.
9                          And as you can see, the soil contamination
10    is very limited to certain residential areas, and then
11    there would be some minor soil contamination in the
12    former dump areas that would be further delineated
13    during the design phase.
14                         So some of the common elements.
15                         All these remedies would be long-term
16    groundwater monitoring; residential vapor sampling, the
17    vapor infusion sampling that we do at the residential
18    homes; and maintenance of the mitigation systems that
19    are installed.            Each of the remedies would involve a
20    pre-design investigation.                   So getting a little more
21    information about the subsurface and doing pilot
22    testing and testing out, you know, how these
23    technologies are really going to work.
24                         Next would be the remedial design, which
25    is putting together the plan for going forward;


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 125 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 19
1                          Institutional controls, which is really
2     just limiting new well installation or limiting access
3     to the site would be also applied;
4                          Site restoration, anything that we do on
5     the site physically would be -- the site would be
6     restored to how it was previously; and then
7                          Also five-year site reviews would be done
8     on the site.
9                          So EPA uses nine criteria to evaluate the
10    alternatives.           The first three are the threshold
11    criteria -- or the first two are the threshold
12    criteria, which is just to evaluate if they protect
13    human health and the environment and their compliance
14    with applicable regulations;
15                         The next five are the primary balancing
16    criteria; and
17                         The last two are the modifying criteria.
18                         So, EPA's preferred alternative for the
19    site is Alternative Groundwater 4, which is the
20    capping, the SVE, and the amendment injections and the
21    MNA down-gradient, and then Alternate S-3, which would
22    be excavation of soil contamination.
23                         Some of the remedy considerations, some of
24    the things that we thought about when we were
25    evaluating the different alternatives was the complex


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 126 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 20
1     geology of the site.                We knew that there were going to
2     be long time frames for each of the alternatives.                                 This
3     is complex geology.               It's hard to get to all of the
4     contamination that's there.                    And EPA believes that this
5     alternative would be the most effective and the
6     quickest way to reduce contamination in the ridge line,
7     therefore, you know, protecting the down-gradient.                                  We
8     know that pilot testing is going to be necessary to
9     ensure that these technologies are effective in the
10    subsurface.
11                         So the next steps are to take public
12    comments up until August 13th.                      The Record of Decision
13    will finalize our decision on which alternative that
14    we'll be using as a remedy, and responding to the
15    public comments that we got as part of the response
16    from the summary.              Next would be remedial design, which
17    would involve pilot testing, and putting together the
18    design, and then implementation of the remedy, and
19    construction.
20                         MS. SEPPI:         Okay.
21                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            That's it.
22                         MS. SEPPI:         Thank you.
23                         Okay.      So now it's time for public
24    comments.
25                         I would ask if you do have a comment or a


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 127 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                        Page 21
1     question, please come up to the mic as we want
2     everybody to be able to hear it.                       And if you would
3     start by just again telling Mr. Perelli your name --
4     you don't have to give your address -- just your name,
5     that would be fine.
6                          Does anyone have a question or a comment?
7                          MR. MORAN:         Yes
8                          MS. SEPPI:         Jack.
9                          MR. MORAN:         Jack Moran, 7 East Waterloo
10    Road.
11                         MS. SEPPI:         Jack, would you go to the mic.
12    Thank you.
13                         MR. MORAN:         The question I had was in
14    reference to institutional controls.                         Can you elaborate
15    on what exactly you mean, by what institution?                               Is
16    there a panel or a group of people that is regulating
17    this?       And what exactly are the controls?                       Are they
18    legal?       Are they -- I know it mentioned deed
19    restrictions.
20                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes.
21                         MR. MORAN:         If somebody wanted to, you
22    know, get an exemption from them or question them, how
23    you would -- you know, I would like to know more about
24    what you mean by "institutional controls."
25                         And, Mark Herzberg, does that involve the


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 128 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 22
1     DEP as well?           And if you don't know, can you get back
2     to us on that?
3                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes.      So an example would
4     be a classified exemption area where you are -- it's
5     through the State normally, and you signify these areas
6     as places where you should install wells because
7     there's no contamination there.                      Something like that.
8     And deed notices are also a type of institutional
9     control.
10                         MS. O'CONNELL:            The institutional control
11    would depend on what remedy we're selecting.                              So in the
12    case of our preferred alternative, there would be no
13    deed restriction on any residential area.                            That soil
14    would be remediated.                There may be a deed restriction
15    on the property where the cap is to make sure in the
16    deed the cap is there.                 And if that property ever
17    changed hands --
18                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yeah.
19                         MS. O'CONNELL:            -- it would be in the deed
20    to know that there was still some waste there that was
21    capped out.          And the EPA -- it's mostly a well
22    restriction.           It would be an area around the plume to
23    notify any well driller who was applying for a permit
24    that there may be a restriction on wells, a well either
25    couldn't be put in or maybe it could be put in but it


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 129 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 23
1     would have to be at a certain depth to assure it wasn't
2     tapping into the contaminated plume.
3                          MR. MORAN:         What if somebody wanted an
4     exemption from that, who would they contact?
5                          MS. O'CONNELL:            The Agency would work with
6     the State to establish the classification exemption
7     area.       So we would do that as part of our remedy.
8                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes.
9                          MS. O'CONNELL:            We would require a deed
10    notice.        I'm not even sure who holds the deed to those
11    capped areas on the Trail.
12                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes.
13                         MS. O'CONNELL:            But we would try to go to
14    the property owner and get the deed in there.                               So we
15    would implement these institutional controls as part of
16    the remedy.
17                         Then, you know, in five years a
18    well-driller comes out and says, oh, I want to put a
19    well here and it's within the area of the plume, a flag
20    would go up there.
21                         MR. MORAN:         And then what alternative
22    would they have?
23                         MS. O'CONNELL:            Well, it depends.             I mean,
24    it's possible they could still put in a well, but not
25    into the contaminated area.                    If they could put a well


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 130 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 24
1     in deeper or more shallow, it really depends on where
2     they want to put it.
3                          MR. MORAN:         If there was a protocol in
4     place to --
5                          MS. O'CONNELL:            There would be a
6     restriction on putting a well and screening it within
7     the contaminated area, of course.
8                          MR. MORAN:         I just didn't know if there
9     was an edict that said you can't --
10                         MR. HERZBERG:           It's usually less of that
11    and more of a notification going forward --
12                         MR. MORAN:         Okay.
13                         MR. HERZBERG:           -- that you should take
14    certain precautions:                You should go to a certain depth;
15    you should double-case, you should --
16                         MR. MORAN:         Okay.
17                         MR. HERZBERG:           You know, so you can't turn
18    around and say, oh, I didn't know.
19                         MR. MORAN:         Okay.       Is it done by a state
20    regulation or a local municipal ordinance?
21                         MS. O'CONNELL:            The State establishes the
22    classification.
23                         MR. MORAN:         So, not a local municipal
24    ordinance?
25                         MS. O'CONNELL:            In this particular case


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 131 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 25
1     the EPA is implementing the remedy.                         We would work with
2     the State and submit an application.                         And the State
3     controls the waters.                They would establish an area.
4     It's usually where the plume is, and --
5                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yeah.
6                          MS. O'CONNELL:            -- some buffer zone to --
7                          MR. HERZBERG:           It usually functions as a
8     notification to the town so that their appropriate
9     entities would be aware of that, so that if something
10    comes through the planning board process it gets
11    flagged.        It's something that then the State
12    well-permitting section gets flagged.                          So it's meant
13    to, again, prospectively flag --
14                         MR. MORAN:         I can understand the
15    notification end of it.                 But it's more the end.                 Is
16    there a remedy for someone if they want to challenge it
17    or get an exemption?
18                         MR. HERZBERG:           Well, again, it's not
19    necessarily a prohibition so there's not necessarily a
20    remedy for being prohibited.
21                         MR. MORAN:         Well, if you're going through
22    the planning board, usually you need variances to be
23    approved to overcome things that are restricted.
24    That's why I'm asking.
25                         MS. O'CONNELL:            If the developer wanted to


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 132 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 26
1     come in and develop an area that was impacted by the
2     plume, it would flag up.                  You know, we certainly
3     wouldn't want him to put in 30 wells into a
4     contaminated aquifer.                And then other options, you
5     know, the developer could explore public water, or if
6     there's any other place to put -- you know, other
7     options would be explored.
8                          MR. MORAN:         The reason I asked is, there
9     is talk that's conceptual at this point of a community
10    going in very close to where the dump site is in
11    Stanhope.         And then you would talk about also
12    infrastructure, water lines, pump stations, water
13    towers.        Would they be prevented from going there?
14                         And we're also thinking of Stanhope as a
15    water source.           Would that prevent them from putting
16    pipes through that area, that contaminated area if they
17    were ever to supply water to those contaminated homes?
18                         And that was part of the other thing.                          If
19    you're preventing any, you know, disturbance of that
20    area and you want to have a water supplier, one of them
21    is Stanhope which is right there and it would go
22    through that area, it would seem to be you have a
23    remedy to supply water and you're considering Stanhope
24    and they would have to supply the water through that
25    area.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 133 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 27
1                          MS. O'CONNELL:            Yeah.      There would be a
2     restriction of digging through the capped area or
3     damaging the cap in any way.                    That would be in a deed
4     notice.        Just on those areas there would be ways to go
5     around that, I would imagine.                     They're not enormous
6     areas --
7                          MR. MORAN:         I wondered if it would affect
8     your other remedy if you chose Stanhope.
9                          And then going forward, you're talking
10    about an area where you're losing the commercial value
11    if you can't obviously disturb the area and you can't
12    dig a well, and if they're not hooked up to public
13    water you can't have a home or residence.                            So you're --
14    it's a loss of ratables for the town.                          So that was
15    another --
16                         MS. O'CONNELL:            I mean, the long-term goal
17    is to restore this aquifer.                    But this is very long
18    term.       It's not going to be quick to restore the
19    aquifer.
20                         MR. MORAN:         It is long-term, yes.
21                         MS. O'CONNELL:            Here it is the ultimate
22    goal --
23                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes.
24                         MS. O'CONNELL:            -- to the remedy, and we
25    expect it to happen, but it will be decades really.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 134 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 28
1                          MR. MORAN:         Okay.       A second question that
2     had to do with the capping is, I would assume this
3     would be impermeable, so the water would run off.                                 How
4     would you deal with the drainage and runoff issues with
5     that?
6                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            That's something we would
7     have to take into account during the design.
8                          MR. MORAN:         You know, there's lot of
9     drainage issues up there.
10                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes, we do.
11                         MR. MORAN:         And they're in the process of
12    redoing the roads up there and putting in the drainage.
13    So it sounds like if you altered the water levels you
14    could --
15                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yeah.       Yeah.      No, it
16    would definitely need to be taken into account during
17    the design, yeah.
18                         MR. MORAN:         Were there any other items
19    that were eliminated?                I was just curious about the
20    Feasibility Study.              I know they were talking about
21    pumping the water in and heating it and removing it at
22    one point in time.              Was that one of the items looked at
23    and eliminated?
24                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            So we look at a really
25    broad list of technologies that are possibilities.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 135 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 29
1                          MS. SEPPI:         Could you hold on one second.
2                          (Interruption by a member of the public
3     speaking loudly in the audience.)
4                          MS. SEPPI:         Okay.       Thank you.
5                          MR. MORAN:         We were talking about
6     alternative remedies.
7                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes.      The technologies,
8     yes.      So that's all included in the FS online.                           There's
9     a full list.           A lot them get screened.                 I think you
10    have the proposed plan there.                     It's online in the
11    Feasibility Study.
12                         MR. MORAN:         It's on a different link?
13                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yeah.
14                         So it goes through, you know, all of the
15    possible technologies that would be used.                            And they're
16    screened out based on applicability, you know,
17    feasibility.           So they don't even get put into the
18    alternatives
19                         MR. MORAN:         That's all the questions I had
20    for now.        Thank you.
21                         MS. SEPPI:         Thank you, Jack.
22                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Thanks.
23                         MS. SEPPI:         Anyone else have a question?
24                         I wanted to remind you also that this
25    presentation, Anne will send it to me tomorrow and


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 136 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 30
1     we'll post it on our web page.                      So if you want to go
2     back and look at it you'll have it there too.                               Because
3     I know a lot of the information was -- it's important
4     to know but it's difficult to understand.                            So we'll do
5     that.       And then I'll send out a note to everybody so
6     you'll know that it's online and you can go in and
7     check it out.
8                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yeah.
9                          MS. SEPPI:         And a lot of the figures are
10    from the Feasibility Study too, so that goes more into
11    depth on some of these alternatives.
12                         MS. SEPPI:         Next question.
13                         MR. DOLCE:         Joe Dolce.
14                         So my question is on the chain of events.
15                         So this discussion was all about long-term
16    restoration of the soil and the water.
17                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yeah.
18                         MR. DOLCE:         And we also have the more
19    immediate solution of bringing in some type of city
20    water.       Right?
21                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes.
22                         MR. DOLCE:         So which is happening first?
23    And what will be -- if this is happening before the
24    other, what is the impact going to be of all this
25    disturbance of all the water and the ground on the


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 137 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 31
1     wells that we're currently using, and bringing -- even
2     though they have the POET systems on there.                             There's
3     filters on there.              They get clogged.             There's all sorts
4     of other things that happen.
5                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes.
6                          MR. DOLCE:         So if this is happening before
7     the other, how is that going to be addressed?
8                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            So, they're going
9     concurrently.           I will say that this is going to have to
10    go through design.              So that will take about 18 to 24
11    months.        And then after that we'll need to get funding
12    just like we had to do for the OU-1 remedy, go to the
13    Priority Panel, get funding.                    So the actual
14    construction of this is down the road a bit.
15                         And as you know, the OU-1 remedy, the
16    water line is already in design so we're a little bit
17    ahead on that one.              We realize that there's some
18    feedback there and that, you know, any of the -- the
19    injections or some of these remedies are going to
20    impact the water aquifer which is currently being used.
21                         So that's something that we're going to be
22    looking at during pilot testing and during the design
23    process so just to make sure that there's no impacts to
24    the residential area from whatever the remedy that we
25    do is.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 138 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 32
1                          MS. O'CONNELL:            The water line will go in
2     first.
3                          MR. DOLCE:         I think that's the answer I
4     was looking for.
5                          MS. O'CONNELL:            We'll implement the water
6     line.       Exactly when it will go in, it will go in first.
7     We've secured that funding for it.
8                          MR. DOLCE:         Okay.
9                          MS. O'CONNELL:            We're completing our
10    design.        There's contracting, but we hope to start that
11    within about a year or so.
12                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yeah.       Yeah.
13                         MR. DOLCE:         All right.          I'm just thinking
14    if it impacts our well with all this movement --
15                         MS. O'CONNELL:            That will go first.
16                         MR. DOLCE:         You were talking about
17    removing -- removal of contaminated soil.                            But wasn't
18    that already done?              So where is there -- wasn't
19    everything all scraped off and 80 million tons of
20    material was removed, or some number, some ridiculous
21    number?
22                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            So the removal took away,
23    you know, the majority of the waste that was in the
24    dump areas.          Some of the waste that we found during our
25    remedial investigation, the contaminant soil looks to


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 139 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 33
1     be runoff.          It was taken away in various ways probably
2     through the rain and runoff down the ridge line.                                So it
3     was just some residual contamination that we found that
4     we wanted to address through the risk assessments we
5     found that we needed to address.
6                          MR. DOLCE:         So actually some of the
7     contaminated soil that became loose during the
8     excavation flowed down because you sent it into
9     residential areas so it's on people's property now?
10                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Everybody that has
11    contaminated soil on their property was already
12    informed, and it's a very confined area.                            It's
13    pretty -- it's very adjacent to the Dump Area A, one of
14    the dump areas.             So it's -- you know, who is to say
15    when it ran off from there?                    But it's possible it was
16    before the removal was done.
17                         MR. DOLCE:         Okay.       That's what you're
18    talking about anyway.
19                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yeah.       Yeah.
20                         MR. DOLCE:         And then my other question is:
21    You were talking about naturally reducing.                             So maybe
22    you can explain that a little bit more.
23                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            For the monitoring and
24    natural attenuation.
25                         MR. DOLCE:         You said that even now --


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 140 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 34
1                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yeah.
2                          MR. DOLCE:         -- it's going through a
3     natural process of being eliminated.                         So I was just
4     trying to get some clarification as to what was going
5     on, what that meant --
6                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yeah.       So --
7                          MR. DOLCE:         -- anaerobic bacteria, what's
8     reducing --
9                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            So in the subsurface in
10    the bedrock fractures there's biological processes and
11    chemical processes happening that slowly would degrade
12    the contaminants that are in the groundwater.                               So
13    that's something that -- it doesn't happen everywhere.
14    But based on the geology, based on what's in the
15    subsurface in certain areas they can degrade naturally.
16    And so that it's something that sometimes is enhanced
17    with some injections.                There's, you know, microbial
18    organisms that can be injected to sort of speed that
19    process up.          But this is something that happens
20    naturally even without enhancements.
21                         MR. DOLCE:         So you already found some
22    mitigation based on this occurring as well as the
23    removal --
24                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yeah.
25                         MR. DOLCE:         -- of the contamination?


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 141 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 35
1                          Because I know in past conversations you
2     said nothing is changed, nothing is changed, nothing is
3     changed.        So now you're saying something has changed?
4                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            I don't know if we said
5     that nothing's changed.                 I think we've noticed a
6     decline in concentrations generally.
7                          MR. DOLCE:         Well, I know you had said that
8     none of the wells have changed, it's really much the
9     same.       Flowing is going change.                 They're all the same
10    ratings they were required.
11                         MR. HERZBERG:           No.     Though I think more
12    that there's been a gradual decline in the levels that
13    we've seen in the potable wells, the drinking water
14    wells.
15                         MR. DOLCE:         My last question -- I know I'm
16    taking up time here.
17                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            That's okay.
18                         MR. DOLCE:         You said that it did not
19    warrant ecological receptors.                     What does that mean?
20                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            So that means that there
21    was -- there was not unacceptable risk to take any
22    ecological receptors.                So there no basis for taking an
23    action based on the ecological.                      So we clean up areas,
24    media, and areas where we find unacceptable risk,
25    whether it's to human health or to ecological risk --


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 142 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 36
1     or ecological receptors, and we didn't find any
2     unacceptable risk to ecological receptors.
3                          MR. DOLCE:         Did you have a presentation
4     from the State maybe four years ago, maybe even longer,
5     where a woman came in, a scientist, and said that some
6     wells, it was high enough, over a hundred, that you
7     could have had -- women who were pregnant could have
8     impacted fetal hearts I believe it was?
9                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            There's human health
10    impacts, and so that's why we're taking action on the
11    groundwater aquifer.
12                         MS. SEPPI:         You should explain what an
13    "ecological receptor" is.
14                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            An ecological receptor,
15    you know, it could be mammals, land mammals, it could
16    be aquatic animals in the -- you know, there's the
17    creek out here.             So we look at any type of species that
18    would be in this area.                 And there's a whole risk
19    assessment process.               It's complicated.             I couldn't go
20    too far into it.             Abby could talk to you about it more.
21    But it evaluates what the risk based on the exposure,
22    based on the contaminants, based on the levels that we
23    found to those receptors.                   And after doing that whole
24    process we found that there was no unacceptable risk to
25    the ecological receptors in the area.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 143 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 37
1                          MR. DOLCE:         Okay.       So after the capping
2     and that's all done, and we're putting in -- we'll call
3     it city water -- so that area is safe.                          Is what you're
4     saying?        Right?
5                          MS. O'CONNELL:            So the human health risks
6     come from drinking contaminated groundwater, which is
7     being addressed in the short-term by the POET systems
8     but it will be addressed in the long-term, so that
9     people will not be exposed to contamination after --
10    you know, they're not now, but they'll be a permanent
11    protection on human health.                    The ecological receptors
12    are not at risk.             The residual contamination there is
13    not posing any risk to animals or the food chain right
14    now.      We look at both because we protect human health
15    and the environment.
16                         MR. DOLCE:         Right.       Okay.
17                         MS. O'CONNELL:            So in this particular case
18    human health is the driver.                    And so to cut off their
19    pathway to exposure is to provide a potable drinking
20    water source that's permanent.                      We will attempt to seal
21    those wells and cut that off.                     And the rest of the
22    remedy with the cap and the amendments is really to try
23    to -- is an aggressive attempt to restore the
24    groundwater here.
25                         So the ultimate goal is full restoration


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 144 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 38
1     of groundwater.             But that will take decades.                   That will
2     be a very long-term remedy because it's groundwater,
3     because of the geology.                 But that's the long-term plan.
4     The short-term plan is to get everybody off --
5     everybody onto the public potable water supply who is
6     impacted.
7                          MR. DOLCE:         Okay.       I'm good.        Thank you.
8                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            Okay.
9                          MS. SEPPI:         Thank you, Joe.
10                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Thanks.
11                         MS. SEPPI:         Any other questions?
12                         MR. MORAN:         I have one other.
13                         Jack Moran, 7 East Waterloo Road.
14                         You did show a slide about certain
15    standards.          I believe it was latter PCB where one of
16    them was above the NJDEP standard but not the EPA.
17                         What does that mean, that you don't only
18    remedy --
19                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            No.
20                         MR. MORAN:         -- to the EPA standard or to
21    the DEP standard?
22                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes.      So generally we
23    thought the more stringent of the standards.                              That
24    referred to the PCBs I believe in the soil.                             And what
25    we found was that there was no -- the risk posed by


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 145 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 39
1     PCBs to human health was not unacceptable, but because
2     it was above the standards, we will take an action to
3     remove that contamination.
4                          MR. MORAN:         So in this case you will take
5     the stringent DEP standard into account over the EPA
6     one?
7                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes.      So, yeah, it's
8     not --
9                          MR. MORAN:         It's as simple as that?
10                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yeah.
11                         MR. MORAN:         Okay.       The other question I
12    had, had to do with in the future if there's other
13    homes that are found to be contaminated, the soil, the
14    same remedy would be applied to them.                          I think there
15    was one where it was elevated but not above a threshold
16    which would allow a POET or other system to go in.
17                         Will that continue to be monitored as far
18    as homes in that, what do you call it, just the plume
19    area?
20                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yeah.       You're talking
21    about residential potable wells?
22                         Yes, that's part of the OU-1 remedy and
23    those are going to be monitored in the interim until
24    we're able to put in the water line, yes.
25                         MR. MORAN:         I meant the ground -- not just


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 146 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 40
1     the water line, I meant as well as for the soil.
2                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            Soils.
3                          Yeah, we did a pretty extensive sampling
4     and so we feel like we have a pretty good handle on
5     where the exact soil contamination is.                          But during our
6     investigation if we were to find additional elevated
7     soil, we would -- yes, we would remove it.
8                          MR. MORAN:         Is that program still going
9     where you're testing other wells in the area
10    surrounding the area --
11                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Currently we're not doing
12    more investigation on the soils, but we will be doing a
13    pre-design investigation to further delineate those
14    areas that need to be excavated, and so that's when --
15                         MS. O'CONNELL:            Also, this remedy includes
16    long-term monitoring of groundwater.                         Even resident --
17                         MR. MORAN:         That's what I was getting at.
18                         MS. O'CONNELL:            I mean, we'll shut down
19    some residential wells, but there's a pretty extensive
20    well network.           Part of this plan is to knock down the
21    source area where the most contaminated groundwater is
22    aggressively, and then monitor long-term.                            We expect to
23    see a downward trend as time goes on.                          And that will be
24    a long time, and we will be doing groundwater
25    monitoring of the whole plume area to make sure we know


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 147 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 41
1     where it is, where it isn't, if it -- you know, we
2     don't expect it to spread, but if it was spreading, we
3     would --
4                          MR. MORAN:         Yes.      I know there were homes
5     that were quite far from that that were being monitored
6     and I didn't know if that was still going on.
7                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes, it's still going on.
8                          MR. MORAN:         That was it.           Thank you.
9                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            Thanks.
10                         Yes.
11                         MR. HERZBERG:           Do I have to get up?
12                         MS. SEPPI:         Wait a minute.            I don't think
13    we're allowed to ask questions.                      We're supposed to have
14    the answers.
15                         All right.         Go ahead.
16                         MR. HERZBERG:           Mark Herzberg.
17                         I just was curious.               There seems to be
18    some difference of how you are approaching different
19    dump areas.          So you're talking about excavations and
20    some you're talking about capping.                        Can you just
21    elaborate a little bit upon what --
22                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yeah.       So there's only
23    two dump areas where we think the concentrations are
24    high enough in the groundwater beneath them to think
25    that there would be some residual mass in the Vadose


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 148 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 42
1     Zone.
2                          So A and D would be the areas where we
3     would be doing these active treatments.                           The cap would
4     be there, the SVE wells and injections would be in
5     those two areas.
6                          MS. O'CONNELL:            The other areas were
7     excavated.          We excavated waste from there but we are
8     not seeing significant groundwater contamination under
9     there.       We don't think they're continuing to act as a
10    source.
11                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes.
12                         MS. O'CONNELL:            But there were the areas
13    with the pink squares on there -- I think Mark was
14    asking about -- I think that was in the other map where
15    there is going to be a little bit of excavation --
16                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            That's for the soils,
17    yes.
18                         MS. O'CONNELL:            For the soils.
19                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes.      So that's
20    considered part of the soils mediation, so that would
21    be -- we found a couple --
22                         MR. HERZBERG:           Small areas.
23                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            -- small areas --
24                         MR. HERZBERG:           Yeah.
25                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            -- where there were


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 149 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 43
1     exceedances that we had to excavate.
2                          MS. SEPPI:         That's in one.
3                          MR. HERZBERG:           Did some of them have to do
4     with also what the removal folks would have been
5     looking at in terms of levels that they don't do also?
6                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes.      So the removal
7     program has different standards than us.                            So when they
8     did the removal they would use different levels as
9     their criteria than we would.                     So that might be part of
10    it, yeah.
11                         MR. HERZBERG:           Okay.      Thank you.
12                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Those again would be
13    delineated as part of the design, so it's just to
14    confirm.
15                         MS. SEPPI:         Scott, did you have a
16    question?
17                         MR. OLSON:         Yes.      I'm going to be your
18    best friend.
19                         (Laughter.
20                         MR. OLSON:         I am going to hand you a copy
21    of a letter.
22                         Scott Olson 191 Glenside Trail.                      I'm also
23    a Council member here in town and I've been involved
24    with this for 15 years.                 A happy fifteenth anniversary.
25    It's been going along a long time, but I'm very happy


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 150 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 44
1     with the work that's been done.
2                          Donna Griff asked me since she can't be
3     here tonight -- she's attending a wake for a
4     relative -- to read a letter for her, so I would like
5     to do that.
6                          Her letter reads:
7                          "I'm sorry I'm unable to attend tonight's
8     meeting, as I'm attending a wake for a relative.
9                          "I had hoped to listen to tonight's
10    presentation before commenting on the methods chosen,
11    and I will make sure to provide written comment on the
12    plan to Anne before the August 13th deadline.
13                         "I asked Scott to read this note into the
14    record for me, as it's important to stress this point.
15                         "It is my hope that the EPA will allow
16    greater consideration to the comments and opinions of
17    those residents directly impacted by this site, and not
18    those of people living outside the site with agendas of
19    their own.
20                         "This is not about a short-term fix, or
21    bringing water lines to our home.                       I am very much
22    supportive of that process as it is taking place.                                 This
23    is about the cleanup of the entirety of the pollution
24    that remains below our homes.
25                         "We, the 20 homeowners living within this


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 151 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 45
1     site, have had to deal with this issue now for 15
2     years.       The health and well-being of our females has
3     been threatened.             Our property values been impacted.
4                          "I urge the EPA to continue moving forward
5     as quickly as possible with this mediation to help make
6     us 'whole.'          We've had to deal with the thought of
7     'What's next?' for far too long.
8                          "I, for one, am appreciative of the way
9     the EPA staff have always shown consideration for those
10    of us mostly impacted by the site.                        It is my hope that
11    they will continue with that priority, and ignore
12    outside interests who do not have the safety and
13    well-being of my family, and my neighbors, in mind,
14                         "Thank you for listening.
15                         "Donna Griff."
16                         And I agree with Donna in a lot of ways,
17    that there's a lot that still needs to be done.                                I'm
18    very appreciative of everybody who has been doing it
19    and the work that you guys have done.                          I'm very
20    appreciative that the Congresswoman has a
21    representative here and she's taken a great interest in
22    this.       So it goes to show how much concern there is for
23    the job being done.
24                         And I want to thank the people who have
25    been involved so far, Lou Daguardia, Kristin Giacalone,


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 152 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 46
1     Diego Garcia, Pat Seppi, and Anne Rosenblatt, and put
2     that on the record that you've done a fine job.                                I
3     really appreciate the work you've done.                           And it's been
4     a pleasure to work with you as a member of the
5     Township.
6                          The Township Council and the Township
7     government has always been supportive of these
8     residents.          And I think it's more that we maintain a
9     good relationship.              Whenever you guys need something,
10    we're more than happy to help.                      And same thing; if we
11    have questions, you've always been happy to answer us.
12    So I just wanted to reiterate what Donna said, and I
13    hope this priority and this mind-set continues.                                So
14    thank you all.
15                         MS. O'CONNELL:            Thank you.
16                         MS. SEPPI:         Thank you, Scott.              Thank you.
17    We appreciate that.
18                         Other questions?
19                         Mary, I can't believe you don't have --
20                         MS. SSCHNEIDER:            I know, it's a first.
21                         (Laughter.)
22                         MR. OLSON:         Oh, one more thing I forgot.
23                         There was some question about the water
24    availability in the planning board and restrictions and
25    that type of thing.               One of the requirements of any new


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 153 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 47
1     development in town that takes place for the
2     application to be deemed complete is they have to prove
3     a source of drinkable water.                    So with that as the
4     planning board safeguard, if they can't prove they can
5     get water they're going to have to go through a process
6     where they can.             Going to the DEP I would assume would
7     be the next responsible step where they have to get
8     approval for a withdrawal permit if it's a large
9     development, or if it's a private well it still needs
10    to have a withdrawal permit.
11                         And I think from the maps that I've looked
12    at, the plume in the area that's going to be most
13    affected is going to be in Byram.                       There doesn't seem
14    to be anything that's moving in Stanhope in that
15    direction.          So the area unfortunately that is being
16    impacted or potential for impact is also undevelopable
17    as it's town-owned property by the school and it's
18    considered for them open space, so it's not anything
19    that is going to be developed in the future.                              But I
20    just wanted to clear that up.                     The planning board in
21    town will have that jurisdiction.
22                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Okay.
23                         MS. SEPPI:         Thank you.
24                         So if there aren't any more questions
25    we'll end the meeting.                 We certainly appreciate


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 154 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 48
1     everybody being here.                If you want to come up and take
2     a look at the post boards that we have here, or we'll
3     also be here for a little while longer.                           I wanted to --
4     yes?
5                          MRS. MORAN:          I'll come up.
6                          Jeanne Moran, 7 East Waterloo Road.
7                          Could you review a little bit about the
8     health impact?            I know it's done on present standard,
9     and could you just explain what you think is the
10    greatest one, the least, and how you intend to keep an
11    eye on that since it's based obviously on the present?
12                         MS. STATES:          Yeah.      I guess I just want a
13    little more clarity about what your question was
14    asking.
15                         MS. ROSENBLATT:             The groundwater, the
16    health risks from the groundwater contamination?
17                         MRS. MORAN:          Yes.
18                         MS. ROSENBLATT:             To impacted residents?
19                         MRS. MORAN:          What was stated in there
20    about levels of carcinogens from this and impact and
21    age groups and everything.                   I didn't quite understand.
22                         MS. STATES:          Yeah.      So the basis for
23    taking action is based on -- so the reasons for taking
24    action on the site is exposure to drinking water
25    through residential exposure to drinking water.                                Excuse


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 155 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 49
1     me.     So the primary contaminant concern is TCE.                             So
2     that's trichloroethylene.
3                          And I could go on and on.                  I guess if you
4     have specific questions I can answer them.
5                          MR. MORAN:         So, in other words, it's based
6     mainly on just the drinking water?
7                          MS. STATES:          Yeah.      It's based --
8                          MR. MORAN:         And what would come from that
9     that has contaminants in it and no other fact, other
10    than maybe air.
11                         MS. STATES:          So our risk assessment
12    quantitatively evaluated exposure to the drinking water
13    and then we qualitatively evaluated exposure that would
14    come from the air through vapor intrusion.                             So our risk
15    numbers that comes from residential exposure to the
16    most contaminated drinking water at the site if there
17    were no POETS in place.                 And so --
18                         MR. MORAN:         Okay.       That's what I didn't
19    understand.
20                         MS. STATES:          Okay.
21                         MR. MORAN:         The POETS take it away, but at
22    the time you put the POETS in you used those figures
23    that were existing in that particular home?
24                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes.
25                         MRS. MORAN:          Okay.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 156 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 50
1                          MS. STATES:          So currently there is no risk
2     from the drinking water because the POETS are in place.
3     But so our basis for taking action is as if they were
4     not in place, the contamination would still be
5     available in the drinking water.
6                          MRS. MORAN:          And then those potential
7     risks would exist?
8                          MS. STATES:          Exactly.
9                          MR. MORAN:         Okay.       That's what I wasn't
10    sure of, but I thought I would just get it clear.
11                         Thank you.
12                         MS. STATES:          I'm happy to talk to you
13    afterwards too if you have more questions.
14                         MS. SEPPI:         Okay.       Any other questions?
15                         All right.         So don't forget, we'll have
16    this presentation posted on the web page and I'll send
17    out a note to everybody so you'll know.
18                         If you haven't signed in, I would
19    appreciate if you would do so, so we can just keep
20    track of who was here this evening.
21                         Anything else that you can think of?
22                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            No.     Yeah, feel free to
23    email me or call me with questions or concerns.
24                         MR. MORAN:         Jack Moran.          Last question.
25    Sorry.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 157 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 51
1                          Did I miss it?            Was there an S-3 and a
2     G-4?      Were they separate, or was this all in one as far
3     as your methods of --
4                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            So we chose one for
5     groundwater and one for soil.                     S-3 was soil.
6                          MR. MORAN:         Okay.       Do you go --
7                          MS. ROSENBLATT:            S-4 is for groundwater.
8                          MR. MORAN:         I thought you just went to the
9     ground --
10                         MS. SEPPI:         S-3, because the excavation I
11    believe --
12                         MR. MORAN:         Okay.
13                         MS. SEPPI:         -- for the soil.
14                         Right?
15                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            Yes.
16                         MS. SEPPI:         Any more last questions?
17                         MS. ROSENBLATT:            We're going to hang out
18    too, so you can come up.
19                         MS. SEPPI:         Thank you again, everybody
20                         Enjoy the rest of the summer.
21                         (At 8:02 p.m., the hearing is concluded.)
22                                            ooOoo
23
24
25


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 158 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 52
1
2                                 C E R T I F I C A T E
3
4                          I, WALTER J. PERELLI, a Notary Public and
5     Certified Court Reporter of the State of New Jersey, do
6     hereby certify that the foregoing is a true and
7     accurate transcript of the proceedings as taken
8     stenographically by and before me at the time, place
9     and on the date hereinbefore set forth.
10                         I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that I am neither a
11    relative nor employee nor attorney or counsel of any of
12    the parties to this action, and that I am neither a
13    relative nor employee of such attorney or counsel, and
14    that I am not financially interested in the action.
15
16                           S/WALTER J. PERELLI
17                           WALTER J. PERELLI, CCR, RMR, CRR
                             License No. X100785
18                           Notary Public of New Jersey
                             My Commission expires January 29, 2021
19
20    Dated:       July 31, 2010
21
22
23
24
25


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 159 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Attachment D
Written Comments

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 160 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

From:          Jeanne Moran
To:            Rosenblatt, Anne
Subject:       My input during the 30 day comment period for the Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund site OU2/ROD ending
               August 13, 2019.
Date:          August 12, 2019 6:52:52 PM
Attachments:   MANSFIELD PRAP OU2 NEWS RELEASE FINAL APPROVED JULY 15.docx



Respectfully submitted for the record by Jeanne Moran:

I attended the public meeting/ hearing for the OU2 ROD held on July 23, 2019
at the Byram Township Municipal Building. During the public comment period a
letter submitted by Donna Griff, a CAG member, was read on her behalf by
Byram Township Councilman, Scott Olson who is the town liaison for the
Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund site. He stated his reason for reading the letter
was the absence of Donna Griff who was unable to attend the meeting for
personal reasons. This letter contained innuendo and incendiary content
directed at the EPA as well as two specific CAG members. Does the EPA show
favoritism toward CAG TCE members concerns vs. CAG community water
company concerns? No comment was made at the hearing by EPA
representatives to reassure those present for the record that the EPA
represents all issues and concerns with equal consideration. In my opinion the
letter was read at the meeting for the purpose of maximizing public
consumption since the public comment period did not end until August 13,
2019. The reporter from the Township Journal, Mandy Coriston, only published
this comment in her article covering the meeting. She told me it was a powerful
statement. However, to my knowledge Mandy Corison did not contact Donna
Griff for a comment regarding her powerful statement. The quotes made by
the Township Journal published in Vol. 22, No. 32, August 8th to the 14th are as
follows: “We, the 20 (households), have been living on the site for 15 years,”
Griff’s note read in part. “This isn’t about drinking water. This is about the
health and safety of my family. I hope the EPA will allow for more weight from
the voices of the affected residents, and not those who may not have our best
interests at heart.”
The only two members of the CAG who have been water company
representatives are (myself) Jeanne and Jack Moran. We are the only two CAG
members who do not have TCE in their drinking water. My attempts to obtain
the letter from EPA representatives Anne Rosenblatt , Pat Seppi and Chris Lyon

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 161 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

have been ignored to date. My interest in obtaining the letter was to review
the content so as to respond with quoted accuracy in my public written
comments made herein.
In my opinion Councilman Olson has continually overreached in his
involvement and role as a liaison by showing favoritism towards TCE CAG
members and by disparaging and marginalizing the two CAG members that
represented their water company as to being considered as the chosen
waterline. We are no longer acting in that capacity on the CAG since Suez now
owns our former EBEPOA water company but only as possibly affected Suez
Water New Jersey customers.
Please define the role that the EPA CAG guidelines state should apply, if a town
appoints a liaison to an EPA CAG.

      Written comments may be mailed or emailed to:
      Anne Rosenblatt, Remedial Project Manager
      U.S. EPA, 290 Broadway, 19th Floor
      New York, NY 10007
      Tel. (212) 637-4308
      rosenblatt.anne@epa.gov

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 162 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                            about.blank




         I'm sorry I'm unable to attend tonight's   meeting, as I'm attending a wake for
         a relative.

         I had hoped to listen to tonight's presentation before commenting on the
         methods chosen, and I will make sure to provide written comment on the
         plan to Anne before the August 13 deadline.

         I ask Scott to read this note into the record for me, as I feel it is important   to
         stress this point.

         It is my hope that the EPAwill allow greater consideration to the comments
         and opinions of those residents DIRECTLY impacted by this site, and not
         those of people living outside the site with agendas of their own.

         This is NOT about a short term fix, or bringing water lines to our homes. I
         am very much supportive of that process as it is taking place. This is about
         the clean-up of the entirety of the pollution that remains BELOWour homes.

         We, the 20 homeowners living WITHIN this site, have had to deal with this
         issue now for 15 years. The health and well-being of our families has been
         threatened. Our property values have been impacted.

         I urge the EPAto continue moving forward as quickly as possible with this
         remediation, to help make us 'whole'. We've had to deal with the thought of
         "What next?" for far too long.

         I, for one, am appreciative of the way the EPA staff have always shown
         consideration for those of us most impacted by this site. It is my hope that
         they will continue with that priority, and ignore any outside interests who do
         not have the safety and well-being of my family, and my neighbors, in mind.

         Thank you for listening.

         Donna Griff




I of I
