LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: RECORD OF DECISION FOR OU2 FOR THE FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY SITE
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/541228
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 31553b4976c05beacfa25cc0ca8c589dcf5f4a91d1f8461651048f02c7ca1c4c
Source PDF pages: 194
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         RECORD OF DECISION

             Operable Unit Two
  Former Kil-Tone Company Superfund Site
      Cumberland County, New Jersey




United States Environmental Protection Agency
                   Region 2
             New York, New York
               September 2019




                                                *541228*
                                                  541228

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                DECLARATION STATEMENT
                                  RECORD OF DECISION


SITE NAME AND LOCATION

Former Kil-Tone Company Superfund Site
Cumberland County, New Jersey.

Superfund Site Identification Number: NJN000200874
Operable Unit 2

STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

This Record of Decision (ROD) documents the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s
(EPA’s) selection of a remedy for Operable Unit 2 (OU2) at the Former Kil-Tone Company
Superfund Site (Site) located in the City of Vineland, Cumberland County, New Jersey, which
was chosen in accordance with the requirements of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA), as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601-9675 and
the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 C.F.R. Part
300. This decision document explains the factual and legal basis for selecting a remedy to
address contamination at the Site. The attached index (see Appendix III) identifies the items that
comprise the administrative record upon which the selected remedy is based.

The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) was consulted on the
proposed remedy in accordance with CERCLA Section 121(f), 42 U.S.C. § 9621(f), and concurs
with the selected remedy (see Appendix IV).

ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE

Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from OU2 of the Site, if not addressed by
implementing the response action selected in this ROD, may present an imminent and substantial
endangerment to public health, welfare or the environment.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY

The selected remedy described in this document addresses a discrete portion of the Site involving
contaminated soil at non-residential properties (commercial/industrial properties and public
areas) in the vicinity of the former Kil-Tone Company property on East Chestnut Avenue in the
City of Vineland, New Jersey, as well as the former Kil-Tone property itself. This is the second
of at least four planned remedial phases, designated as Operable Units (OUs), for the Site. The
first OU includes residential properties in the vicinity of the former Kil-Tone property, for which
remedial work is currently underway. A third operable unit includes contaminated groundwater
associated with the Site, and a fourth operable unit includes contaminated sediment and surface
water as well as the associated floodplains. Soil and residential properties located in the impacted
floodplain area may need to be addressed as a fifth operable unit.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The major components of the remedy selected for OU2 include the following:

   •   Excavation of an estimated 57,800 cubic yards of soil contaminated with arsenic and lead
       from the former Kil-tone Company property and approximately 40 non-residential
       properties in the vicinity of the former Kil-Tone Company property, not to exceed the
       depth of the groundwater table;
   •   Off-site disposal of excavated contaminated soil, and backfilling of excavated areas with
       clean fill;
   •   Restoration of the affected properties;
   •   Institutional controls;
   •   Engineering controls, if necessary; and
   •   Long-term monitoring.

Excavation activities associated with remediation may require the demolition and replacement of
secondary structures, such as garages and sheds, as well as surfaces including asphalt and
driveways. In cases where contamination extends below more permanent structures (buildings,
offices, etc.), effort will be undertaken to avoid demolition (underpinning, etc). In cases where
this is infeasible, other options will be considered, including engineering and institutional
controls.

Additional properties nearby or adjacent to the known OU2 properties may be identified during
the design and/or implementation of the selected remedy that require remediation because of
contamination associated with the Site; these will be incorporated into the selected remedy.

The environmental benefits of the selected remedy may be enhanced by consideration, during
the remedy design or implementation, of technologies and practices that are sustainable in
accordance with EPA Region 2’s Clean and Green Energy Policy.

The estimated present-worth cost of the selected remedy is $36,039,000.

DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

The selected remedy meets the requirements for remedial actions set forth in CERCLA Section
121, 42 U.S.C. § 9621, because it: 1) is protective of human health and the environment; 2)
meets a level or standard of control of the hazardous substances, pollutants and contaminants
which at least attains the legally applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements under
federal and state laws; 3) is cost-effective; and 4) utilizes permanent solutions and alternative
treatments (or resource recovery) technologies to the maximum extent practicable. In addition,
Section 121 of CERCLA includes a preference for remedies that employ treatment that
permanently and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity or mobility of hazardous substances as
a principal element (or requires a justification for not satisfying the preference). Treatment is not
a principal element of the remedy selected herein, as no effective means of treating arsenic and
lead contamination in soil in place were identified. However, some of the contaminated soil may
require treatment prior to land disposal at an off-site facility. Off-site treatment, if required,
would reduce the toxicity of the contaminated soil prior to land disposal.


                                                 ii

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Five-year reviews will be required because the selected remedy may result in hazardous
substances, pollutants, or contaminants remaining on affected properties above levels that allow
for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure.

ROD DATA CERTIFICATION             CHECKLIST

The following information is included in the Decision Summary section of this ROD. Additional
information can be found in the administrative record for the Site.

       •   Chemicals of concern and their respective concentrations may be found in the
           "Summary of Remedial Investigation" section.

       •   Baseline risk represented by the chemicals of concern may be found in the "Summary
           of Site Risks" section.

       •   A discussion of remediation goals may be found in the "Remedial Action Objectives"
           section.

       •   A discussion of principal threat waste may be found in the "Principal Threat Waste"
           section.

       •   Current and reasonably anticipated future land use assumptions are discussed in the
           "Current and Potential Future Site and Resource Uses" section.

       •   Estimated capital, annual operation and maintenance (O&M) and total present worth
           costs are discussed in the "Description of Remedial Alternatives" section.

       •   Key factors that led to selecting the remedy (i.e., how the selected remedy provides
           the best balance of tradeoffs with respect to the balancing and modifying criteria,
           highlighting key decision criteria may be found in the "Comparative Analysis of
           Alternatives" and "Statutory Determinations" sections.


AUTHORIZING SIGNATURE




Pat Evangelista, Acting Director                            Date;
Superfund & Emergency Management Division
EPA - Region 2




                                                1ll

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

          DECISION SUMMARY

             Operable Unit 2
      Former Kil-Tone Company Site
      Cumberland County, New Jersey




United States Environmental Protection Agency
                   Region 2
             New York, New York
               September 2019

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                              PAGE

SITE NAME AND LOCATION .................................................................................................... 1
SITE DESCRIPTION ..................................................................................................................... 1
SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES .............................................................. 2
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION ................................................................................................ 3
SCOPE AND ROLE OF THIS OPERABLE UNIT ....................................................................... 4
PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS AND EARLY RESPONSE ACTIONS ............................ 4
RESULTS OF THE REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION ................................................................... 5
CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES ................................. 7
SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS ........................................................................................................ 8
REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES ......................................................................................... 13
DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES .................................................................. 15
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES ................................................................ 18
PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE .................................................................................................. 25
SELECTED REMEDY ................................................................................................................. 25
STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS .......................................................................................... 27
DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES ............................................................... 29




APPENDICES

APPENDIX I                     FIGURES
APPENDIX II                    TABLES
APPENDIX III                   ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX
APPENDIX IV                    STATE LETTER
APPENDIX V                     RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE NAME AND LOCATION

The Former Kil-Tone Company Site (Site), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Superfund Site Identification Number NJN000200874, is located in the City of Vineland,
Cumberland County, New Jersey. The selected remedy described herein addresses a discrete
portion of the Site, referred to as Operable Unit 2 (OU2), involving contaminated soil at the
former Kil-Tone Company property and non-residential properties in the vicinity of the former
Kil-Tone Company property on East Chestnut Avenue (see Appendix I, Figure 1.) EPA is the
lead agency and the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) is the support
agency.

SITE DESCRIPTION

The former Kil-Tone Company property (Property) encompasses approximately 4.076 acres at
527 East Chestnut Avenue in a mixed residential and commercial area that has been identified as
a community with environmental justice concerns. The Property is bordered to the north by East
Chestnut Avenue; to the east by South Sixth Street; to the south by Paul Street; and to the west
by South East Boulevard followed by railroad tracks used commercially for transporting freight.
Both residential and non-residential properties are located throughout the area (see Appendix I,
Figures 2 and 3).

Pesticides were manufactured at the Property from the late 1910s until the 1930s. Contaminated
soil has been identified on the Property itself, at various residential and commercial properties
surrounding the Property, and in soil, sediment, surface water and groundwater downgradient of
the Property. This decision document focuses on Property and the non-residential properties
located near the Property, including commercial, industrial and mixed-use properties, as well as
public land. A previous decision document, signed in September 2016, focused on residential
properties in the vicinity of the former Kil-Tone facility. Future decision documents will address
contaminated groundwater, surface water and sediment and additional soil, if necessary.

Non-residential properties in the area range in lot size and date of construction. The smallest lots
are less than 0.1 acres, the largest lots are over 4.7 acres, and the oldest structures were
constructed around 1900. The Property itself is currently developed with a multi-section building
on the western side, and the remainder of the Property, formerly unpaved, was paved with an
asphalt cover in December 2016/January 2017 as part of a removal action performed by EPA to
provide temporary protection from Site-related contamination. The paved area is used for vehicle
parking, materials storage, and as a laydown area for unused equipment and larger steel
fabrications. Adjacent and north of the Property is the Lerco Fuel Co. Inc. (Lerco) industrial
facility that consists of two lots. The Lerco property was formerly used as a fuel storage and
distribution site but is now vacant. Other commercial and industrial properties in the vicinity of
the Property include a transmission service company, a salon, a restaurant, and a market, and are
interspersed with residential properties in the area surrounding the Property. In addition, a few
vacant lots and public properties are interspersed throughout the area.

A storm sewer catch basin located in the northwestern corner of the Property receives storm
water from the entire four-acre Property and discharges into the head of the Tarkiln Branch

                                                 1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

located across South East Boulevard about 400 feet west of the Property. The Tarkiln Branch is a
tributary of the Parvin Branch which flows into the Maurice River located approximately 3.5
miles from the Site. The Maurice River eventually flows into Union Lake six miles downstream
of the entrance of Parvin Branch.

The neighborhood to the northwest, north, and east of the Property consists of various residential
properties with some commercial and industrial properties. Open spaces (neighborhood parks
and vacant lots) are interspersed throughout this area as well. The non-residential properties to be
addressed as part of OU2 may be adjacent to or near residential properties being addressed as
part of OU1. Farther away, land use is primarily a mix of residential and commercial
development. The urban core of Vineland is centered near the intersection of Landis Avenue and
County Route 615 (South East Boulevard). This area includes suburban housing and light
commercial development that radiates in all directions, with development becoming lighter away
from the urban center.

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES

The former Kil-Tone Company (Kil-Tone) began operations at the Property in or about 1917.
Kil-Tone manufactured, among other things, the pesticide lead arsenate. In the mid-1920s, Kil-
Tone was acquired by John Lucas & Company forming the Lucas Kil-Tone Company. The
Lucas Kil-Tone Company continued manufacturing arsenic-based pesticides on the Property.
Sanborn maps from 1919 and 1925 were used to identify the original buildings used by the
former Kil-Tone Company to manufacture pesticides. Buildings identified on the Sanborn maps
included an acid plant, tank room, engine room, and manufacturing building for grinding, mixing
and pressing, and storage. A laboratory was constructed after 1919 on the southwest corner of
the property.

Lead arsenate is a pentavalent form of inorganic arsenic, which exists normally as white crystals
with no discernible odor, contains about 22 percent arsenic and is slightly soluble in cold water.
Inorganic arsenicals are known to be acutely toxic. Lead arsenate was the most extensively used
of the arsenical insecticides. Information obtained from the Vineland Chamber of Commerce and
the New Jersey Experiment Stations that dates between 1917 and 1926 indicates that specific
products manufactured by the former Kil-Tone Company included Green Cross Dry Powdered
Arsenate of Lead, Green Cross Standard Arsenate of Lead (paste), Green Cross Sulpho-arsenate
Powder, Green Cross Sulphur and Arsenate of Lead Mixture, Modified Kil-Tone, Improved Kil-
Tone, Fruit Kil-Tone, Bordeaux Mixture, Dry Powdered Arsenite of Zinc, and Beetle Mort.
Based on the timeframe during which the former Kil-Tone Company operated, these products
were regulated under the Insecticide Act of 1910.

Lucas Kil-Tone continued to operate at the Property until about 1933, and the Property has
undergone several property transfers since Lucas Kil-Tone ceased operations. The 1949 and
1968 Sanborn maps indicate that the Uddo Taormina Company Food Products occupied the
Property and the configurations of the buildings had changed. Since that time, several other
entities have operated on the Property. The Property is currently owned by Urban
Manufacturing, LLC, which purchased the Property in 2008. Urban Sign & Crane, Inc. is the
current tenant, and its operation includes the fabrication and installation of commercial signage.

                                                 2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The Lerco Company property is located directly across East Chestnut Avenue from the former
Kil-Tone Company facility. A fuel distribution facility has operated on the Lerco property since
the 1930s but is no longer in use. In 1989, a release of petroleum hydrocarbons was reported to
NJDEP during the removal of a 20,000-gallon underground storage tank (UST) at the Lerco
property. Since 1989, Lerco has performed remedial investigation activities under NJDEP
authority on its property, which included removal of several USTs, aboveground storage tanks,
light non-aqueous phase liquid remediation, and soil and groundwater sampling. Soil and
groundwater sampling performed on the Lerco property identified high concentrations of
benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylenes, as well as arsenic and lead. Arsenic was identified
at concentrations up to 20,500 milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg) and lead up to 28,700 mg/kg.
The exceedances of soil cleanup standards for arsenic and lead were mainly detected in the 1.5 to
2 feet and 4.5 to 5 feet below ground surface (bgs) along the western and southern property
boundaries. Since the initial investigation, several soil sampling events have been conducted at
the Lerco property by environmental consulting companies, including Aqua-tex and RT
Environmental. RT Environmental indicated that the arsenic and lead identified were not
associated with the Lerco operations. RT Environmental also stated that historical operations on
the Lerco property support that it has always been operated as a fueling station, with no evidence
that they would have generated arsenic or lead wastes. The presence of arsenic in conjunction
with lead indicated that it is likely that some portion of the lead contamination may not be
petroleum-related.

In August 2014, NJDEP initiated a Site investigation. The NJDEP investigation found arsenic on
the Property at concentrations as high as 740 mg/kg in the top six inches of soil and at
concentrations as high as 5,800 mg/kg at depth (3.5 to 4 feet bgs). Groundwater samples
collected from temporary well points on the former Kil-Tone Company facility showed arsenic
concentrations from 8.1 micrograms per liter (μg/L) to 14,000 μg/L. This discovery prompted
NJDEP to refer the Site to EPA on November 14, 2014. The Site was proposed to the National
Priorities List (NPL) on September 30, 2015 and was added to the NPL on April 5, 2016.

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

EPA has worked closely with local residents, public officials and other interested members of the
community since sampling started at the Site in 2014. Work is occurring in a residential
community and directly affects both residential and non-residential properties, so the level of
interest is high, particularly by the owners/operators of impacted properties. This community in
this section of Vineland is primarily Spanish-speaking. As such, translation and interpretation
services are provided at public meetings and other events.

The Proposed Plan for OU2 of the Site was released for public comment on July 30, 2019. The
Proposed Plan and other Site-related documents were made available to the public in the
administrative record file maintained at the Vineland City Library, 1058 East Landis Avenue in
Vineland, New Jersey and at the EPA Region 2 Superfund Records Center located at 290
Broadway, New York, New York (see Appendix III). The administrative record file is also
available online at http://www.epa/gov/superfund/former-kil-tone.




                                                3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

A press release documenting the availability of these documents was released on July 30th, 2019.
A notice of the Proposed Plan release and the public meeting was intended to be published in the
Daily Journal newspaper, but due to a printing error the notice was never published. The public
comment period was originally intended to close on August 28, 2019 but was extended to
September 26 following the publication of the notice on August 27. Both English and Spanish
versions of the Proposed Plan were made available.

A public meeting was held on August 13, 2019, at the Gloria M Sabater Elementary School, 301
Southeast Boulevard in Vineland, New Jersey to discuss the findings of the Remedial
Investigation (RI) and the Focused Feasibility Study (FFS) and to present EPA’s plan to the
community. At this meeting, EPA representatives answered questions about the RI/FFS and the
remedial alternatives. Due to the printing error mentioned above, a second public meeting was
held on September 4, 2019, at the Vineland City Hall. Comments that were received by EPA at
the public meetings and in writing during the public comment period are addressed in the
Responsiveness Summary (see Appendix V).

SCOPE AND ROLE OF THIS OPERABLE UNIT

Due to the large area, the different media affected by contamination, the complexity of multiple
properties and varying land uses, EPA is addressing the cleanup of the Site in several remedial
actions, or operable units (OUs). A ROD for OU1 was signed on September 12, 2016. It selected
a remedy for residential properties in the vicinity of the former Kil-Tone Company
manufacturing facility and that remedial work is currently underway. This ROD addresses the
second operable unit associated with the Site, which includes contaminated soils on the Property
and non-residential properties in the vicinity of the Property. A third OU to address groundwater
contamination and a fourth OU to address contaminated sediment and surface water will be
needed. A fifth OU may be needed to address soil and residential properties located in the
impacted floodplain area.

The approximately 40 properties referenced in this ROD requiring a CERCLA response action is
an estimate used to calculate the approximate costs of the cleanup alternatives. The precise
number of non-residential properties that will require soil remediation under the OU2 remedy
will be determined upon completion of additional soil sampling activities to be conducted during
the remedial design and possibly refined during implementation of the remedial action.

PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS AND EARLY RESPONSE ACTIONS

From January 2015 through February 2016, EPA conducted several sampling events at the Site
seeking to define the nature and extent of contamination in residential and non-residential soil,
groundwater, surface water and sediment. Based on the results of EPA’s 2015 and 2016
sampling events and the earlier sampling by NJDEP, EPA initiated a removal action in April
2016 to prevent exposure to lead and arsenic contaminated surface soil at residential properties
located in the vicinity of the Property.

EPA’s removal action consisted of the placement of topsoil to support the growth of sod on
portions of 26 residential properties with arsenic and/or lead concentrations in surface soil in

                                                 4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

excess of action levels. EPA also instructed property owners and/or residents of these residential
properties to not disturb the new layer of clean topsoil and/or sod until a permanent remedy
could be implemented. These preventative measures were completed in June 2016.

Later in 2016, an additional six residential properties located in the flood plain of the Tarkiln
Branch were addressed to prevent exposure to and/or migration of contamination, and fencing
was installed to restrict access to portions of two public housing developments along the Tarkiln.
In addition, soil cover and paving were placed over a portion of the Property to prevent further
migration of contamination from the Property until a permanent remedy can be implemented.

Operable Unit One

EPA selected a remedy for OU1 of the former Kil-Tone Site on September 12, 2016. The remedy
addresses contaminated soil on approximately 57 residential properties in the vicinity of the Site
and involves the excavation of an estimated 21,000 cubic yards of soil contaminated primarily
with arsenic and lead. It also involves the off-site disposal of contaminated soil, the backfilling
of excavated areas with clean fill, and the restoration of affected properties. Remedial activities
are currently underway for OU1 residential properties. An initial 6 properties were completed in
2018, and 27 properties are currently undergoing remediation. Remedial design for remediation
of the remaining properties is currently underway and is expected to start in 2020.

RESULTS OF THE REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION

Site Geology and Hydrogeology

The topography of the Site area is generally flat. The United States Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service, Soil Survey of Cumberland County, New Jersey, states that the Site is
located on Downer and Auro loamy sands. The Downer loamy sands are formed from
fluviomarine deposits, located on river basins or hills. The Auro loamy sands occur with low
hills and ancient stream terraces. The permeability is moderately slow to moderate for these soil
associations. Parent material is described as loamy and gravelly alluvium. Much of the area is
covered by houses, streets, driveways, buildings, parking lots, and urban construction. During
sampling activities, the soil types observed at the background and the residential areas included
coarse sands, coarse sandy loams, coarse loamy sands, coarse sandy clays, coarse loamy sand
and sand. In addition, background and residential soil samples collected during the residential
soil sampling events were analyzed for grain size. The grain size analysis indicated that the
background and residential soil samples are primarily sand. The percentage of sand in the
background soil samples ranged from 61.4 percent to 63.9. The percentage of sand in the
residential soil samples ranged from 54.4 percent to 85 percent. The grain size analysis indicated
that the background and residential soil samples also contained silt, clay, and colloids. During
sampling activities, fill material was routinely encountered in some of the soil borings. The fill
material included concrete, red brick, coarse sand, coarse black sand, coarse orange and orange
black sand with asphalt, brick and rock shards, plastic, terra cotta, dark brown soil fill, various
types of variegated dark brown soil and fill, coal fragments, coal ash, silt, small shards of coal,
porcelain, slag and trash.



                                                5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Site Characterization Summary and Results

The RI report for OU2 of the Site was finalized in July 2018 and amended in July 2019 to
account for an update to the baseline human health risk assessment. The FFS was completed in
July 2019. Together, the RI/FFS form the basis for this ROD. The focus of the OU2 RI was on
soil contamination at non-residential properties. Additional information regarding the depth to
groundwater was also obtained. The sampling associated with the RI was conducted in multiple
stages, as described below.

Tier A Sampling

Soil sampling for OU2 began in August 2017, with the first round of sampling conducted at three
properties: the former Kil-Tone Property itself, the Lerco property to the north, and 511 Paul
Street, a vacant property to the south. The purpose of the initial sampling was to determine the
full list of contaminants present in soil that are potentially related to the operations at the former
Kil-Tone Property, and to determine the nature and extent of the contamination.

Soil samples were collected from at least eight borings per property using direct-push drilling
equipment. Shallow soil (0-2 feet below ground surface (ft bgs)) from four discrete six-inch
intervals and composite samples from three deeper intervals (2-4, 4-6 and 6-10 ft bgs) were
collected from each boring for laboratory analysis. One additional sample was collected from
each boring just above the water table, and all samples were analyzed for the full list of
chemicals of potential concern (COPCs), including volatile organic compounds, semi-volatile
organic compounds, polychlorinated biphenyls, pesticides and metals, including lead and arsenic.

The results were compared against New Jersey Residential Direct Contact Soil Remediation
Standards (RDCSRS), New Jersey Non-Residential Direct Contact Soil Remediation Standards
(NRDCSRS) and the New Jersey Impact to Groundwater Soil Screening Levels (IGWSSL).
Arsenic and lead were found to be the only contaminants that regularly exceeded the RDCSRS
and NRDCSRS for arsenic (19 mg/kg) and for lead (400 ppm and 800 ppm, respectively). The
New Jersey default IGWSSL is 19 mg/kg for arsenic and 90 mg/kg for lead. Sporadic elevated
concentrations of contaminants other than arsenic and lead were also found, particularly
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), but the data did not suggest they are site-related.

Tier B Soil Sampling

Between September 2017 and March 2018, a second round of OU2 soil sampling (Tier B) was
conducted at approximately 50 non-residential properties in the vicinity of the Property. The
sampling approach was similar to the Tier A event; samples were collected from four discrete
six-inch intervals at 0-2 ft bgs, and composite samples were collected from two intervals at 2-4
and 4-6 ft bgs. Based on the results of the Tier A sampling, the Tier B soil samples were
analyzed for metals and two intervals, 0.5-1 and 2-4 ft bgs, were also analyzed for PAHs to
supplement the Tier A sampling results.




                                                  6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Summary of Soil Investigation

The Tier B results verified that arsenic and lead are the primary chemicals of concern (COCs) at
the Site. The highest concentrations of arsenic and lead found during OU2 sampling were on the
Property itself. These concentrations range from 0.93 to 45,900 mg/kg for arsenic and 2.1 to
91,700 mg/kg for lead. Soil samples from adjacent and nearby properties to the north, south, and
near the headwater of the Tarkiln Branch to the southwest also show elevated concentrations of
arsenic (up to 15,900 mg/kg) and lead (up to 16,100 mg/kg). Arsenic and lead impacts on the
OU2 properties decrease laterally with distance away from the Property (see Figure 2).

With some exceptions (mainly in Tier A properties), the arsenic and lead impacts were typically
found in shallow soil above 4 ft bgs. This is consistent with the conceptual site model (CSM) for
the Site, which suggests that overland flow (runoff) and air dispersion (dust) were the main
contaminant transport mechanisms from the Property. Deeper soil impacts found on some nearby
properties may be due to the use of fill material, storage or disposal of manufactured products
and/or waste materials from the Property.

Groundwater

While the OU2 RI focused on soil contamination, the depth to the water table was recorded
during installation of OU2 soil borings. The average depth to groundwater at the Property is
approximately 6 ft bgs. Groundwater may be encountered at shallower depths in certain locations
on the Property, specifically in the area where the Tarkiln Branch originates. The average depth
to groundwater is approximately 7 ft bgs at properties directly north of the Property and is
approximately 8 ft bgs at properties directly south of the Property. The depth to groundwater
increases with distance away from the Property, and away from the Tarkiln Branch, and averages
approximately 13.5 ft bgs north of Cherry Street. Elevated concentrations of lead and/or arsenic
were encountered at some properties below the depth of the groundwater table, including at the
Property and at the Lerco property.

CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES

OU2 encompasses properties with a number of designated land uses, including commercial,
industrial, public land, and vacant properties. Throughout the project study area, non-residential
properties are interspersed with residential properties. Based on discussions with the City of
Vineland, and as documented in the FFS for OU2, most of the impacted properties, while
currently zoned non-residential, have a reasonably anticipated future use of residential. As such,
with the exception of a few properties that are expected to remain industrial/commercial, most
will be approached as having a potential future residential use.

The City of Vineland Water Utility provides municipal water to its residents. It is EPA’s
understanding that a relatively small number of properties may still obtain water through private
wells, though EPA is not aware of any OU2 properties that are doing so. This concern is being
explored more fully and, if necessary, EPA will take additional actions as appropriate.




                                                 7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS

As part of the RI/FFS, a baseline risk assessment was conducted to estimate the current and
future effects of contaminants on human health and the environment. A baseline risk assessment
is an analysis of the potential adverse human health and ecological effects of releases of
hazardous substances from a site in the absence of any actions or controls to mitigate such
releases, under current and future land uses. It provides the basis for taking action and identifies
the contaminants and exposure pathways that need to be addressed by the remedial action. This
section of the ROD summarizes the results of the baseline risk assessment for the Site.

Human Health Risk Assessment

A four-step process is utilized for assessing site-related human health risks for a reasonable
maximum exposure scenario:

   •   Hazard Identification – uses the analytical data collected to identify the contaminants of
       potential concern at the site for each medium, with consideration of a number of factors
       explained below;
   •   Exposure Assessment - estimates the magnitude of actual and/or potential human
       exposures, the frequency and duration of these exposures, and the pathways (e.g.,
       ingesting contaminated well-water) by which humans are potentially exposed;
   •   Toxicity Assessment - determines the types of adverse health effects associated with
       chemical exposures, and the relationship between magnitude of exposure (dose) and
       severity of adverse effects (response); and
   •   Risk Characterization - summarizes and combines outputs of the exposure and toxicity
       assessments to provide a quantitative assessment of site-related risks. The risk
       characterization also identifies contamination with concentrations which exceed
       acceptable levels, defined by the National Contingency Plan (NCP) as an excess lifetime
       cancer risk greater than 1 x 10-6 – 1 x 10-4 or a Hazard Index greater than 1; contaminants
       at these concentrations are considered chemicals of concern (COCs) and are typically
       those that will require remediation at the site. Also included in this section is a discussion
       of the uncertainties associated with these risks.

Hazard Identification

In this step, the COPCs in soil were identified based on such factors as toxicity, frequency of
detection, fate and transport of the contaminants in the environment, concentration, mobility,
persistence and bioaccumulation. Analytical information that was collected to determine the
nature and extent of contamination revealed the presence of arsenic and lead on non-residential
properties at concentrations of potential concern. Surface (0-2 feet) and surface/subsurface (0-10
feet) soils were the only media quantitatively evaluated in the HHRA.

This ROD focuses on the former Kil-tone Property and the non-residential properties in the
immediate vicinity of the Property. Consistent with the OU1 approach, three OU2 properties
were selected for a streamlined risk assessment. These three properties are considered
representative of the range of properties included in the OU2 RI. Two of the selected properties

                                                 8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

are representative of properties with relatively deep (below the water table) contamination likely
due to the use of fill material including manufactured products and/or waste material from the
former Kil-Tone Company facility. The third property is representative of properties impacted by
the operations of the former Kil-Tone facility through overland flow and/or air dispersion of
contamination, and properties with relatively shallow (above the water table) impacts. In
addition, two of the properties have a reasonably anticipated future use as residential while one
(with deep contamination) is reasonably anticipated to remain non-residential. As such, the
results of the risk assessment on these properties are applicable to all OU2 properties.

The contaminated media, concentrations detected, and concentrations utilized to estimate
potential risks and hazards for the COCs at each property that was quantitatively assessed are
presented in Table 1. A comprehensive list of all COPCs in surface soils can be found in the
HHRA in the Administrative Record. Lead was also identified as a COC; the relevant subset of
information on lead is summarized in Table 7.

Exposure Assessment

Consistent with Superfund policy and guidance, the HHRA is a baseline human health risk
assessment and therefore assumes no remediation has been performed or institutional controls
established to mitigate or remove hazardous substance releases. Cancer risks and noncancer
hazard indices were calculated based on an estimate of the reasonable maximum exposure
(RME) expected to occur under current and future conditions at the Site. The RME is defined as
the highest exposure that is reasonably expected to occur at a site.

Exposure pathways were identified for each potentially exposed population and each potential
exposure scenario. Although the OU2 properties are zoned non-residential, many are adjacent to
residential areas and, based on EPA’s communications with the Township of Vineland planning
committee, could be rezoned as such in the future. Potential exposures to COPCs in surface and
combined surface and subsurface soil pathways were evaluated for each scenario. Exposure
pathways assessed in the HHRA included incidental ingestion of and dermal contact with
contaminated soil by future adult and child residents, utility workers, construction workers, and
current/future industrial workers. A summary of the exposure pathways included in the human
health risk assessment can be found in Table 2. Typically, exposures are evaluated using a
statistical estimate of the exposure point concentration, which is usually an upper-bound estimate
of the average concentration for each contaminant, but in some cases may be the maximum
detected concentration. A summary of the exposure point concentrations for the Site-related
COCs in surface soil can be found in Table 1, while a comprehensive list of the exposure point
concentrations for all COPCs can be found in the HHRA.

Toxicity Assessment

In this step, the types of adverse health effects associated with contaminant exposures and the
relationship between magnitude of exposure and severity of adverse health effects were
determined. Potential health effects are contaminant-specific and may include the risk of
developing cancer over a lifetime or other noncancer health effects, such as changes in the



                                                9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

normal functions of organs within the body (e.g., changes in the effectiveness of the immune
system). Some contaminants are capable of causing both cancer and noncancer health effects.

Under current EPA guidelines, the likelihood of carcinogenic risks and noncancer hazards due to
exposure to Site chemicals are considered separately. Consistent with current EPA policy, it was
assumed that the toxic effects of the Site-related chemicals would be additive. Thus, cancer and
noncancer risks associated with exposures to individual COPCs were summed to indicate the
potential risks and hazards associated with mixtures of potential carcinogens and
noncarcinogens, respectively.

Toxicity data for the human health risk assessment were provided by the Integrated Risk
Information System (IRIS) database, the Provisional Peer Reviewed Toxicity Database
(PPRTV), or another source that is identified as an appropriate reference for toxicity values
consistent with EPA’s directive on toxicity values. This information for the Site-related COCs is
presented in Table 3 (noncancer toxicity data summary) and Table 4 (cancer toxicity data
summary). Additional toxicity information for all COPCs is presented in the HHRA.

Risk Characterization

This step summarized and combined outputs of the exposure and toxicity assessments to provide
a quantitative assessment of site risks. Exposures were evaluated based on the potential risk of
developing cancer and the potential for noncancer health hazards. Exposure from lead was
evaluated using blood lead modeling and is discussed in more detail later in this section.

Noncarcinogenic risks were assessed using a hazard index (HI) approach, based on a comparison
of expected contaminant intakes and benchmark comparison levels of intake (reference doses,
reference concentrations). Reference doses (RfDs) and reference concentrations (RfCs) are
estimates of daily exposure levels for humans (including sensitive individuals) which are thought
to be safe over a lifetime of exposure. The estimated intake of chemicals identified in
environmental media (e.g., the amount of a chemical ingested from contaminated soil) is
compared to the RfD or the RfC to derive the hazard quotient (HQ) for the contaminant in the
particular medium. The HI is obtained by adding the hazard quotients for all compounds within a
particular medium that impacts a particular receptor population.

The HQ for oral and dermal exposures is calculated as below. The HQ for inhalation exposures
is calculated using a similar model that incorporates the RfC, rather than the RfD.

HQ = Intake/RfD

Where: HQ = hazard quotient
            Intake = estimated intake for a chemical (mg/kg-day)
            RfD = reference dose (mg/kg-day)

The intake and the RfD will represent the same exposure period (i.e., chronic, subchronic, or
acute).



                                               10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

As previously stated, the HI is calculated by summing the HQs for all chemicals for likely
exposure scenarios for a specific population. An HI greater than 1 indicates that the potential
exists for noncarcinogenic health effects to occur as a result of Site-related exposures, with the
potential for health effects increasing as the HI increases. When the HI calculated for all
chemicals for a specific population exceeds 1, separate HI values are then calculated for those
chemicals that are known to act on the same target organ. These discrete HI values are then
compared to the acceptable limit of 1 to evaluate the potential for noncancer health effects on a
specific target organ. The HI provides a useful reference point for gauging the potential
significance of multiple contaminant exposures within a single medium or across media. A
summary of the noncarcinogenic risks associated with these chemicals for each exposure
pathway is contained in Table 5.

As shown in Table 5, when separated by target organ, the HI for noncancer health effects
exceeded EPA’s threshold value of 1 for the child resident for all three non-residential
properties, ranging from 2 to 67. The HI also exceeded 1 for the construction worker at both
properties with deeper contamination. The noncancer hazard threshold was exceeded for all
potential receptors at the Property. The noncancer hazards were mainly attributable to ingestion
of arsenic-contaminated soils.

For carcinogens, risks are generally expressed as the incremental probability of an individual
developing cancer over a lifetime as a result of exposure to a carcinogen, using the cancer slope
factor (SF) for oral and dermal exposures and the inhalation unit risk (IUR) for inhalation
exposures. Excess lifetime cancer risk for oral and dermal exposures is calculated from the
following equation, while the equation for inhalation exposures uses the IUR, rather than the SF:

Risk = LADD x SF

Where:         Risk = a unitless probability (1 x 10-6) of an individual developing cancer
               LADD = lifetime average daily dose averaged over 70                         years
(mg/kg-day)
               SF = cancer slope factor, expressed as [1/(mg/kg-day)]

These risks are probabilities that are usually expressed in scientific notation (such as 1 x 10-4).
An excess lifetime cancer risk of 1 x 10-4 indicates that one additional incidence of cancer may
occur in a population of 10,000 people who are exposed under the conditions identified in the
Exposure Assessment. Again, as stated in the NCP, the acceptable risk range for Site-related
exposure is 10-6 to 10-4.

As shown in Table 6, an exceedance of the target cancer risk range was predicted at the Property
for a future resident (3 x 10-3), industrial worker (8 x 10-4), and utility worker (3 x 10-4). The
estimated cancer risk for a future resident and utility worker at the other property with deeper
contamination is at the limit of the acceptable risk range (1 x 10-4). Cancer risks were primarily
due to ingestion of and dermal contact with arsenic in surface soil. The estimated cancer risks for
all receptors at the third property assessed were within or below the acceptable risk range.




                                                 11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Lead was detected on non-residential properties at elevated concentrations. Since there are no
published quantitative toxicity values for lead, it is not possible to evaluate risks from lead
exposure using the same methodology as other COCs. However, because the toxicokinetics (the
absorption, distribution, metabolism, an excretion of toxins in the body) of lead are well
understood, lead is regulated based on blood lead concentrations (BLL). In lieu of evaluating risk
using typical intake calculations and toxicity criteria, EPA developed models which are used to
predict blood lead concentration and the probability of BLL in a child exceeding specific target
concentrations based on a given multimedia exposure scenario. EPA’s risk reduction goal is to
limit the probability of a typical child’s (or that of a group of similarly exposed individuals) BLL
exceeding 5 micrograms per deciliter (µg/dL) to 5 percent or less. For this HHRA, lead risks for
were evaluated using EPA’s Integrated Exposure Uptake Biokinetic (IEUBK) model for the
child resident as the most conservative receptor. For adult receptors, fetal BLL is predicted using
EPA’s Adult Lead Methodology (ALM) model and evaluated with the same risk reduction goal.

The predicted probabilities of a child’s BLL exceeding 5 µg/dL surpassed EPA’s risk reduction
goal of 5 percent at the former Kil-Tone Company facility for a resident, industrial worker, and
construction worker. An exceedance of the risk reduction goal was also predicted for a
construction worker at the other property with deeper contamination. Results of all lead
modeling for the targeted properties are summarized in Table 7.

Uncertainties

The procedures and inputs used to assess risks in this evaluation, as in all such assessments, are
subject to a wide variety of uncertainties. In general, the main sources of uncertainty include:

•      environmental chemistry sampling and analysis
•      environmental parameter measurement
•      fate and transport modeling
•      exposure parameter estimation
•      toxicological data.

Uncertainty in environmental sampling arises in part from the potentially uneven distribution of
chemicals in the media sampled. Consequently, there is significant uncertainty as to the actual
levels present. Environmental chemistry-analysis error can stem from several sources including
the errors inherent in the analytical methods and characteristics of the matrix being sampled.

Uncertainties in the exposure assessment are related to estimates of how often an individual
would actually come in contact with the COCs, the period of time over which such exposure
would occur, and in the models used to estimate the concentrations of the COCs at the point of
exposure.

Uncertainties in toxicological data occur in extrapolating both from animals to humans and from
high to low doses of exposure, as well as from the difficulties in assessing the toxicity of a
mixture of chemicals. These uncertainties are addressed by making conservative assumptions
concerning risk and exposure parameters throughout the assessment. As a result, the risk
assessment provides upper-bound estimates of the risks to populations near a site and is highly
unlikely to underestimate actual risks related to the Site.
                                                12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

More specific information concerning uncertainty in health risks is presented in the risk
assessment report.

Ecological Risk Assessment

In 2017, a Screening-Level Ecological Risk Assessment (SLERA) for OU2 was conducted to
evaluate the potential risk to ecological receptors at the Site. In general, the OU2 properties are
developed and do not contain suitable ecological habitats. However, a few properties were
identified as having potentially ecologically suitable habitat upland. Three distinct exposure units
(EUs) were evaluated in the SLERA; the first two, EU-1 and EU-2, consisted of OU2 properties,
while the third (EU-3) included the Tarkiln Branch and its floodplain, extending to its confluence
with the Parvin Branch. The SLERA evaluated screening-level direct contact exposures and risks
to community receptors (plants, invertebrates, and fish) and food chain exposures and risks to
wildlife receptors (select birds and mammals). Exposures were calculated using maximum
contaminant of potential ecological concern (COPEC) concentrations, and conservative
literature-derived ecotoxicity benchmarks and dose levels.

Results of the SLERA indicated that the potential for adverse ecological effects exists for each
EU due to metals (primarily arsenic) and PAHs. A Step 3A ERA was conducted for EUs 1 and 2
and evaluated exposures to ecological receptors under current and reasonably anticipated future
land use conditions using more realistic (less conservative) assumptions and values for exposure
and toxicity. Results indicated that for EU-1 and EU-2, there is a potential for adverse effects to
terrestrial plant and soil invertebrate communities, with arsenic and lead as the primary
chemicals of concern and found minimal potential for adverse effects to wildlife populations. A
full Baseline Ecological Risk Assessment (BERA) for EU-3 will be conducted, most likely as
part of OU4 for the Site.

Basis for Taking Action

Based on the results of the quantitative human health risk assessment, the SLERA and the Step
3A ERA, EPA has determined that actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from
the Site, if not addressed by the response action selected in this ROD, may present a current or
potential threat to human health and the environment. It is EPA’s judgment that the remedial
action selected in this ROD is necessary to protect public health or welfare and the environment
from actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances into the environment.

REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES

Soil contamination on non-residential properties is present in surface and/or subsurface soil. The
following remedial action objectives (RAOs) for contaminated soil attain a degree of cleanup
that ensures the protection of human health and the environment:

   •   Prevent current and potential future unacceptable risks to human receptors resulting from
       direct contact with contaminated soil;
   •   Prevent migration of chemicals of concern (COCs) from the OU2 properties to other
       areas via overland flow and air dispersion;

                                                13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   •   Prevent or reduce the migration of COCs from soil to groundwater; and
   •   Prevent current and potential future unacceptable risks to ecological receptors resulting
       from direct contact with contaminated soil.

Remediation Goals

To achieve the RAOs, property-specific remediation goals (RGs) will be used based on the
reasonably anticipated future use of the property (residential or non-residential), the depth of the
contamination for impact to groundwater, and the potential for adverse ecological effects. With
the exception of a few properties that are expected to remain industrial/commercial, most will be
approached as having a potential future residential use. EPA has adopted the preliminary
remediation goals identified in the Proposed Plan as the final RGs for OU2 of the Site with the
exception of the Impact to Groundwater (IGW) goal for lead. Sampling is being completed to
develop a Site-specific IGW concentration for lead, and, based on existing literature, it is
anticipated that the Site-specific IGW concentration for lead will be greater than 400 mg/kg,
which is the residential RG for lead. If this is the case, the result is not expected to significantly
impact the remedial design or the scope, performance or cost of the remedy. The IGW RG will
be memorialized in a publicly available technical memorandum to the Site file or other
appropriate decision document.

The RGs for OU2 are as follows:

                                                 Arsenic (mg/kg)               Lead (mg/kg)
               Residential Soil                        19                           400
             Non-Residential Soil                      19                           800
           Impact to Groundwater                       19                    Under development
              Ecological (Plants)                      69                           500
        Ecological (Soil Invertebrates)               93.7                         3,162
       Note: mg/kg = milligrams per kilogram

The residential, non-residential and IGW RGs are based on New Jersey Remediation Standards
and default IGWSSLs (N.J.A.C. 7:26d). As discussed above, and consistent with New Jersey
Remediation Standards and guidance, EPA is developing a Site-specific IGW value for lead. The
plant and soil invertebrate RGs listed above are based on the results of the ecological analyses
conducted for OU2.

Additionally, the current NJDEP RDCSRS for lead is based on a child blood lead level of 10
micrograms per deciliter (μg/dL). However, recent toxicological evidence outlined in a
December 2016 EPA memorandum “Updated Scientific Considerations for Lead in Soil
Cleanups” suggests that adverse health effects are associated with lower blood lead levels. To
achieve a lead risk reduction goal consistent with recent toxicological findings, the average lead
concentration across the surface of the remediated area must be at or below 200 mg/kg, with no
single point above 400 mg/kg, which corresponds to a child blood lead level of 5 μg/dL.




                                                  14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

CERCLA Section 121(b)(1), 42 U.S.C. § 9621(b)(1), mandates that remedial actions be
protective of human health and the environment, be cost-effective, and use permanent solutions,
alternative treatment technologies, and resource recovery alternatives to the maximum extent
practicable. Section 121(b)(1) also establishes a preference for remedial actions which employ,
as a principal element, treatment to reduce the volume, toxicity, or mobility of the hazardous
substances, pollutants, and contaminants at a site permanently and significantly. CERCLA
Section 121(d), 42 U.S.C. § 9621(d), further specifies that a remedial action must attain a level
or standard of control of the hazardous substances, pollutants and contaminants, which at least
attains applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (“ARARs”) under federal and state
laws, unless a waiver can be justified.

Remedial alternatives for OU2 of the Site are summarized below. Capital costs are those
expenditures that are required to construct a remedial alternative. Operation and maintenance
(O&M) costs are those post-construction costs necessary to ensure or verify the continued
effectiveness of a remedial alternative and are estimated on an annual basis. Present worth is the
amount of money which, if invested in the current year, would be sufficient to cover all the costs
associated with a project over time, calculated using a discount rate of seven percent and up to a
30-year time interval. Construction time is the time required to construct and implement the
alternative and does not include the time required to design the remedy, negotiate performance of
the remedy with responsible parties, or procure contracts for design and construction. Detailed
information regarding the alternatives can be found in the 2019 Focused Feasibility Study Report
(FFS Report).

Potential technologies applicable to soil remediation were identified and screened by
effectiveness, implementability, and cost criteria, with an emphasis on effectiveness. Those
technologies that passed the initial screening were then assembled into remedial alternatives.

Approximately 50 properties were sampled during the OU2 RI, and EPA estimates that
approximately 40 will require remediation. Additional sampling will be conducted during the
design of the OU2 remedy to refine the extent of contamination on each property, which may
lead to the identification of additional properties.

Alternative 1 - No Action

The NCP requires that a “No Action” alternative be evaluated to establish a baseline for
comparison with other remedial alternatives. Under this alternative, no action would be taken to
remediate the contaminated soil at non-residential properties.


Total Capital Cost:                  $0
Annual O&M:                          $0
Present Worth Cost:                  $0
Construction Timeframe:              0 years



                                                15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 2 – Engineering Controls (Capping/Access Control) and Institutional Controls

Under this alternative, an estimated 8,650 cubic yards of contaminated soil would be excavated
to accommodate caps on individual OU2 properties. Some properties contain existing paved
areas that could act as engineered covers and would require only maintenance.

This alternative consists of the following major components:

   •   Installation and/or maintenance of engineered covers
   •   Off-site disposal of soil excavated prior to cap installation
   •   Institutional controls in the form of deed notices
   •   Long-term monitoring

The active components of this remedial action are anticipated to take approximately 15 months
to implement. The estimated present-worth cost is $8.1 million. Under this remedial alternative,
institutional controls in the form of deed notices would be required to prevent disturbance of
engineered covers and identify use restrictions. In addition, long-term monitoring in the form of
visual inspections of the affected properties would be required to ensure that the engineering
controls remain effective.

This alternative would result in contaminants remaining on-site above levels that allow for
unrestricted use and unlimited exposure; therefore, five-year reviews would be required under
CERCLA.

Total Capital Cost:           $7,961,000
Annual O&M:                   $10,000
Present Worth Cost:           $8,091,000
Construction Time Frame:      15 months

Alternative 3 – Excavation to Depth of Contamination (not to exceed depth of groundwater
table), Engineering Controls and Institutional Controls.

Under this alternative, an estimated 57,800 cubic yards of soil would be excavated for off-site
disposal. It is estimated that the active component of the remedial action would take about 35
months to implement, inclusive of mobilization/demobilization, sheeting/building, excavation
and backfill/restoration.

This alternative consists of the following major components:

   •   Excavation of soil in exceedance of the appropriate property-specific soil RGs, not to
       exceed the depth of the groundwater table
   •   Off-site disposal of excavated soil
   •   Institutional controls
   •   Engineering controls, if necessary
   •   Long-term monitoring, if necessary


                                                 16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The estimated present-worth cost of this alternative is $36 million. The cost estimate assumes
that for the Property itself and the Lerco property 75% of excavated material could be disposed
of as non-hazardous waste and 25% would require disposal as hazardous waste at an
appropriately permitted facility. For the remainder of the properties within OU2, disposal cost
assumptions were split 90% non-hazardous and 10% hazardous based on the results of the RI
and best professional judgement.

Institutional controls would be needed on properties not addressed to residential standards. While
the goal would be full excavation of all impacted soil above the water table, due to engineering
and/or access considerations, it may be necessary in some instances to use engineering controls
to fully achieve RAOs. If this is the case, long-term monitoring in the form of visual inspections
would be needed to assure the engineering controls remain effective. Because this alternative
would result in contaminants remaining on-Site above levels that allow for unrestricted use and
unlimited exposure, CERCLA requires that the Site be reviewed at least once every five years.

Note that existing data indicate elevated concentrations of COCs are present in soil beneath the
water table on at least 3 of the approximately 40 OU2 properties. Under Alternative 3, this
contaminated soil would be left in place and addressed as part of OU3 of the Site, which relates
to groundwater. However, by removing impacted soil above the water table, Alternative 3 would
also reduce the migration of contamination below the water table. Sampling for the OU3 RI has
recently been initiated and a more complete understanding of Site-related groundwater
contamination obtained during the OU3 RI will be valuable in determining the appropriate
remedy for soil below the water table. For this reason, under this alternative, remediation of any
properties with contamination beneath or near the water table will be deferred until after EPA
determines whether any active remediation is needed for OU3. Remedial activities on the
properties with impacts below the water table could then be conducted concurrently with, or in
accordance with, the remedial action selected for OU3 of the Site in order to avoid the potential
need to return to a property previously cleaned up under OU2.

Total Capital Cost: $35,941,000
Annual O&M: $7,500
Present Worth Cost: $36,039,000
Construction Time Frame: 35 months

Alternative 4 – Excavation to Depth of Contamination, Engineering Controls and
Institutional Controls

Under this alternative, an estimated 86,600 cubic yards of soil would be excavated for off-site
disposal. The volume is higher than it is under Alternative 3 because Alternative 4 includes
excavation of soil below the water table at the three properties where under Alternative 3,
elevated concentrations of COCs above the RGs would remain in place. It is estimated that the
active component of the remedial action would take about 50 months to implement including
mobilization/demobilization, sheeting/building, excavation and backfill/restoration.




                                                17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

This alternative consists of the following major components:

   •   Excavation of all soil in exceedance of the appropriate parcel-specific soil remediation
       standard
   •   Off-site disposal of excavated soil
   •   Institutional controls
   •   Engineering controls, if necessary
   •   Long-term monitoring, if necessary

The estimated present-worth cost is $58.4 million. As noted in Alternative 3, the cost estimate
assumes a 75% non-hazardous and 25% hazardous disposal cost split for material excavated
from the Property and the Lerco property. For the remainder of the properties within OU2,
disposal cost assumptions were split 90% non-hazardous and 10% hazardous.

Institutional controls would be needed on properties not remediated to residential standards.
While the goal would be full excavation of all impacted soil, due to engineering and/or access
considerations, it may be necessary in some instances to use engineering controls to fully achieve
RAOs. If this is the case, long-term monitoring of the engineering controls would be needed to
assure they remain effective. Because this alternative may result in contaminants remaining on-
Site above levels that allow for unrestricted use and unlimited exposure, five-year reviews may
be required, as per CERCLA.

Total Capital Cost:           $58,311,000
Annual O&M:                   $7,500
Total Present Worth:          $58,409,000
Construction Time Frame:      50 months

COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES

In selecting a remedy for a site, EPA considers the factors set forth in Section 121 of
CERCLA 42 U.S.C. § 9621, and conducts a detailed analysis of the viable remedial alternatives
pursuant to Section 300.430(e)(9) of the NCP, 40 C.F.R § 300.430(e)(9), EPA’s Guidance for
Conducting Remedial Investigations and Feasibility Studies, OSWER Directive 9355.3-01, and
EPA’s A Guide to Preparing Superfund Proposed Plans, Records of Decision, and Other
Remedy Selection Decision Documents, OSWER 9200.1-23.P. The detailed analysis consists of
an assessment of the individual alternatives against each of the nine evaluation criteria at 40
C.F.R. § 300.430(e)(9)(iii) and a comparative analysis focusing upon the relative performance of
each alternative against those criteria.

A comparative analysis of these alternatives based upon the nine evaluation criteria noted below
follows.




                                               18

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Threshold Criteria – The first two criteria are known as “threshold criteria” because they are
the minimum requirements that each response measure must meet in order to be eligible for
selection as a remedy.


1. Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment
Overall protection of human health and the environment determines whether an alternative
eliminates, reduces, or controls threats to public health and the environment through
institutional controls, engineering controls, or treatment.

Alternative 1, the no action alternative, is not protective of human health and the environment
because it does not eliminate, reduce, or control risk of exposure to contaminated soils through
off-site disposal, engineering controls, or institutional controls.

Alternative 2 would provide adequate protection of human health and the environment by
eliminating, reducing, or controlling risk through containment, soil cover, or removal of
contaminated soil. Engineering controls (i.e., soil covers) and deed notices would prevent
exposure to risk-based levels of contaminants.

Alternative 3 would protect human health and the environment by removing the contaminated
soil, thereby preventing exposure and reducing potential migration to groundwater.

Alternative 4 would protect human health and the environment by removing contamination,
including below the water table, thereby preventing exposure and preventing or reducing the
migration of COCs from soil to groundwater.

Alternatives 3 and 4 would also include institutional controls in the form of deed notices for
properties where soil contamination remained in place above residential standards.

2. Compliance with applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs)
Section 121 (d) of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. § 9621(d), and Section 300.430(f)(1)(ii)(B) of the NCP,
40 C.F.R. §300.430(f)(1)(ii)(B), require that remedial actions at CERCLA sites at least attain
legally applicable or relevant and appropriate federal and state requirements, standards,
criteria and limitations which are collectively referred to as “ARARs,” unless such ARARs are
waived under Section 121(d)(4) of CERCLA.

Compliance with ARARs addresses whether a remedy will meet all of the applicable or relevant
and appropriate requirements of other federal and state environmental statutes or provides a
basis for invoking a waiver.

A complete list of ARARs can be found in Table 8 in Appendix II.

Alternative 1: since ARARs apply to actions taken, they are not applicable to the no action
alternative.



                                                19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 2 would comply with chemical-specific ARARs because the soil cover and
institutional controls would be effective in preventing exposure to the contaminants. Location-
specific ARARs, such as the National Historic Preservation Act and action-specific ARARs such
as waste handling requirements under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act would be
met by proper design and implementation of the remedial components. The action-specific
ARARs for the disposal phase would be met with proper waste management on-Site and
selection of appropriate disposal facilities.

Alternative 3 would comply with chemical-specific ARARs by removing arsenic-contaminated
soil above either New Jersey RDCSRS or NRDCSRS, according to the reasonably anticipated
future use of the property. The New Jersey soil remediation standards for lead are not ARARs,
but the RGs developed for OU2 are consistent with those standards. Location- and action-
specific ARARs would be met during the construction phase by proper design and
implementation of the action. The action-specific ARARs for the disposal phase would be met
with proper waste management on-Site and selection of appropriate disposal facilities.

Alternative 4 would comply with chemical-specific ARARs by removing contaminated soil
above either New Jersey RDCSRS or NRDCSRS, according to the reasonably anticipated future
use of the property. Location and action-specific ARARs would be met during the construction
phase by proper design and implementation of the action such as general construction standards
and waste handling requirements. The location-specific ARARs and action-specific ARARs for
the disposal phase would be met with proper waste management on-Site and selection of
appropriate disposal facilities.


Primary Balancing Criteria – The next five criteria, criteria 3 through 7, are known as
“primary balancing criteria”. These criteria are factors by which tradeoffs between response
measures are assessed so that the best options will be chosen, given site-specific data and
conditions.


3. Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence
Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence considers the ability of an alternative to maintain
protection of human health and the environment over time.

Alternative 1 provides no long-term effectiveness or permanence.

Alternative 2 provides long-term effectiveness and permanence through maintenance of the soil
covers and the institutional controls. Periodic inspection and maintenance, as required by the
institutional controls, would ensure the remedy remains effective in preventing exposure to
contaminants. The continued effectiveness of the Alternative 2 containment system would
depend on how well the soil covers are maintained. Alternative 2 would not be as permanent or
as effective over the long term as Alternative 3 since contaminated soil would remain at the
properties with concentrations above the RGs, and deed notices would not eliminate potential
future health risks to property owners/occupants or workers associated with exposure to
contaminated surface soils. Implementation of a deed notice requires that the property owners

                                              20

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

consent to the recording of the deed notice on their property. Consent to place a deed notice on
properties may be difficult to obtain partly because some property owners may perceive that such
a deed notice may restrict their use of the property. In addition, monitoring and enforcing use
restrictions imposed through deed notices requires dedicated resources.

Alternative 3 would provide long-term effectiveness and permanence by removing contaminants
from the non-residential properties and providing secure disposal of excavated soil at appropriate
permitted facilities. Off-site treatment, where necessary, and disposal at a secure, permitted
hazardous waste facility for contaminated soil is reliable because the design of such facilities
includes safeguards and would ensure the reliability of the technology and the security of the
waste material. Long-term monitoring and maintenance of the affected properties and five-year
reviews would be required, as contamination may remain below the water table on some
properties. In addition, while the goal would be full remediation to the water table, engineering
controls may be needed in some instances due to structural and/or access concerns.
Deed notices would be required for properties anticipated to remain in commercial use, which
would be cleaned up to non-residential standards, but most properties are expected to be cleaned
up to residential standards.

Alternative 4 would provide long-term effectiveness and permanence by removing contaminants
above the RGs from the properties, including below the water table, and providing secure
disposal of excavated soil at appropriate permitted facilities. Off-site treatment, where necessary,
and disposal at a secure, permitted hazardous waste facility for contaminated soil is reliable
because the design of such facilities includes safeguards and would ensure the reliability of the
technology and the security of the waste material. Alternative 4 would provide the greatest long-
term effectiveness and permanence since all, or most, Site-related soil contamination exceeding
the RGs would be excavated and disposed of at an approved off-site facility. While the goal
would be full excavation of all Site-related contamination, in some limited instances engineering
controls may be needed due to structural and/or access concerns. Long-term monitoring in the
form of visual inspections and maintenance, as well as CERCLA five-year reviews, would be
required for any property for which remediation could not reach unlimited use and unrestricted
exposure conditions. Deed notices would be required for properties anticipated to remain in
commercial use, which would be cleaned up to non-residential standards, but most properties are
expected to be cleaned up to residential standards.

4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume through Treatment
Reduction in Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume of Contaminants through Treatment evaluates an
alternative's use of treatment to reduce the harmful effects of principal contaminants, their
ability to move in the environment and the amount of contamination present.

Alternative 1 would not reduce the toxicity, mobility or volume of contaminated soil, since the
soil would remain in place.

Alternative 2 would not provide reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume of contamination
through treatment.




                                                21

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 3 would not provide reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume of contamination at
the properties through treatment.

Alternative 4 would not provide reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume of contamination at
the properties through treatment.

The use of treatment was evaluated as a part of the FFS process, but no effective means of
treating arsenic and lead contamination in soil in place were identified. Excavated soil for off-
site disposal may require treatment prior to disposal.

Alternative 2 would reduce the mobility of contamination somewhat through the placement of
caps over impacted areas, however, not through treatment. Alternative 3 would provide better
reduction of mobility through the excavation and removal of COC-contaminated soil from the
Site. At a select group of properties contamination would remain below the water table, but this
remaining contamination would be addressed as part of OU3, if necessary. Alternative 4 would
provide the highest reduction of mobility and volume of contaminants through the excavation
and off-site disposal of contaminated soil from all identified properties with COCs above the
RGs. It would also prevent the potential migration of COCs from soil to groundwater.

5. Short-Term Effectiveness
Short-term Effectiveness considers the length of time needed to implement an alternative and the
risks the alternative poses to workers, residents and the environment during implementation.

Alternative 1 poses no short-term adverse impacts to the community.

Alternative 2 would be effective in the short term since contaminated soil would not be
significantly disturbed during construction activities. Under this alternative, any potential
environmental impacts associated with the excavation of soil would be minimized with the
proper installation and implementation of dust and erosion control measures, by performing
excavation with appropriate health and safety measures, and by using a lined temporary staging
area. Appropriate transportation safety measures would be required during the shipping of the
contaminated soil to approved off-site disposal facilities. Construction of the required
containment system and establishment of the deed notices could be accomplished in
approximately 15 months.

Alternative 3 involves excavation of contaminated soil and would present a potential for short-
term exposure. As with Alternative 2, under this alternative any potential environmental impacts
associated with the excavation of soil would be minimized with the proper installation and
implementation of dust and erosion control measures, by performing excavation with appropriate
health and safety measures, and by using a lined temporary staging area. Appropriate
transportation safety measures would be required during the shipping of the contaminated soil to
approved off-site disposal facilities. Completion of the required construction for most properties
can be accomplished in approximately 35 months.

Alternative 4 involves excavation of contaminated soil and would present a potential for short-
term exposure. As with Alternatives 2 and 3, under this alternative any potential environmental

                                                22

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

impacts associated with the excavation of soil would be minimized with the proper installation
and implementation of dust and erosion control measures, by performing excavation with
appropriate health and safety measures, and by using a lined temporary staging area. Appropriate
transportation safety measures would be required during the shipping of the contaminated soil to
approved off-site disposal facilities. Completion of the required construction for most properties
can be accomplished in approximately 50 months.

Alternatives 2, 3 and 4 would all result in some short-term impacts to the community, in the form
of vehicular (truck) traffic and noise and dust from construction/excavation activities, although
Alternative 2 (limited removal of soil and bringing soil in to construct a soil cover) would
generate less truck traffic than Alternatives 3 and 4 (removing contaminated soil from properties
and bringing soil in to fill excavated areas). Traffic, noise, and dust impacts could be mitigated to
some extent by limiting the construction schedule to daytime hours on weekdays or other timing
as specified by local ordinance. Perimeter air monitoring and dust control measures would be
required to address concerns over exposure to dust during activities.

6. Implementability
Implementability addresses the technical and administrative feasibility of a remedy from design
through construction and operation. Factors such as availability of services and materials,
administrative feasibility, and coordination with other governmental entities are also considered.

Alternative 1 requires no implementation.

Alternative 2 can be implemented; however, the development of protective institutional controls
that would be both enforceable and acceptable to the property owners is highly uncertain.
Administrative implementation of Alternative 2 may be significantly impacted by the need to
impose deed notices on properties to prevent human exposure by restricting future use of
contaminated areas within the properties. Consent to place a deed notice on properties may be
difficult to obtain because these notices would restrict the owners’ use of their property and
would not likely be viewed favorably by the owners. Implementation of Alternative 2 is also
complicated to some extent by the need to perform soil cover construction on properties.

Alternative 3 is implementable, although it will require performing excavation and backfilling on
individual properties, the majority of which are developed with primary structures (stores or
buildings) and secondary structures (garages and sheds). It is less administratively complex than
Alternative 2 as it relies less heavily on the need to place deed notices on properties.

Alternative 4 is implementable, although it will require performing excavation and backfilling on
individual properties, the majority of which are developed with primary structures (stores or
buildings) and secondary structures (garages and sheds). It is less administratively complex than
Alternative 2 as fewer deed notices would need to be recorded on properties. Alternative 4 would
be significantly more complex than Alternative 3, as it is more difficult to implement on
properties where contamination extends below the water table. In some cases, the depth of
contamination extends greater than 12 feet below ground surface, which would require either
braced or sloped excavation and would likely require dewatering.



                                                 23

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

All alternatives would result in some short-term impacts to the community, in the form of truck
traffic and noise and dust from construction/excavation activities, although Alternative 2
(bringing soil in to construct a soil cover) would generate less truck traffic than Alternatives 3
and Alternative 4 (both would involve removing contaminated soil from properties and bringing
soil in to fill excavated areas). Traffic, noise, and dust impacts would be mitigated by limiting
the construction schedule to daytime hours on weekdays or other timing as specified by local
ordinance. Perimeter air monitoring and dust control measures would be required to address
concerns over potential exposure to dust during activities. Administrative implementation of
Alternative 2 may be significantly impacted by the need to impose deed notices on properties not
cleaned up to meet residential standards to limit human exposure by restricting the future use of
contaminated areas within the properties. These notices would restrict the owners’ use of the
properties and may not be acceptable to some of the property owners. Since Alternatives 3 and 4
result in the removal of contaminated soil but may not address all contamination above
residential standards, which is necessary to achieve unlimited use conditions, institutional
controls on a limited number of properties would be required.

7. Cost
Cost includes estimated capital and annual operation and maintenance costs, as well as present
worth cost. Present worth cost is the total cost of an alternative over time in terms of today's
dollar value. Cost estimates are expected to be accurate within a range of +50 to -30 percent
(This is a standard assumption in accordance with EPA guidance).
The estimated capital cost, O&M, and present worth costs are discussed in detail in EPA’s FFS.
The cost estimates are based on the best available information. The estimated capital, O&M
present-worth cost over a thirty-year period, and total present-worth costs for each of the
alternatives are as follows:


     Alternative            Capital Cost                 O&M               Present Worth Cost
          1                      $0                        $0                       $0
          2                  $7,961,000                 $10,000                 $8,091,000
          3                 $35,941,000                  $7,500                $36,039,000
          4                 $58,311,000                  $7,500                $58,409,000



Modifying Criteria – The final two evaluation criteria, criteria 8 and 9, are called “modifying
criteria” because new information or comments from the state or the community on the
Proposed Plan may modify the preferred response measure or cause another response measure
to be considered.

8. State/Support Agency Acceptance
State Agency acceptance considers whether the state and/or support agency agrees with EPA’s
analyses and recommendations.




                                               24

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

NJDEP concurs with the selected remedy. A letter of concurrence is attached in Appendix
IV.

9. Community Acceptance
Community Acceptance considers whether the local community agrees with EPA's analyses and
preferred alternative. Comments received on the Proposed Plan are an important indicator of
community acceptance.

On August 13th, 2019, EPA held a formal public meeting on the proposed plan for this OU.
All written and oral comments are addressed in detail in Appendix V, which is the
Responsiveness Summary for this ROD. Due to an unforeseen error at the newspaper, the
advertisement for the meeting was not published, so a second public meeting was held on
September 4th, and the public comment period was extended to September 26th. No comments
received during the comment period for the proposed plan expressed disagreement with EPA’s
preferred alternative for this OU at the Site.

PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE

The NCP establishes an expectation that EPA will use treatment to address the principal threats
posed by a site wherever practicable (40 C.F.R. §300.430(a)(1)(iii)(A)). Identifying principal
threat wastes combines concepts of both hazard and risk. In general, principal threat wastes are
those source materials considered to be highly toxic or highly mobile which generally cannot be
contained in a reliable manner or would present a significant risk to human health or the
environment should exposure occur. Non-principal threat wastes are those source materials that
generally can be reliably contained and that would present only a low risk in the event of
exposure.

The Property itself has acted as a source of lead and arsenic contamination to other properties
and to groundwater and surface water. The cancer risks associated with contamination at this
Property exceed 10-3. Therefore, the soil contamination at the Property is considered Principal
Threat Waste (PTW). Although PTW cannot be treated in place, some of the contaminated soil
may require treatment prior to land disposal at an off-site facility.

SELECTED REMEDY

Based upon the requirements of CERCLA, the results of the Site investigations, the detailed
analysis of the alternatives, and public comments, EPA’s selected remedy to address
contaminated soil at the OU2 properties is Alternative 3. This alternative includes the following
components:

   •   Excavation of an estimated 57,800 cubic yards of soil contaminated primarily with
       arsenic and lead from the Property and approximately 40 non-residential properties in the
       vicinity of the Property, not to exceed depth of groundwater table;
   •   Off-site disposal of contaminated soil, and backfilling of excavated areas with clean fill;
   •   Restoration of the affected properties;
   •   Institutional controls;

                                                25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   •   Engineering controls, if necessary; and
   •   Long-term monitoring.

Excavation activities associated with remediation may require the demolition and replacement of
structures such as sheds and garages and the removal and replacement of asphalt and driveways.

Additional properties nearby or adjacent to the OU2 properties already known to require
remediation may be identified during the design and/or implementation of the selected remedy
that require remediation; these will be incorporated into the selected remedy.

The total estimated present-worth cost for the selected remedy is $36,039,000. A more detailed,
itemized list of costs for the selected remedy may be found in Table 3b of the FFS. The cost
estimates, which are based on available information, are order-of magnitude engineering cost
estimates that are expected to be within +50 to -30 percent of the actual cost of the project.

It is estimated that the active component of the remedial action would take about 35 months to
implement. This would be inclusive of mobilization/demobilization, sheeting/building,
excavation and backfill/restoration. Institutional controls would be required on properties not
addressed to residential standards and long-term monitoring in the form of visual inspection of
these properties would be needed. In addition, inspection and maintenance of any necessary
engineering controls may be needed.

Expected Outcomes of the Selected Remedy

Implementation of Alternative 3 will eliminate potential pathways of human exposure to
contaminated soil present at the non-residential properties and will prevent migration of Site
contaminants from the OU2 properties to other areas.

Summary of the Rationale for the Selected Remedy

The selection of Alternative 3 provides the best balance of trade-offs among the alternatives with
respect to the evaluation criteria. The selected alternative will be protective of human health and
the environment, complies with federal and state requirements that are legally applicable or
relevant and appropriate to the remedial action, is cost-effective, and will utilize permanent
solutions and treatment technologies to the maximum extent practicable. NJDEP concurs with
the selected remedy.

Alternative 2 relies heavily on the ability to ensure that the institutional controls, in the form of
deed notices and restrictions, remain in place and are complied with. Alternative 3 relies less
heavily on institutional controls and Alternative 4 may not require the use of institutional
controls at all, and as such both are more effective in the long-term than Alternative 2.
Alternative 3 would achieve the RAOs, is more easily implementable, has greater effectiveness
in the short term and is less costly than Alternative 4. While Alternative 2 is approximately $28
million less costly than Alternative 3, there would be significant resource requirements over time
associated with long-term inspection and maintenance of the caps. For these reasons, EPA
prefers Alternative 3 over Alternatives 2 and 4.

                                                 26

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

EPA anticipates that a more complete understanding of groundwater contamination, obtained
during the OU3 RI, will be valuable in determining the best remedy for soil below the water
table. Existing data indicate soil contamination beneath the water table is present at 3 of 40 OU2
properties. For this reason, EPA will address contamination in below-water-table soil after the
OU3 RI/FS is further along, at least until it is determined whether any active remediation is
needed for OU3. Remedial activities on the properties with impacts below the water table could
then be conducted concurrently with, or in accordance with, the OU3 remedy, to avoid the
potential need to return to a property post-action.

The implementation of Alternative 3 may require excavation work adjacent to and/or underneath
structures. In general, reasonable efforts will be made to remove all soil contamination above
residential standards so that deed restrictions are not necessary. All impacted properties will be
restored.

Based on the information available at this time, EPA has concluded and NJDEP concurs that
Alternative 3 meets the threshold criteria and provides the best balance of tradeoffs among the
alternatives with respect to the balancing criteria. The Alternative satisfies the threshold criteria
and achieves the best combination of the five balancing criteria of the comparative analysis. This
alternative is preferred because it will achieve the RAOs and remediation goals in the shortest
amount of time and is a permanent remedy. EPA expects the selected remedy to satisfy the
following statutory requirements of CERCLA Section 121: 1) be protective of human health and
the environment; 2) comply with ARARs; 3) be cost effective; 4) utilize permanent solutions and
alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery technologies to the maximum extent
practicable; and 5) satisfy the preference for treatment as a principal element or explain why the
preference for treatment will not be met.

Although treatment is not a principal element of the remedy, based on sampling performed to
date, some of the contaminated soil may require treatment prior to land disposal at an off-site
facility.

The environmental benefits of the selected remedy may be enhanced by consideration, during the
design, of technologies and practices that are sustainable in accordance with EPA Region 2’s
Clean and Green Energy Policy. This will include consideration of green remediation
technologies and practices.

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

EPA has determined that the selected remedy complies with the CERCLA and NCP provisions
for remedy selection, meets the threshold criteria, and provides the best balance of tradeoffs
among the alternatives with respect to the balancing and modifying criteria. These provisions
require the selection of remedies that are protective of human health and the environment,
comply with ARARs (or justify a waiver from such requirements), are cost-effective, and utilize
permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery technologies to
the maximum extent practicable. In addition, CERCLA includes a preference for remedies that
employ treatment that permanently and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity, or mobility of
hazardous substances as a principal element (or justify not satisfying the preference). For the

                                                 27

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Former Kil-Tone Company Site, EPA does not believe that on-site treatment of the soils at the
non-residential properties is practicable or cost-effective. The selected remedy will be more
protective and cost-effective in the long-term than capping since soil excavation is a permanent
solution which will allow the non-residential properties to be returned to their beneficial re-use
and does not require periodic maintenance. The following sections discuss how the selected
remedy meets these statutory requirements.

Protection of Human Health and the Environment

The selected remedy, Alternative 3, will protect human health and the environment through
removal, off-site treatment, if necessary, and disposal. The selected remedy will eliminate all
significant direct-contact risks to human health and the environment associated with
contaminated soil on the OU2 properties. This action will result in the reduction of exposure
levels to acceptable risk levels within EPA’s generally acceptable risk range of 1 x 10-4 to
1 x 10-6 for carcinogens and below a HI of 1.0 for noncarcinogens. Implementation of the
selected remedy will not pose unacceptable short-term risks.

Compliance with ARARs

The selected remedy complies with chemical-specific, location-specific and action-specific
ARARs. A complete list of the ARARs and TBCs for the selected remedy is presented in
Appendix II, Table 8.

Cost-Effectiveness

EPA has determined that the selected remedy is cost-effective and represents reasonable value
for the money to be spent. A cost-effective remedy is one whose costs are proportional to its
overall effectiveness (NCP § 300.430(f)(1)(ii)(D)). EPA evaluated the “overall effectiveness” of
those alternatives that satisfied the threshold criteria (i.e. were both protective of human health
and ARAR-compliant). Overall effectiveness is based on the evaluations of long-term
effectiveness and permanence; reduction in toxicity, mobility, and volume through treatment;
and short-term effectiveness. Overall effectiveness was then compared to costs to determine
cost-effectiveness.

Each of the alternatives was subjected to a detailed cost analysis. In that analysis, capital and
annual O&M costs were estimated and used to develop present-worth costs. The estimated
present worth cost of the selected remedy for OU2 is $36,039,000. Although Alternative 2 is less
expensive than the selected remedy, EPA concluded that the long-term effectiveness of
excavation is superior to capping when considering permanent solutions that allow the OU2
properties to be available for future use. The selected remedy’s additional cost for excavation is
protective of human health, and its overall effectiveness is proportional to its present-worth cost.




                                                28

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment Technologies (or Resource
Recovery) Technologies to Maximum Extent Practicable

EPA has determined that the selected remedy represents the maximum extent to which
permanent solutions and treatment technologies can be utilized in a practicable manner for this
OU. Of those alternatives that are protective of human health and the environment and comply
with ARARs (or provide a basis for invoking an ARAR waiver), EPA has determined that the
selected remedy provides the best balance of trade-offs in terms of the five balancing criteria,
while also considering the statutory preference for treatment as a principal element, the bias
against off-site disposal without treatment, and state/support agency and community acceptance.
Implementation of the selected remedy will eliminate current exposures to contaminants at the
non-residential properties and will remove contaminated soil from the non-residential properties
thereby eliminating the risk to human and ecological receptors in the future.

Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element

The selected soil remedy results in the removal of approximately 57,800 cubic yards of
contaminated soil from the Property and the non-residential properties in the vicinity of the
Property. The soil excavation will provide for an immediate reduction in the mobility of
contaminated soil from the OU2 properties. Although Treatment is not a principal element of the
remedy selected herein, as no effective means of treating arsenic and lead contamination in soil
in place were identified. However, some of the contaminated soil may require treatment prior to
land disposal at an off-site facility. Off-site treatment, if required, would reduce the toxicity of
the contaminated soil prior to land disposal. This remedy only addresses a portion of the Site,
and subsequent actions to address the remaining threats posed by the Site may include treatment.

Five-Year Review Requirements

Because this remedy may result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants remaining
at the Site above levels that allow for unrestricted use and unlimited exposure, the statutory
requirement for five-year reviews is triggered by the implementation of this action to ensure that
the remedy is, or will remain, protective of human health and the environment.

DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES

The Proposed Plan for OU2 of the Former Kil-Tone Company Site was released for a public
comment period on July 30, 2019. The public comment period was intended to run until August
28, 2019. However, an unforeseen error with the advertisement for the public meeting led to an
extended public comment period, running until September 26, 2019. The Proposed Plan
identified Alternative 3 (Excavation and Off-site Disposal) as the preferred alternative for OU2
of the Site. EPA reviewed all written (including electronic formats such as e-mail) and verbal
comments submitted during the public comment period and has determined that no significant
changes to the remedy, as it was originally identified in the Proposed Plan, are necessary or
appropriate.




                                                 29

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX I

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Figures

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Former Kil-Tone Company
     Vineland, NJ
         o               o
39.478410 N, 75.025509
          W




             Former Kil-Tone Company
                  Superfund Site



                Figure 1: Site Location

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Former Kil-Tone Company
     Superfund Site




 Figure 2: Site Overview

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               Former Kil-Tone Company
                                                                    Superfund Site




                                                               Figure 3: Operable Unit 2
*The extent of the General Study Area may expand or contract
based on results of sampling during design and/or
implementation of the remedy, and remediation goals applied
may change based on intended property use

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX II

  Tables

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          TABLE 1
                                            Summary of Chemicals of Concern and
                                         Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
Scenario Timeframe: Current/Future
Medium:             Soil
Exposure Medium:    Surface Soil (0-2 feet)
                                                   Concentration
                                                                                                      Exposure Point
                                                     Detected          Concentration    Frequency                      EPC
   Exposure Point       Chemical of Concern                                                           Concentration            Statistical Measure
                                                                          Units        of Detection                    Units
                                                                                                         (EPC)
                                                   Min        Max

                        Arsenic                     1.2       32,500      mg/kg           87/87           2,360        mg/kg      95% H-UCL
Former Kil-tone
Property                                                                  mg/kg
                        Lead                       3.8 J      91,700                      87/87           2,373        mg/kg     Arithmetic mean



                        Arsenic                                           mg/kg                                                  95% Chebyshev
                                                    1.1        479                        40/40            126         mg/kg
                                                                                                                                 (Mean, Sd) UCL
Lerco
                        Lead                        6.9        948        mg/kg           40/40            119         mg/kg     Arithmetic mean



                        Arsenic                                           mg/kg                                                95% Adjusted Gamma
511 Paul St                                         2.6        343                        44/44            65.8        mg/kg
                                                                                                                                      UCL

                        Lead                        2.5        593        mg/kg           44/44            107         mg/kg     Arithmetic mean
Scenario Timeframe: Current/Future
Medium:             Soil
Exposure Medium:    Surface and Subsurface Soil (0-10 feet)
                                                   Concentration                                      Exposure Point
                                                     Detected          Concentration    Frequency                      EPC
Exposure Point          Chemical of Concern                                                           Concentration            Statistical Measure
                                                                          Units        of Detection                    Units
                                                   Min        Max                                         (EPC)

                        Arsenic                                                                                                    97.5% KM
                                                  0.66 J      45,900      mg/kg          131/132          2,390        mg/kg
Former Kil-tone                                                                                                                 (Chebyshev) UCL
Property
                        Lead                        2.1       91,700      mg/kg          132/132          2,184        mg/kg     Arithmetic mean



                        Arsenic                                           mg/kg                                                  95% Chebyshev
                                                   0.21       15,900                      72/72           1,880        mg/kg
                                                                                                                                 (Mean, Sd) UCL
Lerco
                        Lead                        2.8       16,100      mg/kg           72/72            592         mg/kg     Arithmetic mean



                        Arsenic                                           mg/kg                                                 95% Approximate
                                                    1.6        343                        79/79            45.1        mg/kg
                                                                                                                                  Gamma UCL
511 Paul St
                        Lead                        2.4        593        mg/kg           79/79            64.4        mg/kg     Arithmetic mean

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

UCL –upper confidence limit
J – estimated value
                                    Summary of Chemicals of Concern and Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
  This table presents the chemicals of concern (COCs) and exposure point concentrations (EPCs) for the COCs in soil. The table includes the range of concentrations
detected for each COC, as well as the frequency of detection (i.e., the number of times the chemical was detected in the samples collected at the Site), the EPC and how
                                                                             it was derived.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    TABLE 2. Selection of Exposure Scenarios
    Scenario                                                                         Receptor
                        Medium         Exposure Medium        Exposure Point                           Receptor Age      Exposure Route     Type of Analysis
   Timeframe                                                                        Population
                                                              FKTC Property
                                                                                                      Adult and Child
      Future              Soil             Surface soil       Lerco Property          Resident         (birth to <6          Ing/Der           Quantitative
                                                                                                          years)
                                                                511 Paul St
                                                              FKTC Property
 Current/Future           Soil             Surface soil       Lerco Property     Industrial worker         Adult             Ing/Der           Quantitative
                                                                511 Paul St
                                                              FKTC Property
                                        Surface/subsurface
      Future              Soil                                Lerco Property       Utility worker          Adult             Ing/Der           Quantitative
                                               soil
                                                                511 Paul St
                                                              FKTC Property
                                        Surface/subsurface                          Construction
      Future              Soil                                Lerco Property                               Adult             Ing/Der           Quantitative
                                               soil                                   worker
                                                                511 Paul St

Ing – Ingestion
Der – Dermal


Summary of Selection of Exposure Pathways
This table describes the exposure pathways that were evaluated for the risk assessment. Exposure media, exposure points, and characteristics of receptor
populations are included.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                          TABLE 3

                                                   Noncancer Toxicity Data Summary
Pathway: Oral/Dermal
                                                                                                                  Combined                           Dates of
                                     Oral                     Absorp.      Adjusted       Adj.        Primary
    Chemical of        Chronic/                 Oral RfD                                                          Uncertainty     Sources of RfD:     RfD:
                                      RfD                    Efficiency       RfD        Dermal        Target
     Concern          Subchronic                 Units                                                            /Modifying       Target Organ
                                     Value                   (Dermal)      ( Dermal)    RfD Units      Organ
                                                                                                                   Factors

Arsenic                 Chronic     3.0E-04    mg/kg-day        95%         3.0E-04     mg/kg-day       Skin           3               IRIS          9/1/1991

Lead                      NA          NA          NA            NA            NA           NA           NA            NA                NA              NA

Key

IRIS: Integrated Risk Information System

                                                           Summary of Toxicity Assessment
This table provides noncarcinogenic risk information which is relevant to the chemicals of concern. When available, the chronic toxicity data have been used to
develop oral reference doses (RfDs).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                TABLE 4

                                              Cancer Toxicity Data Summary
Pathway: Oral/Dermal

  Chemical of Concern             Oral            Units           Adjusted         Slope Factor         Weight of        Source         Date
                                 Cancer                         Cancer Slope          Units             Evidence/
                                  Slope                            Factor                                Cancer
                                 Factor                         (for Dermal)                            Guideline
                                                                                                       Description

Arsenic                          1.5E+00       mg/kg-day           1.5E+00           mg/kg-day              A              IRIS       06/01/95

Lead                               NA              NA                NA                 NA                  NA             NA            NA

Key:
A: Known Human Carcinogen
IRIS: Integrated Risk Information System

                                                    Summary of Toxicity Assessment

This table provides carcinogenic risk information which is relevant to the chemicals of concern. Toxicity data are provided for both the oral
and dermal routes of exposure.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               TABLE 5
                                    Risk Characterization Summary – Noncarcinogens
Scenario Timeframe:            Future
Receptor Population:           Site Resident
Receptor Age:                  Adult
                                                                                                      Noncarcinogenic Risk
                 Exposure                                                    Primary
  Medium                          Exposure Point     Chemical of Concern
                 Medium                                                    Target Organ                                       Exposure
                                                                                          Ingestion           Dermal
                                                                                                                             Routes Total

                                  FKTC Property                                              6                   1                7

Soil            Surface Soil       Lerco Property          Arsenic             Skin          0.3                 0.1             0.4

                                    511 Paul St                                              0.2                0.03             0.2


Scenario Timeframe:            Future
Receptor Population:           Site Resident
Receptor Age:                   Child
                                                                                                      Noncarcinogenic Risk
                 Exposure                                                    Primary
Medium                            Exposure Point     Chemical of Concern
                 Medium                                                    Target Organ                                       Exposure
                                                                                          Ingestion           Dermal
                                                                                                                             Routes Total

                                  FKTC Property                                              60                  7               67

Soil            Surface soil       Lerco Property          Arsenic             Skin          3                   0.4             3.4

                                    511 Paul St                                              2                   0.2             2.2


Scenario Timeframe:            Current/Future
Receptor Population:           Industrial Worker
Receptor Age:                  Adult
                                                                                                      Noncarcinogenic Risk
                 Exposure                                                    Primary
Medium                            Exposure Point     Chemical of Concern
                 Medium                                                    Target Organ                                       Exposure
                                                                                          Ingestion           Dermal
                                                                                                                             Routes Total

                                  FKTC Property                                              4                   0.9              5

Soil              Surface          Lerco Property          Arsenic             Skin          0.2                0.05             0.3

                                    511 Paul St                                              0.1                0.001            0.1


Scenario Timeframe:            Future
Receptor Population:           Utility Worker
Receptor Age:                  Adult
                                                                                                      Noncarcinogenic Risk
                 Exposure                                                    Primary
Medium                            Exposure Point     Chemical of Concern
                 Medium                                                    Target Organ                                       Exposure
                                                                                          Ingestion           Dermal
                                                                                                                             Routes Total

                                  FKTC Property                                              1                   0.5              2
                 Surface/
Soil            Subsurface         Lerco Property          Arsenic             Skin          0.5                 0.2             0.7
                   Soil
                                    511 Paul St                                             0.01                0.006            0.02


Scenario Timeframe:            Future
Receptor Population:           Construction Worker
Receptor Age:                  Adult
                                                                                                      Noncarcinogenic Risk
                 Exposure                                                    Primary
   Medium                         Exposure Point     Chemical of Concern
                 Medium                                                    Target Organ
                                                                                          Ingestion           Dermal          Exposure

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                  Routes Total

                                     FKTC Property                                                              10                    2                 12
                    Surface/
Soil               Subsurface        Lerco Property               Arsenic                  Skin                  5                   0.8                6
                      Soil
                                       511 Paul St                                                              0.1                 0.02               0.1

                                               Summary of Risk Characterization - Noncarcinogens

   The table presents hazard quotients (HQs) for each route of exposure and the hazard index (sum of hazard quotients) for exposure to soils containing site-
  related chemicals. The Risk Assessment Guidance for Superfund states that, generally, a hazard index (HI) greater than 1 indicates the potential for adverse
                                                                      noncancer effects.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                           TABLE 6
                                             Risk Characterization Summary - Carcinogens
Scenario Timeframe:                 Future
Receptor Population:                Site Resident
Receptor Age:                       Adult/Child
                                                                                                                              Carcinogenic Risk
                      Exposure                                                             Primary
Medium                                  Exposure Point        Chemical of Concern
                      Medium                                                             Target Organ                                                  Exposure
                                                                                                                Ingestion              Dermal
                                                                                                                                                      Routes Total

                                        FKTC Property                                                             2E-03                3E-04              3E-03

Soil                 Surface soil       Lerco Property                Arsenic                 Skin                1E-04                 1E-05             1E-04

                                          511 Paul St                                                             6E-05                 8E-06             7E-05


Scenario Timeframe:                 Current/Future
Receptor Population:                Industrial Worker
Receptor Age:                       Adult
                                                                                                                              Carcinogenic Risk
                      Exposure                                                             Primary
Medium                                  Exposure Point        Chemical of Concern
                      Medium                                                             Target Organ                                                  Exposure
                                                                                                                Ingestion              Dermal
                                                                                                                                                      Routes Total

                                        FKTC Property                                                             6E-04                1E-04              8E-04

Soil                   Surface          Lerco Property                Arsenic                 Skin                3E-05                 7E-06             4E-05

                                          511 Paul St                                                             2E-05                 9E-07             2E-05


Scenario Timeframe:                 Future
Receptor Population:                Utility Worker
Receptor Age:                       Adult
                                                                                                                              Carcinogenic Risk
                      Exposure                                                             Primary
Medium                                  Exposure Point        Chemical of Concern
                      Medium                                                             Target Organ                                                  Exposure
                                                                                                                Ingestion              Dermal
                                                                                                                                                      Routes Total

                                        FKTC Property                                                             2E-04                 8E-05             3E-04
                      Surface/
Soil                 Subsurface         Lerco Property                Arsenic                 Skin                8E-05                 4E-05             1E-04
                        Soil
                                          511 Paul St                                                             2E-06                 9E-07             3E-06


Scenario Timeframe:                 Future
Receptor Population:                Construction Worker
Receptor Age:                       Adult
                                                                                                                              Carcinogenic Risk
                       Exposure                                                            Primary
   Medium                               Exposure Point        Chemical of Concern
                       Medium                                                            Target Organ                                                  Exposure
                                                                                                                Ingestion              Dermal
                                                                                                                                                      Routes Total

                                        FKTC Property                                                             7E-05                 1E-05             8E-05
                       Surface/
Soil                  Subsurface        Lerco Property                Arsenic                 Skin                3E-05                 5E-06             4E-05
                         Soil
                                          511 Paul St                                                             8E-07                 1E-07             9E-07

                                                     Summary of Risk Characterization – Carcinogens

       The table presents site-related cancer risks for groundwater exposure. As stated in the National Contingency Plan, the point of departure is 10-6 and the
                                                      acceptable risk range for site-related exposure is 10-6 to 10-4.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                      TABLE 7
                                    Risk Characterization Summary – Lead
                                 Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentration
Scenario Timeframe:           Future
Receptor Population:          Site Resident
Receptor Age:                 Child

                                                                                           Geometric
                                                                  Exposure Point
                Exposure                            Chemical of                            Mean Blood
  Medium                          Exposure Point                  Concentration    Units                Lead Risk3
                Medium                               Concern                               Lead Level
                                                                     (EPC)1
                                                                                            (µg/dL)2

                                   FKTC Property                      2,373                   16.7        99.5%

Soil           Surface Soil        Lerco Property      Lead            119         mg/kg      1.9         2.0%

                                     511 Paul St                       107                    1.8         1.4%


Scenario Timeframe:           Current/Future
Receptor Population:          Industrial Worker
Receptor Age:                 Adult
                                                                                           Geometric
                                                                  Exposure Point
                Exposure                            Chemical of                            Mean Blood
Medium                            Exposure Point                  Concentration    Units                Lead Risk3
                Medium                               Concern                               Lead Level
                                                                     (EPC)1
                                                                                            (µg/dL)2

                                   FKTC Property                      2,373                   8.4         75.9%

Soil           Surface Soil        Lerco Property      Lead            119         mg/kg      1.0         0.2%

                                     511 Paul St                       107                    1.0         0.1%


Scenario Timeframe:           Future
Receptor Population:          Utility Worker
Receptor Age:                 Adult
                                                                                           Geometric
                                                                  Exposure Point
                Exposure                            Chemical of                            Mean Blood
Medium                            Exposure Point                  Concentration    Units                Lead Risk3
                Medium                               Concern                               Lead Level
                                                                     (EPC)1
                                                                                            (µg/dL)2

                                   FKTC Property                      2,184                   1.7         2.4%
                Surface/
Soil           Subsurface          Lerco Property      Lead            592         mg/kg      0.9         0.1%
                  Soil
                                     511 Paul St                       64.4                   0.6         0.01%


Scenario Timeframe:           Future
Receptor Population:          Construction Worker
Receptor Age:                 Adult
                                                                                           Geometric
                                                                  Exposure Point
                Exposure                            Chemical of                            Mean Blood
Medium                            Exposure Point                  Concentration    Units                Lead Risk3
                Medium                               Concern                               Lead Level
                                                                     (EPC)1
                                                                                            (µg/dL)2

                                   FKTC Property                      2,184                   28.3        90.4%
                Surface/
Soil           Subsurface          Lerco Property      Lead            592         mg/kg      3.7         24.2%
                  Soil
                                     511 Paul St                       64.4                   0.9         0.1%

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

1
    – The lead EPC was the arithmetic mean of all samples collected from the target soil interval
2
 – Consistent with the EPA Superfund Lead-Contaminated Residential Site Handbook, lead risks were evaluated for the child using the Integrated
Exposure and Uptake Biokinetic Model. Adult receptor risks were evaluated using the Adult Lead Methodology.
3
  – Lead risks are expressed as the probability of having a blood lead level greater than 5 µg/dL; EPA’s risk reduction goal is to limit the probability of
a child’s blood lead concentration exceeding 5 µg/dL to 5% or less. For adult receptors, fetal blood lead levels are targeted for this risk reduction goal.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             TABLE 8
            Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements (ARARs) & Requirements To-Be-Considered (TBC)
                                                   Chemical-Specific ARARs & TBCs
    Action/Media                             Requirement                               ARAR or TBC                    Citation

                                                                                Arsenic standard is ARAR.
                                                                                Lead standard is not           N.J.A.C. 7:26D,
                      Residential Direct Contact Soil Remediation Standards.    ARAR, but the RGs              Appendix 1, Table 1A
Removal of            N.J.A.C. 7:26D Appendix 1 Table 1A lists the cleanup      developed for OU2 are
contaminated soil     levels.                                                   consistent with the
for residential use       • Arsenic – 19 mg/kg                                  standard                       Residential Direct
                                                                                Applicable to properties for   Contact Soil
                          • Lead – 400 mg/kg
                                                                                which residential use is       Remediation Standards
                                                                                reasonably anticipated
                                                                                Arsenic standard is ARAR.
                                                                                Lead standard is not           N.J.A.C. 7:26D,
                      Non-Residential Direct Contact Soil Remediation           ARAR, but the RGs
Removal of            Standards. N.J.A.C. 7:26D Appendix 1 Table 1B lists the                                  Appendix 1, Table 1B
                                                                                developed for OU2 are
contaminated soil     cleanup levels.                                           consistent with the
for non-residential                                                             standard                       Non-Residential Direct
                          • Arsenic – 19 mg.kg
use                                                                                                            Contact Soil
                          • Lead – 800 mg/kg                                    Applicable to properties
                                                                                anticipated to remain in       Remediation Standards
                                                                                non-residential use.
                      National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS).
Air quality standards National primary and secondary ambient are quality        ARAR
                                                                                                               40 C.F.R. § 50.16
for lead              standards for lead: 0.15 µg/m3, arithmetic mean           Applicable
                      concentration over a 3-month period

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       Action-Specific ARARs & TBCs
   Action/Media                                General Description                                 ARAR or TBC                Citation
Erosion control         Regulations incorporate New Jersey Department of Agriculture’s        ARAR                       N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.1 et
during soil             “The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New                                      seq.
disturbing activities   Jersey,” as revised on December 14, 2015.                                                        N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
                                                                                                                         seq.

                                                                                                                         Soil Erosion and
                                                                                                                         Sediment Control
                                                                                                                         Act Rules
Control of storm        Design and performance standards for stormwater management            ARAR                       N.J.A.C. 7:8
water runoff from       measures.
soil disturbing                                                                                                          Stormwater
activities                                                                                                               Management Rule


Site Remediation        NJ Technical Requirements for Site Remediation establishes the        ARAR                       N.J.A.C. 7:26E
                        minimum technical requirements for the remediation of                 Substantive technical
                        contaminated sites.                                                   requirements potentially
                                                                                              relevant and appropriate
Air Pollution           Remedy will comply with substantive requirements of NJ air            ARAR                       N.J.A.C. 7:27
Control                 pollution rules that apply to air emissions from excavation
                        activities
Noise Control           NJ Noise Control Rules prohibits the generation of certain types of   ARAR                       N.J.A.C. 7:29
                        noise at specific times and establishes methods to determine
                        compliance.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       Action-Specific ARARs & TBCs
   Action/Media                                General Description                                 ARAR or TBC         Citation
Characterization of    40 C.F.R. § 262.11 provides requirements for determining if a solid      ARAR             Resource
solid waste (all       waste is excluded from regulation under 40 C.F.R. § 261.4 and if                          Conservation and
primary and            not, whether waste is a listed as a hazardous waste, or characteristic                    Recovery Act, 42
secondary wastes)      under 40 C.F.R. Part 261, Subpart C. Refer to Parts 261, 262, 264,                        U.S.C. § 9621, et
                       265, 266, 268 and 273 of Chapter 40 for possible exclusions or                            seq.,
                       restrictions pertaining to management of the specific waste.                              40 C.F.R. Parts 261,
                                                                                                                 262, 264-266, 268,
                       Refer to Parts 261, 262, 264, 265, 266, 268, and 273 of Chapter 40
                                                                                                                 273
                       for possible exclusions or restrictions pertaining to management of
                       the specific waste.

Characterization of    Requires a detailed chemical and physical analysis on a               ARAR                40 C.F.R. §
hazardous waste (all   representative sample of the waste(s), which at a minimum contains                        264.13(a)(1)
primary and            all the information that must be known to treat, store, or dispose of
secondary wastes)      the waste in accordance with pertinent sections of 40 CFR 264 and
                       268.
Hazardous waste        Requirements for generators of hazardous waste including                 ARAR             40 C.F.R. Part 262
generators             registration, manifesting, packaging, recordkeeping and
                       accumulation time. Manifesting and pre-transportation
                       requirements for hazardous waste generators are respectively at 40
                       C.F.R. Part 262, Subparts B and C.




Hazardous waste        Requirements for hazardous waste treatment, storage and disposal         ARAR             40 C.F.R. Parts 264
treatment, storage     facilities, including storage and management of hazardous waste in                        and 265
and disposal           containers (40 C.F.R. Part 264, Subpart I), closure performance
                       standards for hazardous waste management facilities (40 C.F.R. §
                       264.111), and staging piles (40 C.F.R. § 264.554).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       Action-Specific ARARs & TBCs
   Action/Media                                General Description                                   ARAR or TBC                Citation
Hazardous waste        NJ requirements for management and transportation of hazardous           ARAR for off-site          NJAC 7:26G
management and         wastes.                                                                  disposal
transportation                                                                                  of hazardous wastes; for
                       NJ hazardous waste management rules incorporate RCRA
                       regulations by reference, with few significant differences.              on-site treatment and
                                                                                                storage activities.
Disposal of RCRA       Land disposal restrictions. Land disposal treatment standards are at     ARAR                       40 CFR Part 268
hazardous waste in a   40 C.F.R. Part 268, Subpart D. Generators must determine the
land-based unit        applicable waste code for a waste in order to determine the
                       applicable treatment standards. (40 C.F.R. § 268.9). A “prohibited
                       waste” (including waste that exhibits or is expected to exhibit the
                       characteristic of toxicity for lead based on TCLP analysis) may
                       only be land disposed if it meets the requirements in the table
                       “Treatment Standards for Hazardous Waste” at 40 C.F.R. 268.40.
 Transportation of     Applicable to the transportation of material on-site and off-site that   ARAR                       Hazardous Material
 hazardous waste       is being managed as hazardous wastes, and include the procedures                                    Transportation Act,
                       for the packaging, labeling, manifesting and transporting of                                        49 U.S.C. §§ 1801-
                       hazardous materials to a licensed off- site disposal facility.                                      1819, 49 C.F.R. §
                                                                                                                           171 - 177

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                               Location-Specific ARARs
         Action/Media                                              Requirement                                                 ARAR or TBC           Citation
                                     The NHPA requires federal agencies to take into account
                                     the effects of any federally assisted undertaking on any
                                     district, site, building, structure or object included in, or                                            National Historic
      Historic landmarks,
                                     eligible for inclusion in, the National Register of Historic                    Potential ARAR for       Preservation Act, 16
      property, or projects
                                     Places. If the undertaking results in adverse effects, the                      historic resources, if   U.S.C. § 470, et seq.
      owned or controlled
                                     agency must consult with the New Jersey Historic                                present
      by federal agencies                                                                                                                     36 C.F.R. Part 800
                                     Preservation Office and other parties to develop ways to
                                     avoid, reduce, minimize, or mitigate any adverse impacts
                                     to those identified properties.
                                     Administrative Requirements for the Remediation of
      Institutional controls                                                                                         ARAR                     N.J.A.C. 7:26C
                                     Contaminated Sites
                                                                                                                                              NJDOT Standard
                                     NJ Department of Transportation (NJDOT) standards are
                                                                                                                                              Specifications – Soil
      Sediment and soil              typically used to develop the appropriate plans for
                                                                                                                     TBC                      Erosion and Sediment
      erosion control                sediment and soil erosion control required under the NJ
                                                                                                                                              Control Measures
                                     Soil Conservation Act
                                                                                                                                              (1996)

Notes:
ARAR Applicable or relevant and appropriate requirement
C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations
mg/kg Milligrams per kilogram
N.J.A.C. New Jersey Administrative Code, Chapters as specified
CMBST High temperature organic destruction technologies, such as combustion in incinerators, boilers, or industrial furnaces
CWA      Clean Water Act
EPA      U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
HMTA Hazardous Materials Transportation Act
HMR      Hazardous Materials Regulations
N.J.A.C. New Jersey Administrative Code, Chapters as specified
N.J.S.A. New Jersey Statutes
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
TCLP     Toxicity characteristic leaching procedure
UHCs     Underlying hazardous constituents
UTS      Universal Treatment Standards

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      APPENDIX III

Administrative Record Index

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                      ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                  FINAL
                                                                               07/29/2019                                              REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY
          CERCLIS ID: NJN000200874
               OUID: 02
                SSID: A24N
              Action:


                                                                  Image
DocID:    Doc Date: Title:                                        Count:        Doc Type:               Addressee Name/Organization:         Author Name/Organization:
568947   07/29/2019 ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX FOR OU2 FOR THE       2    Administrative Record                                       (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                    FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY SITE                                  Index                                                AGENCY)



472945   03/01/2017 UNIFORM FEDERAL POLICY FOR QUALITY             1103           Report           (US ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS)        (HDR / O'BRIEN & GERE JOINT VENTURE)
                    ASSURANCE PROJECT PLAN FOR REMEDIAL
                    INVESTIGATION FOR OU2 FOR THE FORMER KIL-
                    TONE COMPANY SITE

472946   03/01/2017 WORK PLAN FOR REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION FOR        130           Report           (U.S. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS)      (HDR / O'BRIEN & GERE JOINT VENTURE)
                    OU2 FOR THE FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY SITE



472947   04/01/2017 PATHWAY ANALYSIS REPORT FOR REMEDIAL             39           Report           (US ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS)        (HDR / O'BRIEN & GERE JOINT VENTURE)
                    INVESTIGATION FOR OU2 FOR THE FORMER KIL-
                    TONE COMPANY SITE

544786   07/01/2018 FINAL TRIP REPORT, TARKLIN BRANCH SURFACE       826           Report           (US ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS)|(US    (HDR / O'BRIEN & GERE JOINT VENTURE)
                    WATER AND SEDIMENT SAMPLING EVENT OU2 FOR                                      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)
                    THE FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY SITE


565462   07/26/2019 BASELINE HUMAN HEALTH RISK ASSESSMENT FOR       350           Report                                               (HDR / O'BRIEN & GERE JOINT VENTURE)
                    OU2 FOR THE FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY SITE




565463   07/26/2019 REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION HUMAN HEALTH RISK          2       Memorandum           (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION        (HDR / O'BRIEN & GERE JOINT VENTURE)
                    ASSESSMENT ADDENDUM FOR OU2 FOR THE                                            AGENCY)|VAUGHN,STEPHANIE (US
                    FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY SITE                                                   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)




                                                                                  Page 1 of 2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                      ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                               FINAL
                                                                            07/29/2019                                     REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY
          CERCLIS ID: NJN000200874
               OUID: 02
                SSID: A24N
              Action:


                                                                   Image
DocID:    Doc Date: Title:                                         Count:    Doc Type:      Addressee Name/Organization:          Author Name/Organization:
565464   07/26/2019 FINAL REVISED REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION REPORT      180      Report                                       (HDR / O'BRIEN & GERE JOINT VENTURE)
                    FOR OU2 FOR THE FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY SITE




568921   07/26/2019 FINAL REVISED REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION REPORT     2738      Report                                       (HDR / O'BRIEN & GERE JOINT VENTURE)
                    FOR OU2 - APPENDICES A THROUGH E FOR THE
                    FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY SITE


568902   07/26/2019 FINAL REVISED REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION REPORT      860      Report                                       (HDR / O'BRIEN & GERE JOINT VENTURE)
                    FOR OU2 - APPENDIX F FOR THE FORMER KIL-TONE
                    COMPANY SITE


565465   07/26/2019 FINAL REVISED REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION REPORT     5883      Report                                       (HDR / O'BRIEN & GERE JOINT VENTURE)
                    FOR OU2 - APPENDICES G THROUGH J FOR THE
                    FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY SITE


568910   07/29/2019 FOCUSED FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT FOR OU2 FOR     102      Report                                       (HDR / O'BRIEN & GERE JOINT VENTURE)
                    THE FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY SITE




568905   07/29/2019 PROPOSED PLAN FOR OU2 FOR THE FORMER KIL-         16    Publication                                    (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                    TONE COMPANY SITE (ENGLISH VERSION)                                                                    AGENCY)




568904   07/29/2019 PROPOSED PLAN FOR OU2 FOR THE FORMER KIL-         18    Publication                                    (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                    TONE COMPANY SITE (SPANISH VERSION)                                                                    AGENCY)




                                                                              Page 2 of 2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX IV

 State Letter

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    $,faft nf ~tfu 3Jrrsru
                                         DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
PHILIP D. MURPHY                            Site Remediation and Waste Management Program                                       CATHERINE R. McCABE
    Governor                                                                                                                        Commissioner
                                                            401 E. State Street
SHEILA Y. OLIVER                                    PO Box 420, Mail Code 401-06
  Lt. Governor                                        Trenton, New Jersey 08625
                                                           Tel: (609) 292-1250
                                                          Fax: (609) 777-1914

                                                                                                 September 27, 2019

         Mr. Pat Evangelista, Acting Director
         Emergency and Remedial Response Division
         U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
         Region II
         290 Broadway
         New York, NY 10007-1866

         Re:       Former Kil-Tone Company Superfund Site
                   Record of Decision Operable Unit 2
                   EPA ID# NJN000200874
                   DEP PI# 648249

         Dear Mr. Evangelista:

         The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) has completed its review of the
         "Record of Decision, Operable Unit Two, Former Kil-Tone Company Superfund Site, Cumberland
         County, New Jersey" prepared by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Region II in
         September 2019. The DEP concurs with the selected remedy to addresses arsenic and lead soil
         contamination at non-residential properties.

         The selected remedy addresses contaminated soil at commercial/industrial properties and public
         areas in the vicinity of the former Kil-Tone Company property on East Chestnut Avenue in the
         City of Vineland, as well as the former Kil-Tone property itself. This is the second of at least four
         planned remedial phases, designated as Operable Units (OUs), for the site. Residential soil removal
         work is underway at residential properties as part of OUl in the same vicinity of the former Kil-
         Tone property. A third operable unit includes contaminated groundwater associated with the site,
         and a fourth operable unit includes contaminated sediment and surface water as well as the
         associated floodplains. Soil and residential properties located in the impacted floodplain area may
         need to be addressed as a fifth operable unit.

         The major components of the OU2 selected remedy, which has a total cost of $36 million, include:

               •   Excavation of an estimated 57,800 cubic yards of soil contaminated with arsenic and lead
                   from the former Kil-tone Company property and approximately 40 non-residential
                   properties in the vicinity of the former Kil-Tone Company property;



                          The State of New Jersey is an equal opportunity employer. Printed on recycled and recyclable paper.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     •   Off-site disposal of excavated contaminated soil, and backfilling of excavated areas with
         cl~an fill;
     •   Restoration of the affected properties;
     •   Institutional controls;
     •   Engineering controls, if necessary; and,
     •   Long-term monitoring.

Except for a few properties that are anticipated to remain industrial/commercial, most will be
approached as having a potential future residential use. It is important to note that the overall
remediation goal for lead on properties with a reasonably anticipated future use as residential will
be a property-wide average surficial lead concentration of less than 200 mg/kg.

Excavation activities associated with remediation may require the demolition and replacement of
secondary structures, such as garages and sheds, as well as surfaces including asphalt and
driveways. In cases where contamination extends below more permanent structures (buildings,
offices, etc.), efforts will be made to avoid demolition. When this is infeasible, other options will
be considered, including engineering and institutional controls. Please note, institutional controls
(e.g. Deed Notices) require property owner consent. In addition, while the goal is full excavation
of all impacted soil above the water table, due to engineering and/or access considerations, it may
be necessary in some instances to use engineering controls to fully achieve Remedial Action
Objectives.

DEP appreciates the opportunity to participate in the decision-making process to select an
appropriate remedy for this site. Further, DEP looks forward to future cooperation with EPA
during remedial actions for OU2 to ensure protection of residents and business owners from
contaminated soil found stemming from the former pesticide plant's operations and completion of
OUI activities.

If you have any questions, please call me at (609) 292-1250.




                                                    J. Pedersen, ssistant Commissioner
                                                    emediation ~ Waste Management Program

C:       Kenneth J. Kloo, Director, Division ofR mediation; anagement, DEP
         Edward Putnam, Assistant Director, Publicly Funded Response Element, DEP
         Frederick A. Mumford, Section Chief, Publicly Funded Response Element, DEP
         Angela Carpenter, Chief, Special Projects Branch, EPA Region II
         Stephanie Vaughn, Section Chief, Special Projects Branch, EPA Region II
         Sharon Hartzell, Remedial Project Manager, Special Projects Branch, EPA Region II

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    APPENDIX V

Responsiveness Summary

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

                                            FOR THE

                                   RECORD OF DECISION

               FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY SITE, OPERABLE UNIT 2

            CITY OF VINELAND, CUMBERLAND COUNTY, NEW JERSEY



INTRODUCTION

This Responsiveness Summary provides a summary of significant comments and concerns
provided during the public comment period related to the Proposed Plan for Operable Unit 2
(OU2) of the Former Kil-Tone Company Superfund Site (Attachment A) and provides the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) responses to those comments. All comments
summarized in this document have been considered in EPA’s final decision in the selection of a
remedy for OU2.


SUMMARY OF COMMUNITY RELATIONS ACTIVITIES

All documentation which the EPA used to develop the Proposed Plan and select the remedy in
this Record of Decision (ROD), including EPA’s Focused Feasibility Study dated July 2019, are
in the administrative record for OU2 which was made available to the public beginning July 30,
2019 in the information repositories maintained in the EPA Docket Room at the EPA Region 2
offices at 290 Broadway, New York, New York, at the Vineland Public Library, 1058 East
Landis Avenue, Vineland, New Jersey and on EPA’s website for the Site,
www.epa.gov/superfund/former-kil-tone.

On July 30, 2019, EPA intended to publish notices in both English and Spanish in the local
Vineland newspaper, The Daily Journal, informing the public of the start of the public comment
period for the Proposed Plan, the upcoming public meeting on August 13, 2019, the preferred
remedy for OU2, contact information for EPA personnel, and the availability of Site-related
documents in the administrative record. However, due to a printing error, the notices were not
published on July 30, as planned. Instead, revised notices were published on August 28, 2019
and the comment period was extended by another 30 days to September 26th. In addition, the
extension notices stated that another public meeting would be held on September 4, 2019. Copies
of both the original notices that were to be published and the extension notices are found in
Attachment B.

In addition to the use of public notices, EPA uses a variety of means to let potentially interested
parties know about the details of a public comment period. For example, on July 30, the original
start of the public comment period, EPA issued a press release which was forwarded to more

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

than 250 parties, including congressional representatives and newspaper affiliates. In addition,
EPA notified the City of Vineland and the owners of the impacted OU2 properties. Also, both
The Daily Journal and the Press of Atlantic City published articles regarding the Site and the
public comment period. As such, the community was notified of the public comment period and
was made aware of the public meeting, even prior to the publication of the revised public notice.

The first public meeting was held on August 13th at 7:00 P.M. at the Gloria M Sabater
Elementary School at 301 Southeast Boulevard, Vineland, New Jersey, to present the findings of
the Proposed Plan, and to answer questions from the public about the Plan, the remedial
alternatives evaluated, and EPA’s preferred alternative. The second public meeting was held on
September 4 at 6:30 PM at the Vineland City Council Chambers, 640 East Wood Street,
Vineland, New Jersey.

SUMMARY OF COMMENTS AND RESPONSES

A summary of the comments provided at the public meeting and all written comments submitted
during the public comment period, as well as the EPA’s responses to them, is provided below.
The transcripts from the public meetings and the comments submitted during the public
comment period can be found in Attachments C and D, respectively, of this appendix.

Comment 1: An interested party asked which properties have soil contamination below the
groundwater table.

Response: EPA is still refining the list of properties at which soil contamination extends below
the water table. Existing data indicate contamination below the water table is present at 3 of the
estimated 40 OU2 properties, including the former Kil-Tone Property and the Lerco facility.
Additional investigations conducted during the design of the remedial action will determine if
additional properties have soil contamination below the depth of the water table. In addition, the
ongoing remedial investigation and feasibility study (RI/FS) for OU3 will determine the full
nature and extent of Site-related groundwater contamination. EPA intends to defer conducting
remedial activities on OU2 properties with contamination below the water table until such a time
as the OU3 RI/FS is further along and there is a better idea of what remedial activities, if any,
may be needed to address groundwater contamination. EPA is deferring this work so as to avoid
having to go back to a property more than once, if at all possible. That said, after issuance of the
OU2 ROD, it will take time to conduct the remedial design and start remedial activities, during
which time the OU3 RI/FS will continue. Therefore, EPA may have a better understanding of the
potential OU3 remedial activities needed by the time the OU2 remedial activities are starting,
and no deferral of activity may be needed.

Comment 2: An interested party inquired about the three non-residential properties listed on the
figures (the properties which were used to conduct the risk assessment). The party was interested
in the third property, aside from the former Kil-Tone Property itself and the Lerco property, and
what the extent of the remediation would be.

Response: The property in question has been tested under the OU2 Remedial Investigation.
Results indicate that the property will require clean-up; however, the extent of clean-up will be
determined in the design phase. Once the ROD is signed, EPA will start contacting the property

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

owners to obtain access to conduct additional sampling to refine the extent of contamination on
the property. These data will help EPA complete the design of the remedial action.

Comment 3: A property owner inquired as to the results of the investigation on his property,
which the property owner has not yet received.

Response: The property owner was informed that the results would be provided once final. The
property owner has since been provided with the results, which indicate that the property does
not require remediation.

Comment 4: An interested party inquired as to whether post-remediation notifications would be
given to residents to document the results of the cleanup, and whether the plan for remediation
on particular properties was available.

Response: For properties that have been cleaned up to an unrestricted use standard, property
owners are typically given a letter stating that there is no known contamination remaining related
to the property, and that there will be no need to restrict property use as a result of Site-related
contamination. EPA typically gives property owners a file with results that document, the work
done on the property and the outcome. If the property in question does require restrictions as a
result of Site-related contamination, EPA will contact the property owner in writing to explain
the restrictions required based on the post-cleanup conditions. EPA anticipates that very few of
the properties addressed as part of the OU2 cleanup will require restrictions.

In response to the second part of the question, EPA will define specifics of the remediation
during the design phase and will then contact the property owners will to review the details of
the work before it starts.

Comment 5: An interested party inquired as to the paving at 527 East Chestnut Avenue, where a
large section of the property was not paved.

Response: A portion of the property at 527 East Chestnut Avenue was paved to prevent
exposures; however, a portion was left unpaved as a staging area for work done as part of the
first operable unit of the Site, in which EPA is addressing contamination on residential
properties. When the first stage (OU1) of the work has been completed, EPA may pave the
unpaved staging area in the interim until the OU2 remedial action activities are conducted at that
property.

Comment 6: An interested party inquired about the course of action when landlords refuse to
allow testing or remediation.

Response: EPA encourages property owners to provide access for testing and cleanup. It is
EPA’s practice to speak with property owners first to gain permission to access the properties,
and then with tenants. Under the Superfund Law, EPA is authorized to enter any property where
any hazardous substance, pollutant or contaminant may have been released to collect samples or
take a response action.

Comment 7: An interested party inquired about institutional controls and whether they will get
in the way of business operations.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Response: EPA will attempt to clean up the majority of properties to an unrestricted use
standard including residential use, which is a reasonably anticipated use at the majority of the
OU2 properties, so that no institutional controls are needed. However, institutional controls may
be needed for some properties to restrict future use if we are not able to address all of the Site-
related contamination. For example, there could be extensive utilities on a property that would
prevent the safe full excavation of all contaminated material. In this case, a deed notice on the
property may be necessary. These controls should not interfere with normal business operations.

Comment 8: An interested party inquired whether there are still residential properties that need
to be brought into the remediation program.

Response: Based on current information, EPA currently thinks that the extent of the
contamination on residential properties has been delineated. However, additional properties may
be identified that will need to be addressed.

Comment 9: An interested party inquired whether the highest contamination levels were found
at the Kil-Tone Property or at the Lerco property.

Response: The former Kil-Tone facility has the highest levels found of arsenic and lead. High
levels of arsenic and lead have also been identified at the Lerco property.

Comment 10: An interested party asked how the neighborhood encompassed by OU2 could be
described in terms of property use.

Response: The neighborhood is a mix of residential and non-residential properties. Work is
currently being done to address residential properties and OU2 will addresses non-residential
properties. Based on conversations with the City of Vineland, and consistent with the City’s
master plan, EPA understands that the majority of properties in the affected neighborhood have
the potential to be zoned as residential in the future and that it is reasonable to anticipate they
will be used for residential purposes.

Comment 11: An interested party inquired whether its property was safe for vegetable
gardening.

Response: The party’s property will not require remediation under the OU2 ROD. There are
several vegetable gardens at residential properties being addressed as part of the first operable
unit. In general, studies have found that risk from consuming vegetables grown in heavy-metal
contaminated soil is less than the risk from incidental ingestion of the soil itself. To minimize
incidental ingestion of soil residents should wash hands after outdoor activities to help reduce the
potential for exposure. If residents choose to garden, to minimize potential exposure, they should
consider growing crops in raised bed gardens and containers with clean soil imported from a
non-contaminated area or bagged soil bought commercially instead of the existing soil. Other
recommendations for home vegetable gardening include: discarding outer leaves of leafy
vegetables, washing produce to remove soil and peeling root crops.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Comment 12: An interested party inquired as to the duration of the remediation investigations
and activities at its property. The party also asked to be provided with analytical data for its
property.

Response: EPA anticipates that the OU2 remediation work will take about 35 months, however,
this does not specify duration for any specific properties. EPA will have a better estimate of the
time needed once the remedial design is completed. Some remedial investigation activities
related to the OU3 investigation may also be required. EPA will compile results for the property
and send them to the inquirer.

Comment 13: A property owner of one of the impacted properties asked that EPA not conduct
work on its property, and indicated that the owner would accept the presence of asphalt as an
engineering control/in-place cap.

Response: EPA has determined the property will need remediation due to elevated contaminant
levels and potential groundwater impacts. However, EPA will evaluate the potential use of
engineering and institutional controls during the remedial design process.

Comment 14: An interested party inquired about how close testing was conducted to his property,
which is to the north of the former facility, and how contamination may have spread to the north,
given groundwater flow is to the south.

Response: EPA conducted testing in the vicinity of the former Kil-Tone Property as far north as
the Gloria M. Sabater Elementary School. The closest properties sampled to 633 Almond Street
were Property IDs 223 and 233 and the Elementary School, and at each of which no remediation
was determined to be necessary. According to the conceptual site model for the Site, contamination
spread primarily through overland flow and air dispersion, which could result in contamination
north of the former facility.

Comment 15: An interested party inquired whether demolition of buildings would be required
during the non-residential remediation.

Response: EPA will attempt, whenever possible, to avoid the demolition of structures. Where
contamination is present under a structure and cannot be addressed through underpinning or
another method of gaining access to soil below the structure, demolition may be considered. This
will be further evaluated and addressed during the design process.

Comment 16: An interested party inquired whether any other areas of high contamination were
found beyond the former Kil-Tone and Lerco properties.

Response: EPA has identified the former Kil-Tone and Lerco properties as having particularly
high levels of arsenic and lead contamination in soil. However, the investigation is still ongoing
and further areas of high contamination cannot be ruled out.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Comment 17: An interested party inquired when the work might start, and how long it is expected
to last.

Response: The start date and length of work is dependent on a number of factors. Once the Record
of Decision is signed, the remedial design process may take in the range of two years, after which
remedial work will begin. Current estimates predict that the remediation process will take 35
months, but timelines are uncertain until we are further along in the design process.

Comment 18: An interested party inquired about the Tarkiln branch, and the potential impacts of
the Kil-Tone property on aquatic life.

Response: EPA will more thoroughly evaluate impacts to aquatic life in the Tarkiln during the
investigation process for Operable Unit 4. Based on investigations so far, ecological risks to
receptors in the vicinity of the former Kil-Tone Property may exist.

Comment 19: An interested party inquired about the existence of caps at certain properties in the
vicinity, and whether these would need to be removed during the remedial action.

Response: EPA, under the Removal Program, placed caps on several properties to prevent
exposure of receptors to contamination until a permanent remedy could be put in place. The
permanent remedy for the site may require the removal of some of these interim caps, but this will
be determined during the design process.



ATTACHED TO THIS RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY ARE THE FOLLOWING:

Attachment A - Proposed Plan (English and Spanish versions)
Attachment B - Public Notices (English and Spanish) – The Daily Journal
Attachment C - August 13, 2019 Public Meeting Transcript and September 4, 2019 Public Meeting
Transcript
Attachment D - Comments Submitted During Public Comment Period

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Attachment A

Proposed Plan

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   Former Kil-Tone Company Superfund Site
                                   Operable Unit Two, Non-Residential Soil
                                                    Vineland, New Jersey



Superfund Proposed Plan                                                                                     July 2019

EPA ANNOUNCES PROPOSED PLAN                                  EPA is issuing this Proposed Plan as part of its
                                                             community relations program under Section 117(a) of
This Proposed Plan identifies the Preferred Alternative      the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
to remediate non-residential properties with                 Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA) 42 U.S.C.
contaminated soil related to the former Kil-Tone             9617(a), and Section 300.435(c) (2) (ii) of the National
Company pesticide manufacturing plant located in             Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency
Vineland, New Jersey. The Preferred Alternative calls        Plan (NCP). This Proposed Plan summarizes
for the excavation and off-site disposal of contaminated     information that can be found in greater detail in the
soil on non-residential properties and would be the final    Remedial Investigation (RI) and Focused Feasibility
remedy for soil on non-residential properties.               Study (FFS) reports for non-residential soil, as well as
                                                             other related documents, which can be found in the
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has                Administrative Record file for this action. The location
performed soil sampling at approximately 50 non-             of the Administrative Record file is provided below.
residential properties located in the vicinity of the
former Kil-Tone Company pesticide manufacturing                 MARK YOUR CALENDARS
facility located at 527 East Chestnut Avenue, City of
Vineland, Cumberland County, New Jersey                         Public Comment Period:
                                                                July 30 – August 28, 2019
(“Property”), as well as at the Property itself. The            EPA will accept written comments on the Proposed
results of the soil sampling program identified                 Plan during the public comment period. Written
approximately 40 of the approximately 50 non-                   comments should be addressed to:
residential properties where a remedial action is
required. Additional sampling may be needed to further                    Sharon Hartzell, Project Manager
refine the extent of contamination at these properties.                 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
                                                                              290 Broadway, 18th Floor
                                                                                New York, NY 10007
This Proposed Plan includes a summary of the cleanup
                                                                           Email: hartzell.sharon@epa.gov
alternatives evaluated for use at the affected non-
residential properties. This Proposed Plan was                  Written comments must be postmarked no later than
developed by EPA, the lead agency for the Former Kil-           August 28, 2019.
Tone Company Superfund Site (Site), in consultation
with the New Jersey Department of Environmental                Public Meeting
Protection (NJDEP), the support agency. EPA, in                August 13, 2019 at 7:00 P.M.
consultation with NJDEP, will select a final remedy for        EPA will hold a public meeting to explain the Proposed
                                                               Plan and all of the alternatives presented in the
contaminated soil at affected non-residential properties
                                                               Feasibility Study. Oral and written comments will also
after reviewing and considering all information                be accepted at the meeting. The meeting will be held
submitted during the 30-day public comment period.             at:
EPA, in consultation with NJDEP, may modify the                          Gloria M Sabater Elementary School.
Preferred Alternative or select another response action                 301 So. East Blvd, Vineland, NJ 08360
presented in this Plan based on new information or
public comments. Therefore, the public is encouraged            In addition, select documents from the administrative
to review and comment on the alternatives presented in          record are available on-line at:
this Proposed Plan.                                             https://www.epa.gov/superfund/former-kil-tone

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

EPA and NJDEP encourage the public to review these              with the Site and addresses contaminated soil at non-
documents to gain a more comprehensive                          residential properties impacted by the former Kil-Tone
understanding of activities for the Site.                       Company operations, including at the former Kil-Tone
                                                                property itself. Additional operable units for the Site
COMMUNITY ROLE IN SELECTION PROCESS                             include OU3, which addresses contaminated
                                                                groundwater, and OU4, which addresses contaminated
This Proposed Plan is being issued to inform the public         sediment and surface water. Additional OUs may be
of EPA’s proposed alternative for non-residential               required.
properties and to solicit public comments pertaining to
all of the remedial alternatives evaluated, including the       The approximately 40 properties referenced in this
Preferred Alternative. Changes to the proposed                  Proposed Plan as requiring a remedial action is an
alternative, or a change to another alternative, may be         estimate used to calculate the approximate costs of the
made if public comments or additional data indicate             cleanup alternatives. EPA thinks that the estimate is not
that such a change would result in a more appropriate           likely to change significantly. The precise number of
remedial action. The final decision regarding the               non-residential properties to be remediated will be
selected remedy will be made after EPA, in                      determined upon completion of additional soil sampling
consultation with NJDEP, has taken into consideration           during the remedial design and possibly refined during
all public comments. EPA is soliciting public                   implementation of the remedial action.
comments on all of the alternatives considered in the
Proposed Plan, because EPA may select a remedy other            SITE BACKGROUND
than the proposed alternative. This Proposed Plan has
been made available to the public for a public comment          Site Description
period that concludes on August 28, 2019.
                                                                The Site is located in a mixed-use area that has been
A public meeting will be held during the public                 identified as a community with environmental justice
comment period to present the conclusions of the                concerns. The Site consists of the location of the former
RI/FFS, to elaborate further on the reasons for                 Kil-Tone Company pesticide manufacturing facility,
proposing the Preferred Alternative, and to receive             and the areal extent of contamination. Pesticides were
public comments. The public meeting will include a              manufactured at the Property from 1917 to on or about
presentation by EPA of the Preferred Alternative and            1933. Lead and arsenic releases from the pesticide
other cleanup options.                                          manufacturing operations contaminated the Property
                                                                itself, and areas in the vicinity of the Property.
Information concerning the public meeting and on                Sampling has detected lead and arsenic contaminated
submitting written comments can be found in the                 soil in at least 57 residential and an estimated 40 non-
“Mark Your Calendars” text box on Page 1. Comments              residential properties in the vicinity of the former Kil-
received at the public meeting, as well as written              Tone Company pesticide manufacturing facility.
comments received during the public comment period,
will be documented in the Responsiveness Summary                The former Kil-Tone Company facility is bordered to
section of the Record of Decision (ROD). The ROD is             the north by East Chestnut Avenue; to the east by South
the document that explains which alternative has been           Sixth Street; to the south by Paul Street; and to the west
selected and the basis for the selection of the remedy.         by South East Boulevard. Residential and non-
                                                                residential properties are located throughout the area.
SCOPE AND ROLE OF THE ACTION                                    The focus of this Proposed Plan is the non-residential
                                                                properties impacted by the lead and arsenic releases
Due to the large area, the different media affected by          from the Property.
contamination, and varying land uses, EPA is
addressing the cleanup of the Site in several phases, or        The Property comprises approximately four acres and is
operable units (OUs). A ROD for the first operable unit         currently occupied by a commercial enterprise involved
(OU1) was signed on September 12, 2016. It selected a           in making and installing signs for businesses. The
remedy for residential properties in the vicinity of the        Property is developed and has a multi-section building
former Kil-Tone Company manufacturing facility. This            on its western side. The remainder of the Property,
Proposed Plan is for the second operable unit associated        formerly unpaved, was paved (asphalt cover) by EPA in
                                                            2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

December 2016/January 2017 as part of a removal                 currently owned by Urban Manufacturing, LLC, which
action performed by EPA on the Property. The paved              purchased the property in 2008, and leases the Property
area is used for vehicle parking, materials storage, and        to Urban Sign & Crane, Inc., which operates a
as a laydown area for unused equipment and larger steel         commercial sign fabrication and installation business at
fabrications.                                                   the Property.

Adjacent and north of the Property is the Lerco Fuel            There have been several investigations at the Site,
Co. Inc. (Lerco) industrial facility that consists of two       including a site investigation by NJDEP which was
lots. The Lerco property was formerly used as a fuel            initiated in August 2014. Site assessments have also
storage and distribution site but is now vacant.                been conducted by EPA’s removal program. Samples
                                                                collected during the NJDEP investigation found arsenic
A storm sewer catch basin located in the northwestern           on the Property at concentrations as high as 740
corner of the Property receives storm water from the            milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg) in the top 6 inches of
entire Property and discharges into the head of the             soil and at concentrations as high as 5,800 mg/kg in soil
Tarkiln Branch, which is located across South East              at depth of 3.5 to 4 feet below ground surface.
Boulevard and approximately 400 feet from the                   Groundwater samples collected by NJDEP from
Property. Tarkiln Branch is a tributary to the Parvin           temporary well points on the Property found arsenic
Branch which flows into the Maurice River that is               concentrations as high as 8.1 micrograms per liter
located approximately 3.5 miles from the Property.              (μg/L) to 14,000 μg/L. This discovery prompted
                                                                NJDEP to refer the Site to EPA on November 14, 2014.
The neighborhood to the northwest, north, and east of           Note that this groundwater is not the source of drinking
the Property consist of various residential properties          for the community; the City of Vineland Water Utility
with some commercial and industrial properties, as              provides water to the community and this supply is
shown on Figure 1. Open spaces (neighborhood parks              tested regularly to assure it meets state and federal
and vacant lots) are interspersed throughout this area as       drinking water standards.
well. The non-residential properties to be addressed as
part of OU2 may be adjacent to or near residential              The Site was proposed to the National Priorities List
properties being addressed as part of OU1.                      (NPL) on September 30, 2015 and was added to the
                                                                NPL on April 5, 2016.
Farther away from the Property, land use is primarily a
mix of residential and commercial development. The              Lead and arsenic associated with operations at the
urban core of Vineland is centered near the intersection        former Kil-Tone Company facility have been found in
of Landis Avenue and County Route 615 (South East               soil at residential and non-residential properties in the
Boulevard). This area includes suburban housing and             vicinity of the Property. These contaminants have also
light commercial development that radiates in all               been found in sediment along the entire stretch of the
directions, with development becoming lighter away              Tarkiln Branch to the confluence with the Parvin
from the urban center.                                          Branch, as well as in associated floodplains. Lead and
                                                                arsenic have also been identified in groundwater at or
Site History                                                    near the Property.

The former Kil-Tone Company began pesticide                     Site Geology and Hydrogeology
manufacturing operations at the Property in or about
1917. The company manufactured arsenic-based                    The Site is located in the Coastal Plain Province of
pesticides. Specific compounds manufactured by the              unconsolidated fluvial and marine deposits. Soil at the
company included lead arsenate, London purple, and              Site typically includes coarse sands, coarse sandy
Paris green.                                                    loams, coarse loamy sands, course sandy clays and
                                                                sand. Fill material was routinely encountered in soil
In 1926, the Kil-Tone Company sold the Property to              borings. The hydrogeologic unit at the Site is
Lucas Kil-Tone Co., a New Jersey company, which                 Kirkwood-Cohansey aquifer. The depth to water at the
continued to manufacture pesticides on the Property             Property is approximately 6 feet below ground surface,
until on or about 1933 when pesticide manufacturing             but ranges to at least 15 feet below ground surface
operations ceased at the Property. The Property is              across OU2.
                                                            3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The topography of the Site area is generally flat. Much          soil; backfilling of excavated areas with clean fill; and
of the area surrounding the Property is covered by               restoration of the affected properties.
impervious surfaces such as houses, streets, driveways,
buildings, parking lots and urban construction.                  Remedial activities have been underway for OU1
                                                                 residential properties since 2017. Remediation of an
EARLY RESPONSE ACTIONS AND OPERABLE                              initial 6 properties was completed in 2018, and
UNIT ONE                                                         remediation of an additional 27 properties is ongoing.
                                                                 The design of a third phase of remedial activities for
Early Response Actions                                           OU1 is currently being completed and remediation of
                                                                 those properties is expected to start in 2020.
From January 2015 through February 2016, EPA
conducted several sampling events at the Site seeking            SUMMARY OF OPERABLE UNIT TWO
to define the nature and extent of contamination in              REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION
residential and non-residential soil, groundwater,
surface water and sediment. Based on the results of              The RI report for OU2 was finalized in August 2018,
EPA’s 2015 and 2016 sampling events and the earlier              and the Final FFS was completed in July 2019.
sampling by NJDEP, EPA initiated a removal action in             Together, the RI/FFS form the basis for this Proposed
April 2016 to prevent exposure to lead and arsenic-              Plan. The focus of the OU2 RI was on soil
contaminated surface soil at residential properties              contamination on non-residential properties. Additional
located in the vicinity of the Property.                         information regarding the depth to groundwater was
                                                                 also obtained and is described below.
EPA’s removal action consisted of the placement of
topsoil to support the growth of sod on portions of 26           Soil
residential properties with arsenic and/or lead
concentrations in surface soil in excess of action levels.       Tier A Soil Sampling
EPA also instructed property owners and/or residents of
these residential properties to not disturb the new layer        An initial round of OU2 soil sampling (Tier A) was
of clean topsoil and/or sod until a permanent remedy             conducted in August 2017 at three properties, namely,
could be implemented. These preventative measures                the Property itself and two adjacent properties, the
were completed in June 2016.                                     Lerco property to the north and a vacant property to the
                                                                 south. The purpose of conducting this initial round of
Later in 2016, an additional six residential properties          sampling on the former Kil-Tone manufacturing facility
located in the flood plain of the Tarkiln Branch were            and two other adjacent properties was to determine the
addressed to prevent exposure to and/or migration of             nature and extent of contamination on those properties,
contamination, and fencing was installed to restrict             as well as to determine the full list of contaminants
access to portions of two public housing developments            present in soil that may be related to the operations of
along the Tarkiln. In addition, soil cover and paving            the former Kil-Tone Company, in addition to arsenic
were placed over a portion of the Property itself to             and lead.
prevent further migration of contamination from the
Property until a permanent remedy can be                         Soil samples were collected from at least eight borings
implemented.                                                     per property using direct-push drilling equipment.
                                                                 Shallow soil (0-2 feet below ground surface (ft bgs))
Operable Unit One                                                from four discrete six-inch intervals and composite
                                                                 samples from three deeper intervals (2-4, 4-6, and 6-10
On September 12, 2016, EPA selected a remedy for                 ft bgs) were collected from each boring for laboratory
OU1 of the Site, which addresses contaminated soil on            analysis. One additional soil sample was collected from
residential properties in the vicinity of the Property.          each boring just above the water table. Samples were
The OU1 remedy includes excavation of an                         analyzed for the full list of contaminants of potential
estimated 21,000 cubic yards of soil contaminated                concern (COPCs), including volatile organic
primarily with arsenic and lead from approximately 57            compounds, semi-volatile organic compounds,
residential properties; off-site disposal of contaminated        polychlorinated biphenyls, pesticides and metals,
                                                                 including lead and arsenic.
                                                             4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The results were compared against New Jersey                    from the Property. Deeper soil impacts found on some
Residential Direct Contact Soil Remediation Standards           nearby properties may be due to the use of fill material,
(RDCSRS), New Jersey Non-Residential Direct                     storage or disposal of manufactured products and/or
Contact Soil Remediation Standards (NRDCSRS) and                waste materials from the Property.
the New Jersey Impact to Groundwater Soil Screening
Levels (IGWSSL). Arsenic and lead were found to be              Groundwater
the only contaminants that regularly exceeded the
RDCSRS and/or NRDCSRS of 19 mg/kg for arsenic                   While the OU2 RI focused on soil contamination, the
and 400 ppm or 800 ppm for lead, depending on future            depth to the water table was recorded during
use. The New Jersey default IGWSSL is 19 mg/kg for              installation of OU2 soil borings. The average depth to
arsenic and 90 mg/kg for lead. Sporadic elevated                groundwater at the Property is approximately 6 ft bgs.
concentrations of contaminants other than arsenic and           The depth to groundwater may be encountered at
lead were also found, particularly polycyclic aromatic          shallower locations on the Property, specifically in the
hydrocarbons (PAHs), but the data did not suggest any           area where the Tarkiln Branch originates. The average
other site-related COPCs exist.                                 depth to groundwater is approximately 7 ft bgs at
                                                                properties directly north of the Property and is
Tier B Soil Sampling                                            approximately 8 ft bgs at properties directly south of
                                                                the Property. The depth to groundwater increases with
Between September 2017 and March 2018, a second                 distance away from the Property, and away from the
round of OU2 soil sampling (Tier B) was conducted at            Tarkiln Branch, and averages approximately 13.5 ft bgs
approximately 50 non-residential properties in the              north of Cherry Street.
vicinity of the Property. The sampling approach was
similar to the Tier A event; samples were collected             Elevated concentrations of lead and/or arsenic were
from four discrete six-inch intervals at 0-2 ft bgs, and        encountered at some properties below the depth of the
composite samples were collected from two intervals at          groundwater table, including at the Property and at
2-4 and 4-6 ft bgs. Based on the results of the Tier A          Lerco.
sampling, the Tier B soil samples were analyzed for
metals and two intervals, 0.5-1 and 2-4 ft bgs, were also       PRINCIPAL THREATS
analyzed for PAHs to supplement the Tier A sampling
results.                                                        The Kil-Tone property itself has acted as a source of
                                                                lead and arsenic contamination to other properties,
Summary of Soil Investigation                                   groundwater and surface water, and the cancer risks
                                                                associated with contamination at this property exceed
The Tier B results verified that arsenic and lead are the       10-3. Therefore, the soil contamination at this property
primary COPCs at the Site. The highest concentrations           would be considered PTW.
of arsenic and lead found during OU2 sampling were
on the Property itself. These concentrations range from         SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS
0.93 to 45,900 mg/kg for arsenic and 2.1 to 91,700
mg/kg for lead. Soil samples from adjacent and nearby           As part of the RI/FFS, a human health risk assessment
properties to the north, south, and near the headwater of       (HHRA) was conducted to estimate current and
the Tarkiln Branch to the southwest also show elevated          potential future effects of contaminants on human
concentrations of arsenic (up to 15,900 mg/kg) and lead         health. A HHRA is an analysis of the potential adverse
(up to 16,100 mg/kg). Arsenic and lead impacts on the           human health effects caused by hazardous-substance
OU2 properties decrease laterally with distance away            exposure in the absence of any actions to control or
from the Property (see Figure 2).                               mitigate these exposures under current and future site
                                                                uses.
With some exceptions (mainly in Tier A properties), the
arsenic and lead impacts were typically found in                The cancer risk and noncancer health hazard estimates
shallow soil above 4 ft bgs. This is consistent with the        in the HHRA are based on current and potential future
conceptual site model (CSM) for the Site, which                 reasonable maximum exposure scenarios and were
suggests that overland flow (runoff) and air dispersion         developed by taking into account various health
(dust) were the main contaminant transport mechanisms           protective estimates about the concentrations,
                                                            5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                 waste material from the former Kil- Tone Company
       WHAT IS A “PRINCIPAL THREAT?”                             facility. The third property is representative of
The NCP establishes an expectation that EPA will use             properties impacted by the operations of the former Kil-
treatment to address the principal threats posed by a Site       Tone facility through overland flow and/or air
wherever         practicable         (NCP         Section        dispersion of contamination, and properties with
300.430(a)(1)(iii)(A)). The "principal threat" concept is        relatively shallow (above the water table) impacts. In
applied to the characterization of "source materials" at         addition, two of the properties have a reasonably
a Superfund site. A source material is material that             anticipated future use as residential while one (with
includes or contains hazardous substances, pollutants or         deep contamination) is reasonably anticipated to remain
contaminants that act as a reservoir for migration of            non-residential. As such, the results of the risk
contamination to ground water, surface water or air, or          assessment on these properties are applicable to all
acts as a source for direct exposure. Contaminated               OU2 properties.
ground water generally is not considered to be a source
material; however, Non-Aqueous Phase Liquids                     Based on current and reasonably anticipated future land
(NAPLs) in groundwater may be viewed as source                   use, the receptors assessed in the HHRA included a
material. Principal threat wastes are those source               future child and adult resident, industrial worker, utility
materials considered to be highly toxic or highly mobile         worker, and construction worker. Although the
that generally cannot be reliably contained or would             properties are zoned non-residential, many are adjacent
present a significant risk to human health or the                to residential areas and, based on conversations with the
environment should exposure occur. The decision to               Township of Vineland planning committee, could be
treat these wastes is made on a site-specific basis              rezoned as such in the future. Potential exposures to
through a detailed analysis of the alternatives using the        COPCs in surface and combined surface and subsurface
nine remedy selection criteria. This analysis provides a         soil pathways were evaluated for each scenario.
basis for making a statutory finding that the remedy
employs treatment as a principal element.                        For COPCs other than lead, two types of toxic health
                                                                 effects were evaluated in the risk assessment: cancer
frequency and duration of an individual's exposure to            risk and noncancer hazard. Calculated cancer risk
chemicals selected as COPCs, as well as the toxicity of          estimates for each receptor were compared to EPA’s
these contaminants.                                              target risk range of 1x10-6 (one-in-one million) to 1 x
                                                                 10-4 (one-in-ten thousand). The calculated noncancer
A Screening Level Ecological Risk Assessment                     hazard index (HI) estimates were compared to EPA’s
(SLERA) for OU2 was also conducted.                              target threshold value of 1.

Human Health Risk Assessment                                     The result of the risk assessment indicated that, out of
                                                                 the three properties evaluated, the former Kil-tone
A four-step human health risk assessment process was             Company facility had cancer risks of 3x10-3 for future
used for assessing site-related cancer risks and                 residents, 8x10-4 for industrial workers, and 2x10-4 for
noncancer health hazards. The four-step process is               utility workers, all exceeding EPA’s target cancer risk
comprised of: Hazard Identification, Exposure                    range. The second property was within the cancer risk
Assessment, Toxicity Assessment, and Risk                        range for all receptors, though at the upper bounds of
Characterization (see adjoining box “What is Risk and            the range for utility workers and child residents at 1x10-
                                                                 4
How is it Calculated” for more details on the risk                 . The third property was within the cancer risk range
assessment process).                                             for all receptors. Elevated cancer risks were primarily
                                                                 driven by exposure to arsenic in surface soil.
Consistent with the OU1 approach, three OU2
properties were selected for a streamlined risk                  Total noncancer hazards for future child residents at all
assessment. These three properties are considered                three properties exceeded EPA’s target threshold of
representative of the range of properties included in the        one, with values ranging from 3 to 69. The total
OU2 RI. Two of the selected properties are                       noncancer hazard index (HI) also exceeded EPA’s
representative of properties with relatively deep (below         target threshold for construction workers at both
the water table) contamination likely due to the use of          properties with deeper contamination. The noncancer
fill material including manufactured products and/or             hazard threshold was exceeded for all potential
                                                             6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

receptors at the former Kil-tone Company facility. The
HI exceedances at these properties were driven by                       WHAT IS RISK AND HOW IS IT CALCULATED?
exposure to arsenic in soil.
                                                                  A Superfund baseline human health risk assessment is an analysis of the
Blood lead modeling was also performed utilizing soil             potential adverse health effects caused by hazardous substance releases
                                                                  from a site in the absence of any actions to control or mitigate these
lead concentrations at the three properties. The Adult            under current- and future-land uses. A four-step process is utilized for
Lead Methodology (ALM) model was used for adult                   assessing site-related human health risks for reasonable maximum
receptors, and the Integrated Exposure Uptake                     exposure scenarios.
Biokinetic Model (IEUBK) predicted blood lead levels
                                                                  Hazard Identification: In this step, the contaminants of concern
in children in a future residential scenario. Soil lead
                                                                  (COPCs) at the site in various media (i.e., soil, groundwater, surface
concentrations at the former Kil-tone Company facility            water, and air) are identified based on such factors as toxicity, frequency
resulted in blood lead levels exceeding EPA’s regional            of occurrence, and fate and transport of the contaminants in the
target (no more than 5% exceeding 5 µg/dl) for                    environment, concentrations of the contaminants in specific media,
industrial workers, construction workers, and future              mobility, persistence, and bioaccumulation.
residents. Target blood lead levels were not exceeded             Exposure Assessment: In this step, the different exposure pathways
for any receptors using soil lead concentrations from             through which people might be exposed to the contaminants identified
the second or third property.                                     in the previous step are evaluated. Examples of exposure pathways
                                                                  include incidental ingestion of and dermal contact with contaminated
                                                                  soil and ingestion of and dermal contact with contaminated groundwater.
Contamination levels found at the three properties are
                                                                  Factors relating to the exposure assessment include, but are not limited
generally similar to those found at other non-residential         to, the concentrations in specific media that people might be exposed to
properties in the vicinity of the Former Kil-tone                 and the frequency and duration of that exposure. Using these factors, a
Company facility and are above background                         “reasonable maximum exposure” scenario, which portrays the highest
concentrations. The results of the risk assessment are            level of human exposure that could reasonably be expected to occur, is
                                                                  calculated.
considered to be representative of all affected non-
residential properties in the vicinity of the former Kil-         Toxicity Assessment: In this step, the types of adverse health effects
tone Company facility and are therefore applicable to             associated with chemical exposures, and the relationship between
OU2 as a whole.                                                   magnitude of exposure and severity of adverse effects are determined.
                                                                  Potential health effects are chemical-specific and may include the risk
                                                                  of developing cancer over a lifetime or other non-cancer health hazards,
Screening Level Ecological Risk Assessment                        such as changes in the normal functions of organs within the body (e.g.,
                                                                  changes in the effectiveness of the immune system). Some chemicals are
A SLERA for OU2 was conducted in 2017 to evaluate                 capable of causing both cancer and non-cancer health hazards.
the potential for risk to ecological receptors at the Site.
                                                                  Risk Characterization: This step summarizes and combines outputs of
Properties in OU2 are primarily developed, and do not             the exposure and toxicity assessments to provide a quantitative
contain suitable ecological habitat, but a few properties         assessment of site risks for all COPCs. Exposures are evaluated based
were identified as having potentially ecologically                on the potential risk of developing cancer and the potential for non-
suitable upland habitat. Three distinct exposure units            cancer health hazards. The likelihood of an individual developing cancer
                                                                  is expressed as a probability. For example, a 10-4 cancer risk means a
(EUs) were evaluated in the SLERA, two of which
                                                                  “one in ten thousand excess cancer risk;” or one additional cancer may
(EU-1 and EU-2) consisted of OU2 properties and the               be seen in a population of 10,000 people as a result of exposure to site
third of which (EU-3) included the Tarkiln Branch and             contaminants under the conditions identified in the Exposure
its floodplain down its confluence with the Parvin                Assessment. Current Superfund regulations for exposures identify the
Branch.                                                           range for determining whether remedial action is necessary as an
                                                                  individual excess lifetime cancer risk of 10-4 to 10-6, corresponding to a
                                                                  one in ten thousand to a one in a million excess cancer risk.
The SLERA concluded that the potential for adverse
ecological effects exists for each EU due to metals,              For non-cancer health effects, a “hazard index” (HI) is calculated. The
primarily arsenic, and some PAHs. Given the results of            key concept for a non-cancer HI is that a “threshold” (measured as an
                                                                  HI of less than or equal to 1) exists below which non-cancer health
the SLERA, a full Baseline Ecological Risk
                                                                  hazards are not expected to occur. The goal of protection is 10-6 for
Assessment for EU-3 will be conducted as part of OU4              cancer risk and an HI of 1 for a non-cancer health hazard. Chemicals that
of the Site.                                                      exceed a 10-4 cancer risk or an HI of 1 are typically those that will require
                                                                  remedial action at the site.
For EU-1 and EU-2, additional ecological risk analysis
was conducted to further refine the findings of the
SLERA. This additional analysis also found that arsenic
                                                              7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

and lead are the primary contaminants of concern for                                                    Arsenic     Lead
ecological receptors. It indicated that arsenic presents a                                              (mg/kg)     (mg/kg)
potential for adverse effects to terrestrial plant and soil        Residential Soil                     19          400
invertebrate communities and lead presents a potential             Non-Residential Soil                 19          800
for adverse effects to terrestrial plants. It also found           Impact to Groundwater                19          90
that there is minimal potential for adverse effects to             Ecological (Plants)                  69          500
wildlife receptor populations.                                     Ecological (Soil Invertebrates)      93.7        3,162

Summary
                                                                  The residential, non-residential and impact to
It is EPA’s judgment that the Preferred Alternative               groundwater PRGs are based on New Jersey
summarized in this Proposed Plan or one of the other              Remediation Standards (N.J.A.C. 7:26d). Consistent
active measures considered in the Proposed Plan,                  with New Jersey Remediation Standards, EPA is
is necessary to protect public health or welfare and the          developing a site-specific impact to groundwater value
environment from actual or threatened releases of                 for lead that will be incorporated into the Record of
hazardous substances into the environment.                        Decision for OU2. The plant and soil invertebrate PRGs
                                                                  listed above are based on the results of the ecological
REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES                                        analyses conducted for OU2. In addition to the
                                                                  numerical values above, the overall remediation goal
Soil contamination on non-residential properties is               for lead on properties with a reasonably anticipated
present in surface and/or subsurface soil. The following          future use as residential will be a property-wide average
remedial action objectives (RAOs) for contaminated                surficial lead concentration of less than 200 mg/kg.
soil attain a degree of cleanup that ensures the                  That cleanup level is based on recently updated blood
protection of human health and the environment:                   lead level guidance from USEPA’s Office of Land and
                                                                  Emergency Management (Directive 9200.2-167).
    •   Prevent current and potential future
        unacceptable risks to human receptors resulting
        from direct contact with contaminated soil;               SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES
    •   Prevent migration of contaminants of concern
        (COCs) from the OU2 properties to other areas             CERCLA requires that each selected remedy be
        via overland flow and air dispersion;                     protective of human health and the environment, be
    •   Prevent or reduce the migration of COCs from              cost effective, and utilize permanent solutions and
        soil to groundwater; and                                  alternative treatment technologies and resource
    •   Prevent current and potential future                      recovery alternatives to the maximum extent practical.
        unacceptable risks to ecological receptors                In addition, if any hazardous substance, pollutant or
        resulting from direct contact with contaminated           contaminant will remain on-site, any federal and
        soil.                                                     promulgated state standard, requirement, criteria, or
                                                                  limitation that is legally applicable or relevant and
To achieve the RAOs, property-specific Preliminary                appropriate must be attained. CERCLA also includes a
Remediation Goals (PRGs) will be used based on the                preference for the use of treatment as a principal
reasonably anticipated future use of the property                 element for the reduction of toxicity, mobility, or
(residential or non-residential 1), the depth of                  volume of the hazardous substances.
contamination for impact to groundwater, and the
potential for adverse ecological effects. Based on the            Potential technologies applicable to soil remediation
results of the RI, the BHHRA and the ecological                   were identified and screened by effectiveness,
analyses, the COCs for OU2 of the Site are arsenic and            implementability, and cost criteria, with emphasis on
lead. The following PRGs are proposed:                            effectiveness. Those technologies that passed the initial



1
 Note that while OU2 addresses non-residential properties,        reasonably anticipated future use of majority of the OU2
based on discussions with the City of Vineland, the               properties is residential.
                                                              8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

screening were then assembled into remedial                        approximately 15 months to implement. The estimated
alternatives.                                                      present-worth cost is $8.1 million. Institutional controls
                                                                   in the form of deed notices would be needed to prevent
Of the approximately 50 non-residential properties                 disturbance of the engineered covers. In addition, long-
sampled as part of the OU2 RI, EPA estimates that                  term monitoring in the form of visual inspections of the
approximately 40 require remediation. Additional                   affected properties would be needed to assure the
sampling will be needed during the design of the OU2               engineering controls remain effective.
remedy to refine the extent of contamination on each
property, and additional properties could be identified            Because this alternative would result in contaminants
during this process.                                               remaining on-site above levels that allow for
                                                                   unrestricted use and unlimited exposure, CERCLA
The time frames below for construction do not include              requires that the Site be reviewed at least once every
the time for designing a remedy, reaching agreement                five years.
with responsible parties if they are identified, or the time
to procure necessary contracts. All costs were calculated          Total Capital Cost:               $7,961,000
using the seven percent discount factor.                           Annual O&M:                       $10,000
                                                                   Total Present Worth:              $8,091,000
Alternative 1 - No Action                                          Construction Time Frame:          15 months

The NCP requires that a “No Action” alternative be                 Alternative 3 – Excavation to Depth of
evaluated to establish a baseline for comparison with              Contamination (not to exceed depth of groundwater
other remedial alternatives. Under this alternative, no            table), Engineering Controls and Institutional
action would be taken to remediate the contaminated                Controls
soil at non-residential properties.
                                                                   This alternative consists of the following major
Total Capital Cost:               $0                               components:
Annual O&M:                       $0
Total Present Net Worth:          $0                                   •   Excavation of soil in exceedance of the
Timeframe:                         0 years                                 appropriate property-specific soil remediation
                                                                           standard, not to exceed the depth of the
Alternative 2 – Engineering Controls                                       groundwater table
(Capping/Access Control) and Institutional Controls                    •   Off-site disposal of excavated soil
                                                                       •   Institutional controls
This alternative consists of the following major                       •   Engineering controls, if necessary
components:                                                            •   Long-term monitoring, if necessary
    •   Installation and/or maintenance of engineered              Under this alternative, an estimated 57,800 cubic yards
        covers                                                     of soil would be excavated for off-site disposal. It is
    •   Off-site disposal of soil excavated prior to cap           estimated that the active component of the remedial
        installation                                               action would take about 35 months to implement. This
    •   Institutional controls in the form of deed                 would be inclusive of mobilization/demobilization,
        notices                                                    sheeting/building, excavation and backfill/restoration.
    •   Long-term monitoring
                                                                   The estimated present-worth cost of this alternative is
Under this alternative, an estimated 8,650 cubic yards             $36 million. The cost estimate assumes that for the Kil-
of contaminated soil would need to be excavated                    Tone and Lerco properties 75% of excavated material
to accommodate caps on individual OU2 properties.                  could be disposed of as non-hazardous waste and 25%
Some properties have existing paved areas that could               would require disposal as hazardous waste at an
already act as engineered covers and thus would require            appropriately permitted facility. For the remainder of
only maintenance. It is estimated that the active                  the properties within OU2, disposal cost assumptions
components of this remedial action would take                      were split 90% non-hazardous and 10% hazardous.

                                                               9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Institutional controls would be needed on properties not             •   Excavation of all soil in exceedance of the
addressed to residential standards. While the goal                       appropriate parcel-specific soil remediation
would be full excavation of all impacted soil above the                  standard
water table, due to engineering and/or access                        •   Off-site disposal of excavated soil
considerations, it may be necessary in some instances to             •   Institutional controls
use engineering controls to fully achieve RAOs. If this              •   Engineering controls, if necessary
is the case, long-term monitoring in the form of visual              •   Long-term monitoring, if necessary
inspections would be needed to assure the engineering
controls remain effective.                                       Under this alternative, an estimated 86,600 cubic yards
                                                                 of soil would be excavated for off-site disposal. The
Because this alternative would result in contaminants            volume is higher than it is under Alternative 3 because
remaining on-site above levels that allow for                    Alternative 4 includes excavation of soil below the
unrestricted use and unlimited exposure, CERCLA                  water table. It is estimated that the active component of
requires that the Site be reviewed at least once every           the remedial action would take about 50 months to
five years.                                                      implement including mobilization/demobilization,
                                                                 sheeting/building, excavation and backfill/restoration.
Note that existing data indicate elevated concentrations
of COCs are present in soil beneath the water table at 3         The estimated present-worth cost is $58.4 million. As
of the approximately 40 OU2 properties. Under                    noted in Alternative 3, the cost estimate assumes a 75%
Alternative 3, this contaminated soil would be left in           non-hazardous and 25% hazardous disposal cost split
place and addressed as part of OU3 of the Site, which            for the Former Kil-Tone and Lerco properties. For the
relates to groundwater. Sampling for the OU3 RI has              remainder of the properties within OU2, disposal cost
recently been initiated and a more complete                      assumptions were split 90% non-hazardous and 10%
understanding of site-related groundwater                        hazardous.
contamination obtained during the OU3 RI will be
valuable in determining the best remedy for soil below           Institutional controls would be needed on properties not
the water table. In any case, by removing impacted soil          addressed to residential standards. While the goal
above the water table, Alternative 3 would reduce the            would be full excavation of all impacted soil, due to
migration of contamination below the water table.                engineering and/or access considerations, it may be
                                                                 necessary in some instances to use engineering controls
For this reason, under this alternative, remediation of          to fully achieve RAOs. If this is the case, long-term
any properties with contamination beneath or near the            monitoring of the engineering controls would be needed
water table will be deferred at least until after the OU3        to assure they remain effective.
RI/FS is further along, and it is determined whether any
active remediation is needed for OU3. Remedial                   Because this alternative may result in contaminants
activities on the properties with impacts below the              remaining on-site above levels that allow for
water table could then be conducted concurrently with,           unrestricted use and unlimited exposure, five-year
or in accordance with, the remedial action selected for          reviews may be required, as per CERCLA.
OU3 of the Site in order to avoid the potential need to
return to a property previously cleaned up under OU2.            Total Capital Cost:              $58,311,000
                                                                 Annual O&M:                      $7,500
Total Capital Cost:              $35,941,000                     Total Present Worth:             $58,409,000
Annual O&M:                      $7,500                          Construction Time Frame:         50 months
Present Worth Cost:              $36,039,000
Construction Time Frame:         35 months                       EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES
Alternative 4 – Excavation to Depth of                           EPA uses nine criteria to evaluate the remedial
Contamination, Engineering Controls and                          alternatives individually and against each other to select
Institutional Controls                                           a remedy. This section of the Proposed Plan profiles
                                                                 the relative performance of each alternative against the
This alternative consists of the following major                 nine criteria and notes how it compares to the other
components:
                                                            10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

options under consideration. The nine evaluation
criteria are discussed below. A detailed analysis of                THE NINE SUPERFUND EVALUATION CRITERIA
each of the alternatives is in the FFS.
                                                               1. Overall Protectiveness of Human Health and the Environment
                                                               evaluates whether and how an alternative eliminates, reduces, or
Overall Protection of Human Health and the                     controls threats to public health and the environment through
Environment                                                    institutional controls, engineering controls, or treatment.

Since Alternative 1 would not address the risks posed          2. Compliance with Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate
by soil contaminants, it would not be protective of            Requirements (ARARs) evaluates whether the alternative meets
                                                               federal and state environmental statutes, regulations, and other
human health and the environment. Therefore, it was            requirements that pertain to the site, or whether a waiver is justified.
eliminated from further consideration under the
remaining eight criteria.                                      3. Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence considers the ability of
                                                               an alternative to maintain protection of human health and the
                                                               environment over time.
Alternative 2 would provide adequate protection of
human health and the environment by eliminating,               4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume (TMV) of
reducing, or controlling risk through containment, soil        Contaminants through Treatment evaluates an alternative's use of
cover, or removal of contaminated soil. Engineering            treatment to reduce the harmful effects of principal contaminants, their
controls (i.e., soil covers) and deed notices would            ability to move in the environment, and the amount of contamination
                                                               present.
prevent exposure to risk-based levels of contaminants.
                                                               5. Short-term Effectiveness considers the length of time needed to
Alternatives 3 and 4 would provide protection of               implement an alternative and the risks the alternative poses to workers,
human health and the environment by removing the               the community, and the environment during implementation.
contaminated soil, thereby preventing exposure.                6. Implementability considers the technical and administrative
Alternative 4 would provide protection by removing             feasibility of implementing the alternative, including factors such as
contamination below the water table, thereby more              the relative availability of goods and services.
fully addressing the RAO to prevent or reduce the
migration of COCs from soil to groundwater.                    7. Cost includes estimated capital and annual operations and
                                                               maintenance costs, as well as present worth cost. Present worth cost is
                                                               the total cost of an alternative over time in terms of today's dollar
Compliance with ARARs                                          value. Cost estimates are expected to be accurate within a range of
                                                               +50 to -30 percent.
Alternatives 2, 3 and 4 would address potential
                                                               8. State/Support Agency Acceptance considers whether the State
chemical-specific ARARs. Placement of engineered               agrees with the EPA's analyses and recommendations, as described in
soil cover/targeted soil removal, and soil removal             the RI/FS and Proposed Plan.
included in Alternative 2, would address potential
chemical-specific ARARs for soil. The soil removal             9. Community Acceptance considers whether the local community
prescribed in Alternatives 3 and 4 would meet soil             agrees with EPA's analyses and preferred alternative. Comments
                                                               received on the Proposed Plan are an important indicator of community
chemical-specific ARARs for residential or non-                acceptance.
residential use. Each active alternative would also
achieve potential location-specific and action-specific
ARARs.
                                                               Alternative 3 would provide long-term effectiveness
Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence                         and permanence by removing contaminants from the
                                                               OU2 non-residential properties and providing secure
Alternative 2 provides long-term effectiveness and             disposal of excavated soil at appropriate permitted
permanence through maintenance of the soil covers and          facilities. Long-term monitoring and maintenance of
the institutional controls. Periodic inspection and            the affected properties and five-year reviews would be
maintenance, as required by the institutional controls,        required since contaminated soil could remain below
would ensure the remedy remains effective in                   the water table on some properties.
preventing exposure to contaminants. However, the
continued effectiveness of the Alternative 2                   Alternative 4 would provide the greatest long-term
containment system would depend on how well the soil           effectiveness and permanence since all site-related soil
cover is maintained.
                                                          11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

contamination exceeding the PRGs would be excavated              transportation safety measures would be required
and disposed of at an approved off-site facility. If             during the shipping of the contaminated soil to
necessary, long-term monitoring in the form of visual            approved off-site disposal facilities. Completion of the
inspections and maintenance, as well as CERCLA five-             remediation for most individual properties could be
year reviews, would be required for any property that            conducted in approximately 1 year or less, though it is
could not be remediated to unlimited use and                     expected that Alternative 3 would take 35 months to
unrestricted exposure conditions.                                implement fully and Alternative 4 would take 50
                                                                 months.
Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume through
Treatment                                                        Implementability

None of the alternatives would provide reduction of              Alternative 2 can be implemented; however, the
toxicity, mobility, or volume of contamination through           development of protective engineering and institutional
treatment, since treatment is not included as an option.         controls that would be both enforceable and acceptable
The use of treatment was evaluated as part of the FFS            to all property owners is uncertain.
process, but no effective means of treating arsenic and
lead contamination, including PTW, in soil were                  Alternatives 3 and 4 are also implementable, although
identified. Excavated soil for off-site disposition may          implementation of those alternatives is complicated to
require treatment prior to disposal.                             some extent by the need to perform excavation and
                                                                 backfilling on individual properties, the majority of
Alternative 2 would reduce the mobility of                       which are developed with primary structures (such as
contamination somewhat through the placement of caps             stores or buildings) as well as secondary structures such
over some impacted areas. Alternative 3 would provide            as garages and sheds. Alternative 4 would be
better reduction of mobility through the excavation and          significantly more difficult to implement on properties
removal of COC-contaminated soil from the Site. At a             where contamination extends below the water table. In
select group of properties contamination would remain            some cases, the depth of contamination extends greater
below the water table, but this remaining contamination          than 12 feet below ground surface, which would require
would be addressed as part of OU3 of the Site.                   the use of either braced or sloped excavation and would
                                                                 likely require at least some dewatering to occur.
Alternative 4 would provide the highest reduction of
mobility and volume through the excavation and off-              All alternatives would result in some short-term
site disposal of all identified properties with COCs             impacts to the community, in the form of truck traffic
above the PRGs. It would also prevent the potential              and noise and dust from construction/excavation
migration of COCs from soil to groundwater.                      activities, although Alternative 2 (bringing soil in to
                                                                 construct a soil cover) would generate less truck traffic
Short-Term Effectiveness                                         than Alternatives 3 and Alternative 4 (both would
                                                                 involve removing contaminated soil from properties
Alternative 2 would be effective in the short term since         and bringing soil in to fill excavated areas). Traffic,
contaminated soil would not be significantly disturbed           noise, and dust impacts would be mitigated by limiting
during construction activities. It is estimated that caps        the construction schedule to daytime hours on
could be placed and deed notices established in                  weekdays or other timing as specified by local
approximately 15 months.                                         ordinance. Perimeter air monitoring and dust control
                                                                 measures would be required to address concerns over
Alternatives 3 and 4 involve excavation of                       potential exposure to dust during activities.
contaminated soil and would present a potential for
short-term exposure. Under these alternatives, any               Administrative implementation of Alternative 2 may be
potential environmental impacts associated with the              significantly impacted by the need to impose deed
excavation of soil would be minimized with the proper            notices on non-residential properties to limit human
installation and implementation of dust and erosion              exposure by restricting the future use of contaminated
control measures, by performing excavation with                  areas within the properties. These notices would restrict
appropriate health and safety measures, and by using a           the owner’s use of the property and may not be
lined temporary staging area. Appropriate                        acceptable to some of the property owners. Since
                                                            12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternatives 3 and 4 result in the removal of                    PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE
contaminated soil but may not address all
contamination to achieve unlimited use conditions,               The Preferred Alternative for achieving remedial action
institutional controls on a limited number of properties         objectives for the non-residential properties with soil
would be required.                                               impacted by site-related contamination is Alternative 3,
                                                                 excavation to depth of contamination (not to exceed
Cost                                                             depth of groundwater table), engineering controls and
                                                                 institutional controls.
The total estimated cost for Alternative 2 is $8,091,000.
Capital costs include the cost for placement of the caps,        Alternative 3 consists of excavation of an estimated
the excavation of soil needed to accommodate the caps,           57,800 cubic yards of soil for off-site disposal that
and administrative cost for establishment of the deed            exceeds the appropriate property-specific soil
notices. Annual O&M costs include maintenance of the             remediation standard, not to exceed the depth of the
containment systems.                                             groundwater table.

The total estimated cost for Alternative 3 is                    It is estimated that the active component of the remedial
$36,039,000. Capital costs include the cost for the              action would take about 35 months to implement. This
excavation and disposal of soil and site restoration. No         would be inclusive of mobilization/demobilization,
annual maintenance is anticipated, though limited                sheeting/building, excavation and backfill/restoration.
monitoring in the form of visual inspections will be             Institutional controls would be required on properties
required for those properties not addressed to the               not addressed to residential standards and long-term
residential standards, or if any engineering controls are        monitoring in the form of visual inspection of these
needed.                                                          properties would be needed. In addition, inspection and
                                                                 maintenance of any necessary engineering controls may
The total estimated cost for Alternative 4 is                    be needed.
$58,409,000. Like Alternative 3, capital costs include
the cost for the excavation and disposal of soil and Site        Alternative 2 relies heavily on the ability to ensure that
restoration. Costs are higher due to the greater depth of        the institutional controls, in the form of deed notices
excavation needed, and the associated additional                 and restrictions, remain in place and are complied with.
engineering efforts that requires. As with Alternative 3,        Alternative 3 relies less heavily on institutional controls
no annual maintenance is anticipated, though limited             and Alternative 4 may not require the use of
monitoring in the form of visual inspections will be             institutional controls at all, and as such both are more
required for those properties not addressed to the               effective in the long-term than Alternative 2.
residential standards, or if any engineering controls are        Alternative 3 would achieve the RAOs, is more easily
needed.                                                          implementable, has greater effectiveness in the short-
                                                                 term and is less costly than Alternative 4. While
State Acceptance                                                 Alternative 2 is approximately $28 million less costly
                                                                 than Alternative 3, there would be significant resource
The State of New Jersey concurs with the Preferred               requirements over time associated with long-term
Alternative as presented in this Proposed Plan.                  inspection and maintenance of the caps. For these
                                                                 reasons, EPA prefers Alternative 3 over Alternatives 2
Community Acceptance                                             and 4.

Community acceptance of the Preferred Alternative                EPA anticipates that a more complete understanding of
will be evaluated after the public comment period ends           groundwater contamination, obtained during the OU3
and will be described in the ROD. Based on public                RI, will be valuable in determining the best remedy for
comment, the Preferred Alternative could be modified             soil below the water table. Existing data indicates soil
from the version presented in this proposed plan. The            contamination beneath the water table to be a concern
Record of Decision is the document that formalizes the           at 3 of 40 OU2 properties. For this reason, EPA will
selection of the remedy for a site.                              address contamination in below-water-table soil after
                                                                 the OU3 RI/FS is further along. However, under
                                                                 Alternative 3, excavation at properties where soil
                                                            13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

contamination is present below the water table will be
                                                                  FOR FURTHER INFORMATION
deferred at least until it is determined whether any
active remediation is needed for OU3. Remedial                    The administrative record file, which contains copies
activities on the properties with impacts below the               of the Proposed Plan and supporting documentation is
water table could then be conducted concurrently with,            available at the following locations:
or in accordance with, the OU3 remedy, to avoid the
potential need to return to a property post-action.               EPA Region 2 Superfund Records Center
                                                                  290 Broadway, 18th Floor
The implementation of Alternative 3 may require                   New York, New York 10007-1866
excavation work adjacent to and/or underneath                     (212) 637-4308
structures. In general, every attempt will be made to             Hours: Monday-Friday – 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
remove all soil contamination so that deed restrictions
                                                                  Vineland City Library
are not determined to be necessary. All impacted                  1058 East Landis Ave.
properties will be restored to their original condition.          Vineland, New Jersey 08360
                                                                  For Library Hours:
Based on the information available at this time, EPA              http://www.vinelandlibrary.org/
has concluded and NJDEP concurs that the Preferred
Alternative meets the threshold criteria and provides the         In addition, select documents from the administrative
best balance of tradeoffs among the other alternatives            record are available on-line at:
with respect to the balancing criteria.
                                                                  www.epa.gov/superfund/former-kil-tone
The Preferred Alternative satisfies the threshold criteria
and achieves the best combination of the five balancing
criteria of the comparative analysis. This alternative is
preferred because it will achieve the RAOs and cleanup
goals in the shortest amount of time and is a permanent
remedy. EPA expects the Preferred Alternative to
satisfy the following statutory requirements of
CERCLA Section 121: 1) be protective of human
health and the environment; 2) comply with ARARs; 3)
be cost effective; 4) utilize permanent solutions and
alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery
technologies to the maximum extent practicable; and 5)
satisfy the preference for treatment as a principal
element or explain why the preference for treatment
will not be met. EPA will assess the modifying criteria
of community acceptance in the ROD following the
close of the public comment period.




                                                             14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                                                      FIGURE 1

7/18/2018 11:34:24 AM
C:\Users\KaufmaDR\Desktop\KilTone\MXD\OU2_RI_Report\Kil-Tone_Figure1_SiteLocation.mxd




                                                                                                                 FORMER KIL-TONE
                                                                                                                COMPANY PROPERTY




                                                                                                                                                Copyright:© 2013 National Geographic Society, i-cubed

                                                                                                           ADAPTED FROM: MILLVILLE, NEW JERSEY USGS QUADRANGLE

                                                                                                                    FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY



                                                                                                                                                                                                 ¥
                                                                                                                         SUPERFUND SITE
                                                                                                                          OU2 RI REPORT
                                                                                                                      VINELAND, NEW JERSEY

                                                                                            MAP LOCATION
                                                                                                                            SITE LOCATION

                                                                                                                        0    1,000     2,000           4,000

                                                                                                                                       Feet

                                                                                        14426/66305
                                                                                        JULY 2018                                    1:24,000

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

7/17/2019 9:41:21 AM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FIGURE 3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GRAPE STREET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MONTROSE STREET                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MONTROSE STREET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S SEVENTH STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                          LA FRANCE STREET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ALMOND STREET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                222




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 223




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        QUINCE STREET



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           233


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  69                    231         232
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 227




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  211                              230


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                228      226      81                     81         225                                                      237     236

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   229
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        212



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CHERRY STREET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   123
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S WEST BOULEVARD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S EAST BOULEVARD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SIXTH STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   123


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  206
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         210

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 209
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 148                                                                                            244      243                                  242                                                      143                       240

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            208         207                                                                                                       LERCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    305




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CHESTNUT AVENUE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FORMER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 290


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      KIL-TONE
                                                                                                                                               THIRD STREET TERRACE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   286                                             287                                                                                  289                                                                                                                291




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PAUL STREET


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        511 PAUL ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    302
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      296         297




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              277                                                                                                         301

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        278
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 304
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          303                                                                     295



                                                                                                                                                                                                  284

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   279                                                                                                                                                                  WASHINGTON AVENUE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        124
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              280
I:\Hdr-Obg.14426\STDS\GIS\KilTone\MXD\Feasibility Study\Rev Final Submittal July 2019\Kil_tone_Figure3_OU2AreasRequiringRemediation2.mxd




                                                                                                                                                                                            283


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BELLAIR STREET


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             282




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SUMMER AVENUE

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FLORENCE AVENUE




                                                                                                                                           LUCIANO AVENUE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DIFALCO AVENUE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Source: Esri, DigitalGlobe, GeoEye, Earthstar Geographics, CNES/Airbus DS, USDA, USGS, AeroGRID, IGN, and the GIS User Community


                                                                                                                                           LEGEND                                                                                                                                  FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY SUPERFUND SITE                                                                                                                                                                                    OU2 AREAS REQUIRING
                                                                                                                                                                      OU2 PROPERTY - NO ACTION REQUIRED                                                                                         OU2 FFS REPORT                                                                                                                                                                                                   REMEDIATION
                                                                                                                                                                      OU2 PROPERTY - ACTION REQUIRED (NJDEP NON-RESIDENTIAL SRS)                                                            VINELAND, NEW JERSEY
                                                                                                                                                                      OU2 PROPERTY - ACTION REQUIRED (NJDEP RESIDENTIAL SRS)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14426/66305




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ¥
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               JULY 2019
                                                                                                                                                                      OU1 PROPERTY

                                                                                                                                                                      APPROXIMATE OU1/OU2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0                   60         120                 240            360                        480
                                                                                                                                                                      STUDY AREA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PROPERTY BOUNDARY: STATE OF NEW JERSEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         COMPOSITE OF PARCELS DATA, NEW JERSEY OFFICE                                                             Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (NJOIT), OFFICE OF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEMS (OGIS).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    Sitio Superfund ex Kil-Tone Company
                                  Unidad Dos operable, suelos no residenciales
                                                   Vineland, Nueva Jersey



Plan propuesto de Superfund                                                                         Julio de 2019

LA EPA ANUNCIA EL PLAN PROPUESTO                             recuperación presentada en este Plan dependiendo de la
                                                             información nueva o los comentarios del público. Por lo
Este Plan propuesto identifica la Alternativa preferida      tanto, se invita al público a revisar las alternativas
para remediar las propiedades no residenciales con           presentadas en este Plan propuesto y a enviar sus
suelos contaminados relacionados con la antigua              comentarios al respecto.
fábrica de pesticidas Kil-Tone Company, situada en
Vineland, Nueva Jersey. La Alternativa preferida             La EPA publica este Plan propuesto como parte de su
requiere la excavación en las propiedades no                 programa de relaciones comunitarias conforme a la
residenciales y la eliminación de suelos contaminados        Sección 117(a) de la Ley Integral de Responsabilidad,
fuera de ellas, y sería el remedio definitivo para los       Compensación y Recuperación Ambiental (CERCLA)
suelos en las propiedades no residenciales.                  42 U.S.C. 9617(a) y la Sección 300.435(c) (2) (ii) del
                                                             Plan Nacional de Contingencia (NCP) de Petróleo y
La Agencia de Protección Ambiental (EPA, por sus             Sustancias Peligrosas. Este Plan propuesto resume
siglas en inglés) ha realizado muestreos de suelos en        información que se puede encontrar de forma más
aproximadamente 50 propiedades no residenciales en la
cercanía de la antigua fábrica de pesticidas Kil-Tone           MARQUE SU CALENDARIO
Company situada en 527 East Chestnut Avenue, Ciudad
de Vineland, Condado de Cumberland, Nueva Jersey                Período de comentarios del público:
                                                                del 30 de julio al 28 de agosto de 2019
(“Propiedad”), así como en la propiedad misma. Los              La EPA aceptará comentarios escritos sobre el Plan
resultados del programa de muestreo de suelos                   propuesto durante el período de comentarios del
identificaron aproximadamente 40 de las                         público. Los comentarios escritos se deben dirigir a:
aproximadamente 50 propiedades no residenciales
donde se requiere una medida de remediación. Puede                     Sharon Hartzell, gerente de proyectos
que sea necesario realizar un muestreo adicional para              Agencia de Protección Ambiental de los EE. UU.
                                                                              290 Broadway, 18th Floor
definir mejor el grado de contaminación en estas
                                                                               New York, NY 10007
propiedades.                                                        Correo electrónico: hartzell.sharon@epa.gov

Este Plan propuesto incluye un resumen de las                   La fecha en el matasellos de los comentarios escritos
alternativas de limpieza evaluadas para utilizar en las         no debe ser posterior al 28 de agosto de 2019.
propiedades residenciales afectadas. Este Plan
propuesto fue elaborado por la EPA, la agencia                 Reunión pública:
principal para el Sitio Superfund ex Kil-Tone Company          13 de agosto de 2019 a las 7:00 P.M:
                                                               La EPA llevará a cabo una reunión pública para explicar
(Sitio), con el asesoramiento del Departamento de
                                                               el Plan propuesto y todas las alternativas presentadas en
Protección Ambiental de Nueva Jersey (NJDEP), la               el Estudio de factibilidad. También se aceptarán
agencia de apoyo. La EPA, con el asesoramiento del             comentarios verbales y escritos en la reunión. La sede
NJDEP, seleccionará un remedio definitivo para el              de la reunión será:
suelo contaminado en las propiedades no residenciales                     Escuela Primaria Gloria M Sabater.
afectadas después de revisar y considerar toda la                       301 So. East Blvd, Vineland, NJ 08360
información presentada durante el período de 30 días
para recibir comentarios del público. La EPA, con el            Además, encontrará en línea ciertos documentos del
asesoramiento del NJDEP, puede modificar la                     expediente administrativo, en:
Alternativa preferida o seleccionar otra medida de              https://www.epa.gov/superfund/former-kil-tone

                                                                                                    *541228*
                                                                                                          541228

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

detallada en los informes de la Investigación de                ALCANCE Y FUNCIÓN DE LA ACCIÓN
Remediación (RI) y del Estudio de Factibilidad
Orientado al suelo no residencial, así como otros               Debido a la gran extensión del área, los diferentes
documentos relacionados, que se pueden encontrar en             medios afectados por la contaminación y los diversos
el Expediente administrativo de esta acción. A                  usos de la tierra, la EPA está abordando la limpieza del
continuación, se indica la ubicación del Expediente             Sitio en varias fases o unidades operables (OU). Se
administrativo. La EPA y el NJDEP invitan al público            firmó un ROD para la primera unidad operable (OU1)
a revisar estos documentos para comprender las                  el 12 de septiembre de 2016. Seleccionaba un remedio
actividades para el sitio de forma más integral.                para las propiedades residenciales cercanas a la antigua
                                                                fábrica de Kil-Tone Company. Este Plan propuesto es
LA FUNCIÓN DE LA COMUNIDAD EN EL                                para la segunda unidad operable asociada con el Sitio y
PROCESO DE SELECCIÓN                                            se centra en el suelo contaminado en las propiedades no
                                                                residenciales afectadas por las operaciones de la ex Kil-
Este Plan propuesto se publica a fin de informar al             Tone Company, incluyendo la propiedad misma de la
público sobre la alternativa propuesta de la EPA para           ex Kil-Tone. Las unidades operables adicionales para el
las propiedades no residenciales y para solicitarle al          Sitio incluyen la OU3, que aborda el agua subterránea
público comentarios referentes a todas las alternativas         contaminada, y la OU4, que se enfoca en sedimento y
de remediación evaluadas, incluida la Alternativa               agua superficial contaminados. Puede que se requieran
preferida. Es posible incorporar cambios a la alternativa       OU adicionales.
propuesta o a otra alternativa si los comentarios del
público o los datos adicionales indican que dicho               Unas 40 propiedades mencionadas en este Plan
cambio produciría una acción de remediación a largo             propuesto que requieren una medida de remediación
plazo más apropiada. La decisión final respecto del             constituyen una estimación que se utiliza para calcular
remedio seleccionado se tomará después de que la EPA            los costos aproximados de las alternativas de limpieza.
haya considerado todos los comentarios del público con          Según la EPA, es improbable que cambie la estimación
el asesoramiento del NJDEP. La EPA le solicita al               significativamente. La cantidad exacta de propiedades
público comentarios sobre todas las alternativas                no residenciales que se deben remediar se determinará
consideradas en el Plan Propuesto, debido a que la EPA          al finalizar el muestreo de suelo adicional durante el
puede seleccionar un remedio distinto a la alternativa          diseño de la remediación, y se definirá mejor durante la
propuesta. Este Plan propuesto está a disposición del           implementación de la medida de remediación.
público durante un periodo de comentarios del público
que concluye el 28 de agosto de 2019.                           INFORMACIÓN GENERAL SOBRE EL SITIO

Se organizará una reunión pública durante el periodo de         Descripción del Sitio
comentarios del público para presentar las conclusiones
de la RI y el FFS, explicar mejor las razones por las que       El Sitio se encuentra en una zona de uso mixto, que se
se propone la Alternativa preferida, y recibir                  ha identificado como una comunidad con
comentarios del público. La reunión pública incluirá            preocupaciones acerca de la justicia ambiental. El Sitio
una presentación a cargo de la EPA sobre la Alternativa         consta de la sede de la antigua fábrica de pesticidas Kil-
preferida y otras opciones de limpieza.                         Tone Company, y la extensión del área de la
                                                                contaminación. Se fabricaron pesticidas en la Propiedad
Encontrará la información acerca de la reunión pública          desde 1917 hasta alrededor de 1933. Las emisiones de
y el envío de los comentarios escritos en el cuadro de          plomo y arsénico de las operaciones de fabricación de
texto “Marque su calendario” de la página 1. Los                pesticidas contaminaron la propiedad misma, y las
comentarios recibidos en la reunión pública, así como           áreas cercanas a la Propiedad. Los muestreos han
los comentarios escritos recibidos durante el período de        detectado suelos contaminados con plomo y arsénico en
comentarios del público, se documentarán en la sección          al menos 57 propiedades residenciales y unas 40 no
“Resumen de la respuesta” del Registro de Decisión              residenciales cercanas a la antigua fábrica de pesticidas
(ROD). El ROD es el documento que explica qué                   Kil-Tone Company.
alternativa se seleccionó y el fundamento de la
selección del remedio.                                          La antigua fábrica de Kil-Tone Company está
                                                                delimitada al norte por East Chestnut Avenue, al este
                                                            2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

por South Sixth Street, al sur por Paul Street y al oeste       se observa en todas direcciones, haciéndose más escaso
por South East Boulevard. Hay propiedades                       el desarrollo al alejarse del centro urbano.
residenciales y comerciales ubicadas en toda el área. El
enfoque de este Plan propuesto se centra en las                 Historia del Sitio
propiedades no residenciales afectadas por las
emisiones de plomo y arsénico provenientes de la                La ex Kil-Tone Company inició sus operaciones de
Propiedad.                                                      fabricación de pesticidas en la Propiedad en 1917 o
                                                                aproximadamente en dicha fecha. La empresa fabricaba
La Propiedad comprende aproximadamente cuatro                   pesticidas a base de arsénico. Los compuestos
acres y actualmente se halla ocupada por una empresa            específicos fabricados por la empresa incluían arseniato
comercial que se dedica a fabricar e instalar letreros          de plomo, púrpura de Londres y verde de París.
para negocios. La Propiedad está desarrollada y tiene
un inmueble de múltiples secciones en su costado oeste.         En 1926, la Kil-Tone Company vendió la Propiedad a
El resto de la Propiedad, antiguamente sin pavimentar,          Lucas Kil-Tone Co., una empresa de Nueva Jersey, la
fue pavimentada (asfaltada) por la EPA en diciembre de          cual continuó fabricando pesticidas en la Propiedad
2016/enero 2017 como parte de una medida de                     hasta 1933 o alrededor de dicha fecha, cuando cesaron
eliminación efectuada por la EPA en la Propiedad. El            las operaciones de fabricación de pesticidas en la
área pavimentada se utiliza para estacionar vehículos,          Propiedad. La empresa actualmente dueña de la
almacenar materiales y como área donde dejar equipo             Propiedad es Urban Manufacturing, LLC, que compró
sin usar y piezas de acero de gran tamaño.                      la propiedad en 2008, y arrienda la Propiedad a Urban
                                                                Sign & Crane, Inc., la cual opera en la Propiedad un
Al norte y adyacente a la Propiedad se encuentra la             negocio comercial de fabricación e instalación de
planta industrial de Lerco Fuel Co. Inc. (Lerco) que            letreros.
consta de dos lotes. La propiedad de Lerco se usaba
antiguamente para almacenar combustible y como                  Ha habido varias investigaciones en el Sitio, incluida
centro de distribución pero ahora está desocupada.              una investigación a cargo del NJDEP, que se inició en
                                                                agosto de 2014. El programa de eliminación de la EPA
Un sumidero de alcantarillado ubicado en la esquina             también ha realizado evaluaciones del Sitio. Las
noroeste de la Propiedad recibe aguas pluviales de toda         muestras recolectadas durante la investigación del
la Propiedad y descarga en la cabeza del canal Tarkiln,         NJDEP encontraron arsénico en la Propiedad en
situada frente a South East Boulevard y                         concentraciones hasta de 740 miligramos por kilogramo
aproximadamente a 400 pies de la Propiedad. El canal            (mg/kg) en las 6 pulgadas superiores del suelo y hasta
Tarkiln es un afluente del canal Parvin, que fluye hacia        de 5,800 mg/kg a profundidad (de 3.5 a 4 pies debajo
el río Maurice, ubicado aproximadamente a 3.5 millas            de la superficie del suelo). En las muestras de aguas
de la Propiedad.                                                subterráneas recolectadas por el NJDEP de pozos
                                                                temporarios en la Propiedad se hallaron altas
El vecindario situado al noroeste, norte y este de la           concentraciones de arsénico de 8.1 microgramos por
Propiedad consta de diversas propiedades residenciales          litro (μg/L) a 14,000 μg/L. Este descubrimiento impulsó
con algunas propiedades comerciales e industriales,             al NJDEP a remitir el caso de este Sitio a la EPA el
como se muestra en la Figura 1. Hay también espacios            14 de noviembre de 2014. Nótese que esta agua
abiertos (parques del vecindario y lotes desocupados)           subterránea no es la fuente de agua potable de la
intercalados en toda esta área. Las propiedades no              comunidad; la City of Vineland Water Utility
residenciales que se abordarán como parte de la OU2             suministra agua municipal a la comunidad y este
pueden estar adyacentes o cerca de propiedades                  suministro se somete a pruebas regularmente para
residenciales que se tratan como parte de la OU1.               asegurar que cumpla con las normas estatales y
                                                                federales del agua potable.
Más lejos de la Propiedad, el uso de terrenos consiste
principalmente en una mezcla de desarrollo residencial          Se propuso el Sitio para la Lista de Prioridades
y comercial. El núcleo urbano de Vineland se centra             Nacionales (NPL) el 30 de septiembre de 2015 y se
cerca de la intersección de Landis Avenue y County              agregó a la NPL el 5 de abril de 2016.
Route 615 (South East Boulevard). Esta área incluye
viviendas suburbanas y desarrollo comercial ligero que
                                                            3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Se ha encontrado plomo y el arsénico relacionados con             los niveles de la medida. La EPA también dio
las operaciones de la antigua fábrica de Kil-Tone                 instrucciones a los propietarios y/o residentes de estas
Company en los suelos de propiedades residenciales y              propiedades residenciales de que no perturbaran la
no residenciales cerca de la Propiedad. También se han            nueva capa limpia de tierra vegetal y/o el pasto hasta
encontrado estos contaminantes en el sedimento a lo               que se pudiera implementar un remedio permanente.
largo de toda la extensión del canal Tarkiln a la                 Estas medidas preventivas culminaron en junio de
confluencia con el canal Parvin, así como en terrenos             2016.
inundables relacionados. También se detectó la
presencia de plomo y arsénico en las aguas subterráneas           Más adelante en 2016, se abordó a unas seis
en la Propiedad o en su cercanía.                                 propiedades residenciales adicionales situadas en
                                                                  terrenos inundables del canal Tarkiln para prevenir la
Geología e hidrogeología del sitio                                exposición y/o la migración de la contaminación, y se
                                                                  instalaron cercas para restringir el acceso a partes de
El Sitio se encuentra en la Provincia de planicie costera         dos conjuntos de viviendas fiscales a lo largo del
de depósitos fluviales y marinos no consolidados. El              Tarkiln. Además, se colocó una cubierta de tierra y
suelo en el Sitio comúnmente incluye arenas gruesas,              pavimento en una parte de la Propiedad misma para
limos arenosos gruesos, arenas limosas gruesas, arcillas          prevenir una mayor migración de la contaminación
arenosas gruesas y arena. El material de relleno se               desde la Propiedad hasta que se pueda implementar un
encontraba rutinariamente en las perforaciones de                 remedio permanente.
suelos. La unidad hidrogeológica en el Sitio es el
acuífero Kirkwood-Cohansey. La profundidad del agua               Unidad Operable Uno
en la Propiedad es de aproximadamente 6 pies bajo la
superficie de la tierra, pero fluctúa hasta al menos 15           El 12 de septiembre de 2016, la EPA seleccionó un
pies bajo la superficie de la tierra en toda la OU2.              remedio para la OU1 del Sitio, el cual abarca el suelo
La topografía del área del Sitio, por lo general, es plana.       contaminado en las propiedades residenciales situadas
Gran parte del área que rodea la Propiedad está cubierta          en la cercanía de la Propiedad. El remedio de la he OU1
por superficies impenetrables como casas, calles,                 incluye excavar una cantidad que se estima en unas
entradas de vehículos, edificios, estacionamientos y              21,000 yardas cúbicas de tierra contaminada
construcciones urbanas.                                           principalmente con arsénico y plomo de
                                                                  aproximadamente 57 propiedades residenciales;
LAS MEDIDAS INICIALES DE RESPUESTA Y                              desechar fuera del sitio la tierra contaminada; rellenar
LA UNIDAD OPERATIVA UNO                                           las áreas excavadas con relleno limpio y restaurar las
                                                                  propiedades afectadas.
Medidas iniciales de respuesta
                                                                  Las actividades de remediación para las propiedades
Desde enero de 2015 hasta febrero de 2016, la EPA                 residenciales incluidas en la OU1 se han desarrollado
efectuó varios muestreos en el Sitio procurando definir           desde 2017. La remediación de 6 propiedades iniciales
la naturaleza y la extensión de la contaminación en               se terminó en 2018, y se encuentra en curso la
suelos residenciales y no residenciales, agua                     remediación de 27 propiedades adicionales. Se está
subterránea, agua superficial y sedimento. Conforme a             terminando actualmente el diseño de una tercera fase de
los resultados de los muestreos de la EPA en 2015 y               actividades de remediación en la OU1 y se prevé que la
2016 y el muestreo anterior efectuado por el NJDEP, la            remediación de dichas propiedades comience en 2020.
EPA inició una medida de eliminación en abril de 2016
a fin de prevenir la exposición al suelo superficial              RESUMEN DE LA INVESTIGACIÓN DE
contaminado con plomo y arsénico en las propiedades               REMEDIACIÓN DE LA UNIDAD OPERABLE
residenciales situadas en las cercanías de la Propiedad.
                                                                  El informe de la RI de la OU2 finalizó en agosto de
La medida de eliminación de la EPA consistió en                   2018, y se concluyó el FFS Final en julio de 2019. La
colocar una capa superficial de tierra vegetal para               RI y el FFS en conjunto forman la base de este Plan
promover el crecimiento de pasto en partes de las 26              propuesto. El enfoque de la RI de la OU2 estuvo en la
propiedades residenciales con concentraciones de                  contaminación de suelos de las propiedades no
arsénico y/o plomo en suelos superficiales que superan            residenciales. También se obtuvo información adicional
                                                              4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

sobre la profundidad hasta el agua subterránea, como se           NRDCSRS de 19 mg/kg para el arsénico y 400 ppm u
describe a continuación.                                          800 ppm para el plomo, dependiendo del uso futuro.
                                                                  Los IGWSSL predeterminados de Nueva Jersey son de
Suelos                                                            19 mg/kg para el arsénico y de 90 mg/kg para el plomo.
                                                                  También se hallaron concentraciones elevadas
Muestreo de suelos del Nivel A                                    esporádicas de contaminantes aparte de arsénico y
                                                                  plomo, particularmente hidrocarburos aromáticos
En agosto de 2017 se efectuó una ronda inicial de                 policíclicos (PAH, por sus siglas en inglés), pero los
muestreos de suelos de la OU2 (Nivel A) en tres                   datos no sugirieron la existencia de ningún otro COPC
propiedades, a saber, la Propiedad misma y dos                    relacionado con el sitio.
propiedades adyacentes, la propiedad de Lerco al norte
y una propiedad desocupada situada al sur. El propósito           Muestreo de suelos del Nivel B
de realizar esta ronda inicial de muestreos en la antigua
fábrica Kil-Tone y en otras dos propiedades adyacentes            Entre septiembre de 2017 y marzo de 2018, se realizó
era determinar la naturaleza y extensión de la                    una segunda ronda de muestreo de suelos de la OU2
contaminación existente en dichas propiedades, así                (Nivel B) aproximadamente en 50 propiedades
como determinar la lista completa de contaminantes                residenciales cerca de la Propiedad. La estrategia de
presentes en los suelos que puedan relacionarse con las           muestreo fue similar al evento de Nivel A; se
operaciones de la ex Kil-Tone Company, además de                  recolectaron las muestras de cuatro intervalos discretos
arsénico y plomo.                                                 de seis pulgadas a una profundidad de 0-2 pies bajo la
                                                                  superficie de la tierra, y se recolectaron muestras
Se recolectaron muestras de suelos mediante al menos              compuestas de dos intervalos a 2-4 y 4-6 pies bajo la
ocho perforaciones por propiedad utilizando equipo                superficie de la tierra. Conforme a los resultados del
perforador de empuje directo. Se recolectó tierra a poca          muestreo de Nivel A, se analizaron las muestras de
profundidad (0-2 pies bajo la superficie de la tierra) de         suelos del Nivel B en busca de metales y se analizaron
cuatro intervalos de seis pulgadas y muestras                     también dos intervalos, de 0.5-1 y 2-4 pies bajo la
compuestas de tres intervalos a mayor profundidad (2-             superficie de la tierra, en busca de PAH para
4, 4-6 y 6-10 pies bajo la superficie de la tierra) de cada       complementar los resultados del muestreo de Nivel A.
perforación para análisis de laboratorio. Se recolectó
una muestra adicional de tierra de cada perforación               Resumen de la investigación de suelos
justo sobre la napa freática. Se analizaron las muestras
para determinar la lista completa de contaminantes                Los resultados del Nivel B confirmaron que el arsénico
potencialmente preocupantes (COPC, por sus siglas en              y el plomo eran los principales COPC en el Sitio. Las
inglés), como compuestos orgánicos volátiles,                     concentraciones más altas de arsénico y plomo halladas
compuestos orgánicos semivolátiles, bifenilos                     durante el muestreo de la OU2 estaban en la Propiedad
policlorados, pesticidas y metales, incluidos el plomo y          misma. Estas concentraciones presentan gamas de 0.93
el arsénico.                                                      a 45,900 mg/kg para el arsénico de 2.1 a 91,700 mg/kg
Se compararon los resultados contra las Normas de                 para el plomo. Las muestras de suelos provenientes de
Remediación de Suelos de Contacto Directo                         propiedades adyacentes y cercanas situadas al norte, sur
Residencial de Nueva Jersey (RDCSRS), las Normas de               y cerca de la cabeza del canal Tarkiln al suroeste
Remediación de Suelos de Contacto Directo No                      también presentan concentraciones elevadas de arsénico
Residencial de Nueva Jersey (NRDCSRS) y los Niveles               (hasta 15,900 mg/kg) y plomo (hasta 16,100 mg/kg). El
de Análisis de Impacto en Suelos de Agua Subterránea              impacto del arsénico y del plomo en las propiedades de
de Nueva Jersey (IGWSSL). Se encontró que el                      la OU2 va disminuyendo lateralmente al alejarse de la
arsénico y el plomo eran los únicos contaminantes que             Propiedad (veáse la Figura 2).
superaban regularmente las RDCSRS y/o las




                                                              5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        menor profundidad en la Propiedad, específicamente en
                                                                        el área donde se origina el canal Tarkiln. La
        ¿QUÉ ES UNA “AMENAZA PRINCIPAL”?
                                                                        profundidad promedio hasta el agua subterránea es de
El NCP establece la expectativa de que la EPA utilice un                aproximadamente 7 pies bajo la superficie de la tierra
tratamiento para abordar las amenazas principales que presenta          en las propiedades situadas directamente al norte de la
un Sitio, siempre que se pueda poner en práctica [NCP                   Propiedad y es de aproximadamente 8 pies bajo la
Sección 300.430(a)(1)(iii)(A)]. El concepto de “amenaza                 superficie de la tierra en las propiedades directamente al
principal” se aplica a la caracterización de “materiales fuente”        sur de la Propiedad. La profundidad hasta el agua
en un Sitio Superfund. Un material fuente es material que
                                                                        subterránea aumenta al alejarse de la Propiedad, y lejos
incluye o contiene sustancias peligrosas o contaminantes que
actúan como un reservorio para la migración de la                       del canal Tarkiln y promedia aproximadamente 13.5
contaminación hacia las aguas subterráneas, las aguas                   pies bajo la superficie de la tierra al norte de Cherry
superficiales o el aire, o bien, actúan como un fuente de               Street.
exposición directa. Las aguas subterráneas contaminadas, por
lo general, no se consideran un material fuente; no obstante, los       Se hallaron concentraciones elevadas de plomo y/o
líquidos de fase no acuosa (NAPL) en las aguas subterráneas             arsénico en algunas propiedades bajo la profundidad de
pueden considerarse como un material fuente. Los desechos
que son una amenaza principal son aquellos materiales fuente
                                                                        la napa freática del agua subterránea, incluso en la
considerados altamente tóxicos o móviles que, generalmente,             Propiedad y en Lerco.
no se pueden contener de un modo confiable o que podrían
presentar un riesgo importante para la salud humana o el                AMENAZAS PRINCIPALES
medioambiente en caso de exposición. La decisión de tratar
estos desechos se toma según el sitio específico mediante un            La propiedad de Kil-Tone misma ha actuado como
análisis detallado de las alternativas usando los nueve criterios
                                                                        fuente de contaminación de plomo y arsénico en otras
para seleccionar remedios. Este análisis aporta la base para
determinar un hallazgo respaldado por la ley de que el remedio          propiedades, en el agua subterránea y en el agua
emplea tratamiento como elemento principal.                             superficial, y los riesgos de cáncer relacionados con la
                                                                        contaminación en esta propiedad superan 10-3. Por lo
                                                                        tanto, la contaminación del suelo en esta propiedad
                                                                        sería considerada PTW.
  Con algunas excepciones (principalmente en
  propiedades del Nivel A), el impacto del arsénico y del
                                                                        RESUMEN DE LOS RIESGOS DEL SITIO
  plomo se encontró comúnmente en suelos de poca
  profundidad, sobre 4 pies bajo la superficie de la tierra.
                                                                        Como parte de la RI y el FFS, se realizó una evaluación
  Esto concuerda con el modelo conceptual del sitio
                                                                        de riesgos para la salud humana (HHRA) para estimar
  (CSM, por sus siglas en inglés) correspondiente al
                                                                        los efectos actuales y potenciales a futuro de los
  Sitio, el cual sugiere que el flujo superficial
                                                                        contaminantes en la salud humana. Una HHRA es un
  (escorrentía) y la dispersión en el aire (polvo) eran los
                                                                        análisis de los posibles efectos adversos en la salud
  principales mecanismos de transporte de contaminantes
                                                                        humana, causados por la exposición a sustancias
  desde la Propiedad. El impacto en suelos a mayor
                                                                        peligrosas cuando no existen medidas para controlar o
  profundidad encontrado en algunas propiedades
                                                                        mitigar dichas exposiciones en el uso actual y futuro del
  cercanas puede deberse al uso de material de relleno,
                                                                        sitio.
  almacenamiento o desecho de productos
  manufacturados y/o materiales de desecho de la
                                                                        Las estimaciones de riesgos de cáncer y peligros no
  Propiedad.
                                                                        cancerígenos para la salud en la HHRA se basan en
                                                                        situaciones actuales o potenciales a futuro en
  Agua subterránea
                                                                        situaciones de exposición máxima razonable y se
                                                                        desarrollaron teniendo en cuenta diversas estimaciones
  Aunque la RI de la OU2 se enfocó en la contaminación
                                                                        de protección de la salud respecto de las
  de suelos, se registró la profundidad de la napa freática
                                                                        concentraciones, frecuencia y duración de la exposición
  durante la instalación de perforaciones de suelos en la
                                                                        de una persona a las sustancias químicas identificadas
  OU2. La profundidad promedio hasta el agua
                                                                        como COPC, además de la toxicidad de estos
  subterránea en la Propiedad es de aproximadamente 6
                                                                        contaminantes.
  pies bajo la superficie de la tierra. La profundidad hasta
  el agua subterránea puede encontrarse en puntos de

                                                                    6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

También se realizó una Evaluación de Riesgo                    potenciales a los COPC en la superficie y en vías
Ecológico por Análisis de Nivel (SLERA) para la OU2.           combinadas de suelos superficiales y subsuelos.

Evaluación de riesgos para la salud humana                     En cuanto a los COPC aparte del plomo, se evaluaron
                                                               dos tipos de efectos tóxicos para la salud en la
Se empleó un proceso de evaluación de riesgos para la          evaluación de riesgos: riesgo de cáncer y peligro no
salud humana de cuatro pasos para examinar los riesgos         cancerígeno. Las estimaciones de riesgos de cáncer
de cáncer y peligros no cancerígenos para la salud             calculadas para cada receptor se compararon con la
relacionados con el sitio. El proceso está conformado          gama de riesgo objetivo de la EPA de 1x10-6 (uno en un
por los siguientes cuatro pasos: identificación de             millón) a 1 x 10-4 (uno en diez mil). Las estimaciones
peligros, evaluación de la exposición, evaluación de la        del índice de peligro (HI) no cancerígeno se
toxicidad y caracterización de riesgos (para obtener más       compararon con el valor de umbral objetivo de la EPA
detalles sobre el proceso de evaluación de riesgos,            de 1.
consulte el recuadro: “¿Qué es un riesgo y cómo se
calcula?”).                                                    El resultado de la evaluación de riesgo indicó que, de
                                                               las tres propiedades evaluadas, la antigua fábrica de
Conforme a la estrategia de la OU1, se seleccionaron           Kil-tone Company tenía riesgos de cáncer de 3x10-3
tres propiedades de la OU2 para realizar una evaluación        para los residentes futuros, 8x10-4 para trabajadores
simplificada del riesgo. Estas tres propiedades se             industriales y 2x10-4 para trabajadores de servicios de
consideran representativas de la gama de propiedades           servicios públicos, superando todos estos la gama de
incluida en la RI de la OU2. Dos de las propiedades            riesgo objetivo de cáncer de la EPA. La segunda
seleccionadas son representativas de las propiedades           propiedad estuvo dentro de la gama de riesgo de cáncer
con una contaminación relativamente profunda (bajo la          para todos los receptores, aunque en los límites
napa freática) probablemente debido al uso de material         superiores de la gama para trabajadores de servicios
de relleno, incluyendo productos manufacturados y/o            públicos y niños residentes de 1x10-4. La tercera
material de desecho de la antigua fábrica de Kil- Tone         propiedad estuvo dentro de la gama de riesgo de cáncer
Company. La tercera propiedad es representativa de las         en cuanto a todos los receptores. Los riesgos elevados
propiedades afectadas por las operaciones de la antigua        de cáncer se debieron principalmente a la exposición al
fábrica de Kil-Tone a través de flujo superficial y/o          arsénico en el suelo superficial.
dispersión aérea de la contaminación, y las propiedades
con efectos relativamente a poca profundidad (sobre la         Los riesgos no cancerígenos totales para niños
napa freática). Además, dos de las propiedades tienen          residentes futuros en las tres propiedades superó el
un uso futuro razonablemente previsto como residencial         umbral objetivo de la EPA de uno, con valores que
mientras una (con contaminación profunda) se prevé             oscilaban entre 3 y 69. El índice de riesgo no
que siga siendo no residencial. Por lo tanto, los              cancerígeno total (HI) también superó el umbral
resultados de la evaluación de riesgo de estas                 objetivo de la EPA para los obreros de la construcción
propiedades son aplicables a todas las propiedades de la       en las dos propiedades con contaminación a mayor
OU2.                                                           profundidad. El umbral de riesgo no cancerígeno fue
                                                               superado para todos los receptores potenciales en la
Sobre la base del uso actual y el uso futuro previsto de       antigua fábrica de Kil-tone Company. La superación de
los terrenos, los receptores evaluados en la HHRA              los límites del HI en estas propiedades se basó en la
incluyeron a futuro un niño residente y un adulto              exposición al arsénico en el suelo.
residente, un trabajador industrial, un trabajador de
servicios públicos y un obrero de la construcción.             También se modeló el plomo en la sangre utilizando
Aunque las propiedades están en zonas definidas como           concentraciones de plomo en los suelos de las tres
no residenciales, muchas están adyacentes a áreas              propiedades. Se utilizaron el modelo de Metodología de
residenciales y, basándonos en conversaciones con el           Plomo en Adultos (ALM) para los receptores adultos, y
comité de planificación del Distrito de Vineland,              los niveles de plomo en la sangre previstos en el
podrían redefinirse como distintas zonas en el futuro.         Modelo Integrado Biocinético de Absorción de la
Para cada situación, se evaluaron exposiciones                 Exposición (IEUBK) en los niños residentes futuros.
                                                               Las concentraciones de plomo en el suelo presente en la

                                                           7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                     ¿QUÉ ES UN RIESGO Y CÓMO SE CALCULA?
antigua fábrica de Kil-Tone Company dieron como
                                                              Una evaluación de riesgos para la salud humana de referencia de
resultado niveles de plomo en la sangre que superaban         Superfund es un análisis de los posibles efectos adversos para la salud,
el objetivo regional de la EPA (no más de 5% sobre 5          causados por las emisiones de sustancias peligrosas de un sitio cuando
µg/dl) para trabajadores industriales, obreros de la          no existen medidas para controlar o mitigar dichas emisiones en los
construcción y residentes futuros. Ninguno de los             usos actuales y futuros de la tierra. Se utiliza un proceso de cuatro
                                                              pasos para evaluar los riesgos para la salud humana relacionados con el
receptores superó los niveles objetivo de plomo en la         sitio en situaciones de exposición máxima razonable.
sangre utilizando concentraciones de plomo en el suelo        Identificación de peligros: En este paso, se identifican los
de la segunda o la tercera propiedad.                         contaminantes de posible peligro (COPC) en el sitio, en diversos
                                                              medios (es decir, suelo, aguas subterráneas, aguas superficiales y aire)
                                                              sobre la base de factores como toxicidad, frecuencia de presencia,
Los niveles de contaminación hallados en las tres
                                                              destino y transporte de los contaminantes en el medioambiente,
propiedades generalmente son similares a aquellos             concentraciones de los contaminantes en medios específicos,
encontrados en otras propiedades residenciales en las         movilidad, persistencia y bioacumulación.
inmediaciones de la propiedad de la antigua fábrica de        Evaluación de la exposición: En este paso, se evalúan las diferentes
Kil-Tone Company y superan las concentraciones de             vías de exposición a través de las cuales las personas podrían estar
                                                              expuestas a los contaminantes identificados en el paso anterior.
referencia. Los resultados de la evaluación de riesgos se     Algunos ejemplos de rutas de exposición incluyen la ingestión
consideran representativos de todas las propiedades           accidental de suelo contaminado y aguas subterráneas contaminadas y
residenciales afectadas en las inmediaciones de la            el contacto dérmico con dichos medios contaminados. Los factores
propiedad de la antigua fábrica de Kil-Tone Company           relacionados con la evaluación de la exposición incluyen, entre otros,
                                                              las concentraciones en los medios específicos a los que las personas
y, por lo tanto, son aplicables a la OU2 en su totalidad.
                                                              podrían estar expuestas, y la frecuencia y duración de tal exposición.
                                                              Utilizando estos factores, se calcula una situación de “exposición
Evaluación de Riesgo Ecológico por Nivel de
                                                              máxima razonable”, que representa el nivel más alto de exposición
Análisis
                                                              humana que podría preverse razonablemente que ocurriera.

Se realizó una SLERA para OU2 en 2017 a fin de                Evaluación de la toxicidad: En este paso, se determinan los tipos de
evaluar el potencial de riesgo para los receptores            efectos adversos para la salud asociados con la exposición a las
ecológicos presentes en el Sitio. Las propiedades en la       sustancias químicas, y la relación entre la magnitud de la exposición y
                                                              la gravedad de los efectos adversos. Los posibles efectos para la salud
OU2 están desarrolladas en su mayor parte, y no               son específicos de cada sustancia química y pueden incluir el riesgo de
contienen hábitat ecológico apto, pero se determinó que       desarrollar cáncer en algún momento de la vida u otros peligros no
unas pocas propiedades tienen hábitat potencialmente          cancerígenos para la salud, tales como cambios en las funciones
apto ecológicamente colina arriba. Se evaluaron tres          normales de los órganos del cuerpo (por ejemplo, cambios en la
                                                              eficacia del sistema inmunitario). Algunas sustancias químicas tienen
unidades de exposición (EU) distintivas en la SLERA,          la capacidad de provocar cáncer y peligros no cancerígenos para la
dos de las cuales (EU-1 y EU-2) consistieron en               salud.
propiedades de la OU2 y la tercera (EU-3) incluyó el          Caracterización de riesgos: Este paso resume y combina los resultados
canal Tarkiln y sus terrenos inundables hacia su              de la exposición y los exámenes de la toxicidad para brindar una
                                                              evaluación cuantitativa de los riesgos del sitio para todos los COPC.
confluencia con el canal Parvin.
                                                              Las exposiciones se evalúan según el riesgo posible de desarrollar
                                                              cáncer y de los peligros para la salud no cancerígenos. La posibilidad
La SLERA concluyó que existe el potencial para                de que una persona desarrolle cáncer se expresa como una
efectos ecológicos adversos en cada EU debido a               probabilidad. Por ejemplo, un riesgo de cáncer de 10-4 significa un
metales, principalmente arsénico, y algunos PAH. En           “riesgo de cáncer sobre uno en diez mil” o que se puede ver un caso
vista de los resultados de la SLERA, se realizará una         de cáncer adicional en una población de 10,000 personas, como
                                                              resultado de la exposición a los contaminantes del sitio, en las
Evaluación de Riesgo Ecológico de Referencia para la
                                                              condiciones identificadas en la evaluación de la exposición. Las
EU-3 como parte de la OU4 del Sitio.                          reglamentaciones actuales de Superfund acerca de las exposiciones
                                                              identifican la gama para determinar si se necesita una medida de
En cuanto a la EU-1 y la EU-2, se efectuó un análisis         remediación como un riesgo de cáncer excesivo para una persona de
                                                              por vida de 10-4 a 10-6, que corresponde a un riesgo de cáncer sobre
adicional de riesgo ecológico para definir mejor los
                                                              uno en diez mil a uno en un millón.
hallazgos de la SLERA. En este análisis adicional             En cuanto a los efectos para la salud no cancerígenos, se calcula un
también se encontró que el arsénico y el plomo eran los       “índice de peligro” (HI). El concepto clave para un HI no cancerígeno
principales contaminantes preocupantes para los               es que existe un “umbral” (medido como un HI inferior o igual a 1)
receptores ecológicos. Indicó que el arsénico presenta        por debajo del cual no se prevén que ocurran peligros para la salud no
un potencial de efectos adversos para las comunidades         cancerígenos. La meta de protección es de 10-6 para el riesgo de cáncer
terrestres de plantas e invertebrados de la tierra, y el      y un HI de 1 en el caso del peligro no cancerígeno para la salud. Las
                                                              sustancias químicas que superan el riesgo de cáncer de 10-4 o un HI
                                                              de 1, por lo general, son aquellas que requieren una medida de
                                                            8 remediación en el sitio.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

plomo presenta un potencial de efectos adversos para              arsénico y plomo. Se proponen las siguientes Metas de
las plantas terrestres. También se encontró que hay un            Remediación Preliminar:
mínimo potencial de efectos adversos para las
poblaciones de receptores de fauna salvaje.                                                        Arsénico   Plomo
                                                                                                   (mg/kg)    (mg/kg)
Resumen                                                           Suelo residencial                19         400
                                                                  Suelo no residencial             19         800
La EPA considera que es necesaria la Alternativa                  Impacto en el agua subterránea   19         90
preferida resumida en este Plan propuesto o una de las            Aspecto ecológico (Plantas)      69         500
otras medidas activas contempladas en el Plan                     Aspecto ecológico                93.7       3,162
propuesto, a fin de proteger la salud pública o el                (Invertebrados de la tierra)
bienestar y el medioambiente de emisiones concretas o
amenazadas de sustancias peligrosas en el
medioambiente.                                                    Las PRG residenciales, no residenciales y de impacto al
                                                                  agua subterránea se basan en las Normas de
OBJETIVOS   DE               LA        MEDIDA          DE         Remediación de Nueva Jersey (N.J.A.C. 7:26d).
REMEDIACIÓN                                                       Conforme a las Normas de Remediación de Nueva
                                                                  Jersey, la EPA está desarrollando un valor de impacto
La contaminación del suelo en propiedades no                      al agua subterránea específico del sitio para el plomo
residenciales está presente en el suelo superficial y/o en        que se incorporará en el Registro de Decisiones de la
el subsuelo. Los siguientes objetivos de la medida de             OU2. Las PRG de plantas e invertebrados de la tierra
remediación (RAO) para el suelo contaminado logran                mencionadas anteriormente se basan en los resultados
un grado de limpieza que asegura la protección de la              de los análisis ecológicos efectuados para la OU2.
salud humana y del medioambiente:                                 Además de los valores numéricos anteriores, la meta
                                                                  general de remediación para el plomo en las
    •   Prevenir riesgos actuales y potenciales futuros           propiedades con un uso futuro previsto razonablemente
        inaceptables para receptores humanos debido al            como residencial será una concentración de plomo
        contacto directo con el suelo contaminado.                superficial promedio en toda la propiedad de menos de
    •   Prevenir la migración de los contaminantes                200 mg/kg. Este nivel de limpieza se basa en pautas de
        preocupantes (COC) de las propiedades de la               nivel de plomo en la sangre actualizadas recientemente
        OU2 a otras áreas a través del flujo superficial          provenientes de la Oficina de Tierras y Manejo de
        y la dispersión aérea.                                    Emergencias (Directriz 9200.2-167).
    •   Prevenir o reducir la migración de los COC del
        suelo al agua subterránea; y
    •   Prevenir riesgos actuales y potenciales futuros           RESUMEN DE LAS ALTERNATIVAS DE
        inaceptables para receptores ecológicos debido            REMEDIACIÓN
        al contacto directo con el suelo contaminado.
                                                                  La CERCLA exige que cada recurso seleccionado
Para lograr los RAO, se utilizarán Metas de                       proteja la salud humana y el medioambiente, sea
Remediación Preliminar (PRG) basadas en el uso                    económicamente viable y utilice soluciones
previsto razonablemente de la propiedad (residencial o            permanentes, tecnologías de tratamiento alternativas y
no residencial 1), la profundidad de la contaminación             alternativas de recuperación de recursos en la mayor
para el impacto en el agua subterránea, y el potencial de         medida que resulte práctico. Además, si va a quedar en
efectos ecológicos adversos. Conforme a los resultados            el sitio alguna sustancia o contaminante que presente
del RI, la BHHRA y los análisis ecológicos, los                   peligro, debe cumplirse toda norma federal y estatal
contaminantes preocupantes para la OU2 del Sitio son              promulgada, o requisito, criterio o limitación que sea
                                                                  legalmente aplicable o pertinente que corresponda. La
                                                                  CERCLA también incluye la preferencia del uso de un
1
  Nótese que aunque la OU2 abarca propiedades no                  tratamiento como elemento principal para la reducción
residenciales, basándonos en las conversaciones con el            de la toxicidad, la movilidad o el volumen de las
Municipio de Vineland, el uso previsto razonablemente de la       sustancias peligrosas.
mayor parte de las propiedades de la OU2 es residencial.
                                                              9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Se identificaron las posibles tecnologías aplicables a la             •   Monitoreo a largo plazo
remediación del suelo y se seleccionaron según su
eficacia, posibilidad de implementación y criterios de            Con esta alternativa, se necesitaría excavar unas 8,650
costos, enfatizando la eficacia. Aquellas tecnologías             yardas cúbicas de tierra contaminada para instalar tapas
que pasaron el análisis inicial se integraron                     en propiedades individuales de la OU2. Algunas
posteriormente en alternativas de remediación.                    propiedades tienen áreas pavimentadas existentes que
                                                                  podrían actuar ya como cubiertas de ingeniería y así
De las aproximadamente 50 propiedades no                          requerir solo mantenimiento. Se estima que los
residenciales muestreadas como parte de la RI de la               componentes activos de esta medida de remediación
OU2, la EPA estima que aproximadamente 40                         tardarían aproximadamente 15 meses en
requieren remediación. Se necesitará más muestreo                 implementarse. El costo del valor presente estimado es
durante el diseño del remedio de la OU2 para definir la           de $8.1 millones. Se necesitarían controles
extensión de la contaminación en cada propiedad, y                institucionales en forma de avisos de escritura de obra
podría ser que se identificaran otras propiedades                 nueva para prevenir que se alteren las cubiertas de
durante este proceso.                                             ingeniería. Además, se necesitaría el monitoreo a largo
                                                                  plazo en forma de inspecciones visuales de las
Los siguientes plazos para la construcción no incluyen            propiedades afectadas para asegurar que sigan siendo
el tiempo para diseñar un remedio, llegar a un acuerdo            eficaces los controles de ingeniería.
con las partes responsables, si están identificadas, ni el
tiempo para obtener los contratos necesarios. Todos los           Dado que esta alternativa haría que quedaran
costos se calcularon usando el factor de descuento del            contaminantes en el sitio sobre los niveles que permiten
siete por ciento.                                                 el uso irrestricto y la exposición ilimitada, la CERCLA
                                                                  exige que el Sitio sea evaluado al menos una vez cada
Alternativa 1: Ninguna acción                                     cinco años.

El NCP solicita que se evalúe una alternativa de                  Costo de capital total:           $7,961,000
“ninguna acción” para establecer una referencia para la           Operación y
comparación con otras alternativas de remediación.                mantenimiento anual:              $10,000
Según esta alternativa, no se tomaría ninguna medida              Valor presente total:             $8,091,000
para remediar el suelo contaminado en las propiedades             Plazo de la construcción:         15 meses
no residenciales.
                                                                  Alternativa 3 – Excavación hasta la profundidad de
Costo de capital total:                   $0                      la contaminación (sin exceder la profundidad de la
Operación y                                                       napa freática de agua subterránea), controles de
mantenimiento anual:                      $0                      ingeniería y controles institucionales
Valor neto presente total:                $0
Plazo:                                    0 años                  Esta alternativa consta de los siguientes componentes
                                                                  principales:
Alternativa 2 – Controles de ingeniería
(Tapar/Controlar el acceso) y controles                               •   Excavación de la tierra que exceda la norma de
institucionales                                                           remediación de suelos específico de la
                                                                          propiedad respectiva, sin superar la
Esta alternativa consta de los siguientes componentes                     profundidad de la napa freática de agua
principales:                                                              subterránea
                                                                      •   Desecho fuera del sitio de la tierra excavada
    •   Instalación y/o mantenimiento de cubiertas de                 •   Controles institucionales
        ingeniería                                                    •   Controles de ingeniería, si es necesario
    •   Desecho fuera del sitio de la tierra excavada                 •   Monitoreo a largo plazo, si es necesario
        antes de instalar tapas
    •   Controles institucionales en forma de avisos de           Con esta alternativa, se excavarían unas 57,800 yardas
        escritura de obra nueva                                   cúbicas de tierra para desecharla fuera del sitio. Se

                                                             10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

estima que el componente activo de la medida de                   que avance más la etapa de RI/FS de la OU3, y que se
remediación tardaría unos 35 meses en implementarse.              determine si se necesita alguna remediación activa para
Esto incluiría movilización/desmovilización, laminado             la OU3. Las actividades de remediación en las
y construcción, excavación y relleno/restauración.                propiedades con impactos bajo la napa freática podrían
                                                                  efectuarse entonces simultáneamente, o de conformidad
El costo del valor presente estimado de esta alternativa          con la medida de remediación seleccionada para la OU3
es de $36 millones. El costo estimado supone que para             del Sitio a fin de evitar la necesidad potencial de
las propiedades de Kil-Tone y Lerco el 75% del                    regresar a una propiedad limpiada previamente en la
material excavado sería descartado como desecho no                OU2.
peligroso y el 25% requeriría descartarlo como desecho
peligroso en un centro permitido adecuadamente. Para              Costo de capital total:         $35,941,000
el resto de las propiedades dentro de la OU2, los costos          Operación y
supuestos de desecho se dividieron en 90% no                      mantenimiento anual:            $7,500
peligrosos y 10% peligrosos.                                      Costo del valor presente:       $36,039,000
                                                                  Plazo de la construcción:       35 meses
Se necesitarían controles institucionales en propiedades
no abordadas por las normas residenciales. Aunque la              Alternativa 4 – Excavación a la profundidad de la
meta sería la total excavación de toda tierra afectada            contaminación, controles de ingeniería y controles
sobre la napa freática, debido a consideraciones de               institucionales
ingeniería y/o acceso, puede ser necesario en algunos
casos usar controles de ingeniería para lograr                    Esta alternativa consta de los siguientes componentes
plenamente los RAO. Si este es el caso, se necesitaría el         principales:
monitoreo a largo plazo en forma de inspecciones
visuales para asegurar que sigan siendo eficaces los                  •   Excavación de toda la tierra que exceda la
controles de ingeniería.                                                  norma de remediación de suelos específica de
                                                                          la parcela correspondiente
Dado que esta alternativa haría que quedaran                          •   Desecho fuera del sitio de la tierra excavada
contaminantes en el sitio sobre los niveles que permiten              •   Controles institucionales
el uso irrestricto y la exposición ilimitada, la CERCLA               •   Controles de ingeniería, si es necesario
exige que se evalúe el Sitio al menos una vez cada                    •   Monitoreo a largo plazo, si es necesario
cinco años.
                                                                  Con esta alternativa, se excavarían unas 86,600 yardas
Nótese que los datos existentes indican concentraciones           cúbicas de tierra para desecharlas fuera del sitio. El
elevadas de COC presentes en suelos bajo la napa                  volumen es más alto que con la Alternativa 3 porque la
freática aproximadamente en 3 de las 40 propiedades de            Alternativa 4 incluye excavar tierra bajo la napa
la OU2. Con la Alternativa 3, esta tierra contaminada             freática. Se estima que el componente activo de la
quedaría en su lugar y se abordaría como parte de la              medida de remediación tardaría unos 50 meses en
OU3 del Sitio, que se relaciona con el agua subterránea.          implementarse incluyendo movilización y
Se ha iniciado recientemente el muestreo de la RI de la           desmovilización, laminado y construcción, excavación
OU3 RI y será valioso el hecho de obtener un                      y relleno/restauración.
entendimiento más completo de la contaminación del
agua subterránea en relación con el sitio durante la RI           El costo del valor presente estimado es de $58.4
de la OU3 a fin de determinar el mejor remedio para los           millones. Tal como se indica en la Alternativa 3, el
suelos bajo la napa freática. En todo caso, al eliminar la        costo estimado supone un costo dividido entre 75% no
tierra afectada sobre la napa freática, la Alternativa 3          peligroso y 25% peligroso para las propiedades de ex
reduciría la migración de la contaminación bajo la napa           Kil-Tone y Lerco. Para el resto de las propiedades
freática.                                                         dentro de la OU2, los costos supuestos de desecho se
                                                                  dividieron en 90% no peligrosos y 10% peligrosos.
Por este motivo, con esta alternativa, la remediación de
cualquier propiedad con contaminación bajo o cerca de             Se necesitarían controles institucionales en propiedades
la napa freática será diferida al menos hasta después de          no abordadas por las normas residenciales. Aunque la

                                                             11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

meta sería la total excavación de toda tierra afectada,
debido a consideraciones de ingeniería y/o acceso,                      LOS NUEVE CRITERIOS DE EVALUACIÓN DE
puede ser necesario en algunos casos usar controles de                               SUPERFUND
ingeniería para lograr plenamente los RAO. Si este es el
                                                                  1. Protección general de la salud humana y el medioambiente:
caso, se necesitaría el monitoreo a largo plazo de los
                                                                  evalúa si una alternativa elimina, reduce o controla amenazas a la salud
controles de ingeniería para asegurar que sigan siendo            pública y al medioambiente y la manera de hacerlo, a través de un
eficaces.                                                         tratamiento, controles institucionales, controles de ingeniería o
                                                                  tratamiento.
Dado que esta alternativa puede hacer que queden                  2. Cumplimiento de los requisitos aplicables, relevantes y
                                                                  apropiados (ARAR): evalúa si la alternativa cumple las leyes y
contaminantes en el sitio sobre los niveles que permiten          reglamentaciones federales y estatales sobre el medioambiente, y otros
el uso irrestricto y la exposición ilimitada, conforme a          requisitos que corresponden al sitio, o si se justifica una exención.
la CERCLA, es posible que se exijan evaluaciones cada             3. Eficacia y permanencia a largo plazo: considera la posibilidad de
cinco años.                                                       que una alternativa mantenga la protección de la salud humana y el
                                                                  medioambiente con el correr del tiempo.
                                                                  4. Reducción de la toxicidad, movilidad o volumen (TMV) de los
Costo de capital total:           $58,311,000                     contaminantes mediante el tratamiento: evalúa el uso del
Operación y                                                       tratamiento de una alternativa para reducir los efectos nocivos de los
mantenimiento anual:              $7,500                          contaminantes principales, su capacidad de moverse en el
Valor presente total:             $58,409,000                     medioambiente y la cantidad de contaminación presente.
                                                                  5. Eficacia a corto plazo: considera la cantidad de tiempo necesaria
Plazo de la construcción:         50 meses                        para implementar una alternativa y los riesgos que presenta dicha
                                                                  alternativa para los trabajadores, la comunidad y el medioambiente
EVALUACIÓN DE LAS ALTERNATIVAS                                    durante la implementación.
                                                                  6. Posibilidad de implementación: considera la factibilidad técnica y
                                                                  administrativa de implementar la alternativa, incluidos factores como
La EPA utiliza nueve criterios para evaluar las
                                                                  la disponibilidad relativa de bienes y servicios.
alternativas de remediación individualmente y                     7. Costo: incluye los costos estimados de capital y de operación y
compararlas entre sí para seleccionar un remedio. Esta            mantenimiento anuales, además del costo del valor presente. El costo
sección del Plan propuesto describe el desempeño                  del valor presente es el costo total de una alternativa con el correr del
relativo de cada alternativa con respecto a los nueve             tiempo, en términos del valor actual del dólar. Se espera que las
                                                                  estimaciones de costos sean exactas, dentro de un rango de +50 a -
criterios y explica la comparación con las otras                  30%.
opciones que se consideran. Los nueve criterios de                8. Aceptación de la agencia estatal/de apoyo: considera si el Estado
evaluación se analizan más adelante. El FFS incluye un            está de acuerdo con los análisis y recomendaciones de la EPA, según
análisis detallado de cada una de las alternativas.               se describe en la RI/FS y en el Plan Propuesto.
                                                                  9. Aceptación de la comunidad: considera si la comunidad local está
                                                                  de acuerdo con los análisis y la alternativa preferida. Los comentarios
Protección general de la salud humana y el                        recibidos respecto del Plan propuesto son un indicador importante de la
medioambiente                                                     aceptación de la comunidad.

Debido a que la Alternativa 1 no abordaría los riesgos
presentados por los contaminantes del suelo, no
protegería la salud humana ni el medioambiente. Por lo
tanto, fue eliminada de mayores consideraciones según
los ocho criterios restantes.                                     protegería eliminando la contaminación bajo la napa
                                                                  freática, resolviendo de manera más completa el RAO
La Alternativa 2 brindaría una protección adecuada de             para prevenir o reducir la migración de COC de la tierra
la salud humana y el medioambiente pues elimina,                  al agua subterránea.
reduce o controla el riesgo al contener, cubrir el suelo o
eliminar suelos contaminados. Los controles de                    Cumplimiento de los ARAR
ingeniería (es decir, cubrir suelos) y un aviso de
escritura evitarían la exposición a niveles de riesgo de          Las Alternativas 2, 3 y 4 abordarían los ARAR
los contaminantes.                                                potenciales de sustancias químicas específicas. La
                                                                  colocación de tapas de suelos a modo de controles de
Las Alternativas 3 y 4 protegerían la salud humana y el           ingeniería y la eliminación de tierra afectada, además
medioambiente eliminando suelos contaminados,                     de la eliminación de tierra que se incluye en la
previniendo así la exposición. La Alternativa 4
                                                             12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternativa 2, resolvería los ARAR potenciales de                plomo, incluido PTW, en los suelos. La tierra excavada
sustancias químicas específicas en este aspecto. La              para descartarla fuera del sitio puede requerir
eliminación de tierra indicada en las Alternativas 3 y 4         tratamiento antes de desecharla.
cumpliría con los ARAR de sustancias químicas
específicas para uso residencial o no residencial. Cada          La Alternativa 2 reduciría la movilidad de la
alternativa activa también lograría los ARAR                     contaminación en cierto grado mediante la colocación
potenciales específicos del lugar y específicos de la            de tapas sobre las áreas afectadas. La Alternativa 3
medida.                                                          reduciría mejor la movilidad mediante la excavación y
                                                                 eliminación de tierra contaminada con COC del Sitio.
Eficacia y permanencia a largo plazo                             En un grupo selecto de propiedades quedaría la
                                                                 contaminación bajo la napa freática, pero esta
La Alternativa 2 proporciona eficacia y permanencia a            contaminación sería abordada como parte de la OU3 del
largo plazo a través del mantenimiento de las cubiertas          Sitio.
del suelo y los controles institucionales. La inspección
y el mantenimiento periódicos, según lo exigen los               La Alternativa 4 reduciría en el mayor grado la
controles institucionales, asegurarían que el remedio            movilidad y el volumen mediante la excavación y
siguiera siendo efectivo para prevenir la exposición a           desecho fuera del sitio de todas las propiedades
los contaminantes. Sin embargo, la eficacia continua             identificadas con COC sobre las PRG. También
del sistema de contención de la Alternativa 2                    prevendría la migración potencial de los COC de la
dependería de lo bien que se mantenga la cubierta del            tierra al agua subterránea.
suelo.
                                                                 Eficacia a corto plazo
La Alternativa 3 brindaría eficacia y permanencia a
largo plazo al eliminar los contaminantes de las                 La Alternativa 2 sería eficaz a corto plazo debido a que
propiedades no residenciales de la OU2 y proporcionar            el suelo contaminado no se alteraría considerablemente
el desecho seguro de la tierra excavada en instalaciones         durante las actividades de construcción. Se estima que
permitidas y apropiadas. Se requerirían el monitoreo a           se pondrían tapas y se establecerían avisos de escritura
largo plazo y el mantenimiento de las propiedades                de obra nueva en unos 15 meses.
afectadas y las evaluaciones cada cinco años porque
podría quedar suelo contaminado bajo la napa freática            Las Alternativas 3 y 4 contemplan la excavación del
en algunas propiedades.                                          suelo contaminado y presentarían potencial para la
                                                                 exposición a corto plazo. Según estas alternativas, los
La Alternativa 4 aportaría la mayor eficacia y                   impactos ambientales potenciales asociados con la
permanencia a largo plazo porque toda la                         excavación del suelo se minimizarían con la adecuada
contaminación de suelos relacionada con el sitio que             instalación e implementación de medidas de control del
exceda las PRG sería excavada y desechada en un                  polvo y la erosión, al realizar la excavación con las
centro aprobado fuera del sitio. Si es necesario, se             medidas de salud y seguridad apropiadas, y utilizar un
requeriría el monitoreo a largo plazo en forma de                área preparatoria provisional revestida. Se requerirían
inspecciones visuales y mantenimiento, así como                  medidas de seguridad apropiadas para el transporte
evaluaciones conforme a CERCLA cada cinco años, si               durante el envío de tierra contaminada a los centros de
alguna propiedad no se pudo remediar hasta lograr                procesamiento de desechos aprobados fuera del sitio.
condiciones de uso ilimitado y exposición irrestricta.           La conclusión de la remediación para la mayor parte de
                                                                 las propiedades individuales podría producirse en
Reducción de la toxicidad, movilidad o volumen                   aproximadamente 1 año o menos, aunque se espera que
mediante el tratamiento                                          la Alternativa 3 tome 35 meses para implementarse
                                                                 plenamente y la Alternativa 4 tardaría 50 meses.
Ninguna de las alternativas reduciría la toxicidad, de la
movilidad ni del volumen de contaminación mediante               Posibilidad de implementación
tratamiento, pues el tratamiento no se incluye como
opción. El uso de tratamiento fue evaluado como parte            La Alternativa 2 se puede implementar; sin embargo, es
del proceso del FFS, pero no se determinó ningún                 incierto el desarrollo de controles protectores
medio efectivo de tratar la contaminación de arsénico y
                                                            13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

institucionales y de ingeniería que sean tanto aplicables         Costo
como aceptables para todos los propietarios.
                                                                  El costo estimado total para la Alternativa 2 es de
Las Alternativas 3 y 4 también son implementables,                $8,091,000. Los costos de capital incluyen el costo de
aunque la implementación de dichas alternativas es                colocar tapas, excavar suelos según sea necesario para
complicada en cierto grado por la necesidad de realizar           adecuarse a las tapas, y el costo administrativo de
excavaciones y rellenar en las propiedades individuales,          establecer avisos de escritura de obra nueva. Los costos
la mayoría de las cuales están desarrolladas con                  de operación y mantenimiento anual incluyen el
estructuras primarias (como tiendas o inmuebles) y                mantenimiento de los sistemas de contención.
estructuras secundarias como garajes y casetas de
guardar. La Alternativa 4 sería considerablemente más             El costo estimado total para la Alternativa 3 es de
difícil de implementar en propiedades donde la                    $36,039,000. Los costos de capital incluyen el costo de
contaminación se extienda bajo la napa freática. En               la excavación y desecho de tierra, y la restauración del
algunos casos, la profundidad de la contaminación se              sitio. No se prevé mantenimiento anual alguno, aunque
extiende más allá de 12 pies bajo la superficie de la             se requerirá un monitoreo limitado en forma de
tierra, lo cual requeriría aplicar excavación reforzada o         inspecciones visuales para aquellas propiedades que no
en pendiente y es probable que necesitara retirar al              logren llegar a las normas residenciales, o si se
menos algo de agua.                                               necesitan controles de ingeniería.

Todas las alternativas producirían cierto impacto a               El costo estimado total para la Alternativa 4 es de
corto plazo en la comunidad, en lo que respecta al                $58,409,000. Como es el caso de la Alternativa 3, los
tráfico de camiones y al ruido y el polvo de las                  costos de capital incluyen el costo de la excavación y
actividades de construcción o excavación, aunque la               desecho de tierra, y la restauración del sitio. Los costos
Alternativa 2 (traer tierra para construir una cubierta de        son más altos debido a la mayor profundidad de
suelo) generaría menos tráfico de camiones que las                excavación necesaria, y la labor adicional de ingeniería
Alternativas 3 y 4 (retirar el suelo contaminado de las           asociada que exige. Tal como con la Alternativa 3, no
propiedades y traer tierra para rellenar las áreas                se prevé mantenimiento anual alguno, aunque se
excavadas). Los impactos del tráfico, el ruido y el               requerirá un monitoreo limitado en forma de
polvo se podrían mitigar al limitar el horario de                 inspecciones visuales para aquellas propiedades que no
construcción a un horario diurno los días de semana o a           logren llegar a las normas residenciales, o si se
otros horarios según lo especifique la ordenanza local.           necesitan controles de ingeniería.
Se necesitarían medidas de monitoreo del aire y control
de polvo en el perímetro para resolver problemas de               Aceptación estatal
exposición potencial al polvo durante las actividades.
                                                                  El Estado de Nueva Jersey está de acuerdo con la
La implementación administrativa de la Alternativa 2              Alternativa preferida tal como se presenta en este Plan
puede verse afectada considerablemente por la                     propuesto.
necesidad de imponer avisos de escritura de obra nueva
en las propiedades no residenciales para limitar la               Aceptación de la comunidad
exposición humana restringiendo la reglamentación del
uso futuro de áreas contaminadas dentro de las                    La aceptación de la comunidad de la Alternativa
propiedades. Estos avisos restringirían el uso de la              preferida se evaluará después de que finalice el período
propiedad por parte del propietario y pueden no ser               de comentarios del público y se describirá en el
aceptables para algunos de los propietarios. Dado que             Registro de Decisiones (ROD). Conforme a los
las Alternativas 3 y 4 producen la eliminación de suelos          comentarios del público, la Alternativa preferida podría
contaminados pero puede no abordar toda la                        modificarse y diferir de la versión presentada en este
contaminación para lograr condiciones de uso ilimitado,           plan propuesto. El Registro de Decisiones es el
se requerirían controles institucionales en un número             documento que formaliza la selección del remedio para
limitado de propiedades.                                          un sitio.




                                                             14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ALTERNATIVA PREFERIDA                                            contaminación de suelos bajo la napa freática es
                                                                 preocupante en 3 de las 40 propiedades en la OU2. Por
La Alternativa preferida para lograr los objetivos de la         este motivo, la EPA abordará la contaminación en el
medida de remediación en propiedades no residenciales            suelo bajo la napa freática después de que avance más
con suelos afectados por la contaminación relacionada            la RI/FS de la OU3. Sin embargo, con la Alternativa 3,
con el sitio es la Alternativa 3, excavación hasta la            la excavación en las propiedades donde hay
profundidad de la contaminación (sin superar la                  contaminación bajo la napa freática se diferirá al menos
profundidad de la napa freática), controles de ingeniería        hasta que se determine si se necesita alguna
y controles institucionales.                                     remediación activa en la OU3. Las actividades de
                                                                 remediación en las propiedades con impacto bajo la
La Alternativa 3 consiste en excavar unas 57,800                 napa freática podrían realizarse entonces
yardas cúbicas estimadas de tierra para desecharlas              simultáneamente, o de conformidad con el remedio de
fuera del sitio excediendo la norma de remediación de            la OU3, para evitar la necesidad potencial de regresar a
suelos específica de la propiedad respectiva, sin superar        una propiedad después de haberla remediado.
la profundidad de la napa freática.
                                                                 La implementación de la Alternativa 3 puede requerir
Se estima que el componente activo de la medida de               obras de excavación adyacentes a las estructuras y/o
remediación tardaría unos 35 meses en implementarse.             debajo de ellas. En general, se hará lo posible por
Esto incluiría movilización/desmovilización, laminado            eliminar toda la contaminación del suelo para que se
y construcción, excavación y relleno/restauración. Se            determine que hay necesidad de restricciones de
requerirían controles institucionales en propiedades que         escritura. Todas las propiedades afectadas serán
no logren llegar a las normas residenciales y se                 restauradas a sus condiciones originales.
necesitaría monitoreo a largo plazo en forma de
inspecciones visuales de estas propiedades. Además,              Según la información disponible en este momento, la
puede necesitarse la inspección y el mantenimiento de            EPA ha concluido y el NJDEP concuerda que la
todos los controles necesarios de ingeniería.                    Alternativa preferida cumple los criterios de umbral y
                                                                 proporciona el mejor equilibrio entre ventajas y
La Alternativa 2 depende en gran medida de la                    desventajas en comparación con las otras alternativas,
capacidad de asegurar que se mantengan vigentes y se             con respecto a los criterios de equilibrio.
cumplan los controles institucionales, en forma de
avisos de escritura de obra nueva y restricciones. La            La Alternativa preferida satisface los criterios de
Alternativa 3 depende en menor medida de los                     umbral y logra la mejor combinación de los cinco
controles institucionales y la Alternativa 4 puede no            criterios de equilibrio del análisis comparativo. Se
requerir el uso de controles institucionales en absoluto,        prefiere esta alternativa porque logrará los RAO y las
y así ambas son más eficaces a largo plazo que la                metas de limpieza en el menor tiempo, y es un remedio
Alternativa 2. La Alternativa 3 lograría los RAO, es             permanente. La EPA espera que la Alternativa preferida
más fácilmente implementable, tiene mayor grado de               satisfaga los siguientes requisitos legales de la Sección
eficacia en el corto plazo y un costo menor que la               121 de la CERCLA: 1) proteger la salud humana y el
Alternativa 4. Aunque la Alternativa 2 tiene un costo            medioambiente; 2) cumplir los ARAR; 3) ser
menor que la Alternativa 3 en aproximadamente $28                económicamente viable; 4) utilizar soluciones
millones, habría requisitos de recursos significativos           permanentes y tecnologías de tratamiento alternativas o
con el correr del tiempo en relación con inspecciones a          tecnologías de recuperación de recursos en la mayor
largo plazo y mantenimiento de tapas. Por estos                  medida que resulte práctico; y 5) satisfacer la
motivos, la EPA prefiere la Alternativa 3 en vez de la           preferencia de tratamiento como elemento principal o
Alternativas 2 y 4.                                              explicar el motivo por el cual no se cumple la
                                                                 preferencia de tratamiento. La EPA evaluará los
La EPA prevé que será valioso el hecho de obtener un             criterios de modificación de la aceptación de la
entendimiento más completo de la contaminación del               comunidad en el ROD después del cierre del período de
agua subterránea durante la RI de la OU3 a fin de                comentarios del público.
determinar el mejor remedio para los suelos bajo la
napa freática. Los datos existentes indican que la

                                                            15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

PARA OBTENER MÁS INFORMACIÓN

El expediente administrativo, que contiene copias del
Plan propuesto y documentación complementaria, está
disponible en las siguientes ubicaciones:

Centro de Registros de Superfund, Región 2 de la
EPA
290 Broadway, 18th Floor
New York, New York 10007-1866
(212) 637-4308
Horarios: Lunes-Viernes – 9 A.M. a 5 P.M.

Vineland City Library
1058 East Landis Ave.
Vineland, New Jersey 08360
Consulte el horario de la Biblioteca en:
http://www.vinelandlibrary.org/

Además, encontrará documentos seleccionados del
expediente administrativo en línea, en:

www.epa.gov/superfund/former-kil-tone




                   16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                                                      FIGURE 1

7/18/2018 11:34:24 AM
C:\Users\KaufmaDR\Desktop\KilTone\MXD\OU2_RI_Report\Kil-Tone_Figure1_SiteLocation.mxd




                                                                                                                 FORMER KIL-TONE
                                                                                                                COMPANY PROPERTY




                                                                                                                                                Copyright:© 2013 National Geographic Society, i-cubed

                                                                                                           ADAPTED FROM: MILLVILLE, NEW JERSEY USGS QUADRANGLE

                                                                                                                    FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY



                                                                                                                                                                                                 ¥
                                                                                                                         SUPERFUND SITE
                                                                                                                          OU2 RI REPORT
                                                                                                                      VINELAND, NEW JERSEY

                                                                                            MAP LOCATION
                                                                                                                            SITE LOCATION

                                                                                                                        0    1,000     2,000           4,000

                                                                                                                                       Feet

                                                                                        14426/66305
                                                                                        JULY 2018                                    1:24,000

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

7/17/2019 9:41:21 AM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FIGURE 3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GRAPE STREET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MONTROSE STREET                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MONTROSE STREET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S SEVENTH STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                          LA FRANCE STREET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ALMOND STREET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                222




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 223




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        QUINCE STREET



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           233


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  69                    231         232
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 227




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  211                              230


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                228      226      81                     81         225                                                      237     236

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   229
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        212



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CHERRY STREET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   123
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S WEST BOULEVARD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S EAST BOULEVARD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SIXTH STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   123


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  206
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         210

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 209
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 148                                                                                            244      243                                  242                                                      143                       240

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            208         207                                                                                                       LERCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    305




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CHESTNUT AVENUE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FORMER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 290


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      KIL-TONE
                                                                                                                                               THIRD STREET TERRACE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   286                                             287                                                                                  289                                                                                                                291




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PAUL STREET


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        511 PAUL ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    302
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      296         297




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              277                                                                                                         301

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        278
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 304
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          303                                                                     295



                                                                                                                                                                                                  284

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   279                                                                                                                                                                  WASHINGTON AVENUE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        124
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              280
I:\Hdr-Obg.14426\STDS\GIS\KilTone\MXD\Feasibility Study\Rev Final Submittal July 2019\Kil_tone_Figure3_OU2AreasRequiringRemediation2.mxd




                                                                                                                                                                                            283


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BELLAIR STREET


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             282




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SUMMER AVENUE

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FLORENCE AVENUE




                                                                                                                                           LUCIANO AVENUE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DIFALCO AVENUE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Source: Esri, DigitalGlobe, GeoEye, Earthstar Geographics, CNES/Airbus DS, USDA, USGS, AeroGRID, IGN, and the GIS User Community


                                                                                                                                           LEGEND                                                                                                                                  FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY SUPERFUND SITE                                                                                                                                                                                    OU2 AREAS REQUIRING
                                                                                                                                                                      OU2 PROPERTY - NO ACTION REQUIRED                                                                                         OU2 FFS REPORT                                                                                                                                                                                                   REMEDIATION
                                                                                                                                                                      OU2 PROPERTY - ACTION REQUIRED (NJDEP NON-RESIDENTIAL SRS)                                                            VINELAND, NEW JERSEY
                                                                                                                                                                      OU2 PROPERTY - ACTION REQUIRED (NJDEP RESIDENTIAL SRS)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14426/66305




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ¥
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               JULY 2019
                                                                                                                                                                      OU1 PROPERTY

                                                                                                                                                                      APPROXIMATE OU1/OU2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0                   60         120                 240            360                        480
                                                                                                                                                                      STUDY AREA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PROPERTY BOUNDARY: STATE OF NEW JERSEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         COMPOSITE OF PARCELS DATA, NEW JERSEY OFFICE                                                             Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (NJOIT), OFFICE OF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEMS (OGIS).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Attachment B

Public Notice

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                        UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

                     EXTENDS PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD ON THE PROPOSED PLAN

                    FOR THE FORMER KIL-TONE SUPERFUND SITE, OPERABLE UNIT 2

                                         VINELAND, NEW JERSEY



The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announces the extension of a previously opened 30-day
comment period on the preferred plan to address contaminated soil on non-residential properties at the
Kil-Tone Company Superfund Site, located in Cumberland County, Vineland, N.J. The preferred remedy
and other alternatives are identified in the Proposed Plan.

The initial comment period began on July 30, 2019 and was intended to end on August 28, 2019. As part
of the public comment period, EPA held a public meeting on August 13 at 7 p.m. at the Gloria Sabater
Elementary School, 301 So. East Blvd., Vineland, N.J. Due to unforeseen issues with the initial public
comment period announcement, EPA will extend the comment period until September 26, 2019 and
hold another public meeting on September 4 at 6:30 p.m. at the City of Vineland Council Chambers, 640
East Wood Street, Second Floor, Vineland, New Jersey.

The Proposed Plan is available electronically at the following address:

https://www.epa.gov/superfund/former-kil-tone

Written comments on the Proposed Plan, postmarked no later than close of business September 26,
2019, may be emailed to Hartzell.sharon@epa.gov or mailed to Sharon Hartzell, US EPA, 290 Broadway,
19th Floor, New York, NY 10007-1866.

The Administrative Record files are available for public review at the following information repository:

USEPA – Region 2, Superfund Records Center, 290 Broadway, 19th Floor, New York, NY 10007-1866.

For more information, please contact Pat Seppi, EPA’s Community Liaison, at 646.369.0068 or
seppi.pat@epa.gov.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     LA AGENCIA DE PROTECCIÓN AMBIENTAL DE ESTADOS UNIDOS

            EXTIENDE EL PERIODO DE COMENTARIOS PÚBLICOS SOBRE EL PLAN PROPUESTO

                     PARA EL SITIO SUPERFUND EX KIL-TONE, UNIDAD OPERABLE 2

                                       VINELAND, NUEVA JERSEY



La Agencia de Protección Ambiental de los EE. UU. (EPA) anuncia la extensión de un periodo abierto
anteriormente de 30 días para hacer comentarios sobre el plan preferido a fin de abordar el suelo
contaminado en propiedades no residenciales en el Sitio Superfund de Kil-Tone Company, situado en el
Condado de Cumberland, Vineland, N.J. En el Plan propuesto se identifican el remedio preferido y otras
alternativas.

El periodo inicial para comentarios comenzó el 30 de julio de 2019 y estaba previsto que terminara el 28
de agosto de 2019. Como parte del periodo para recibir comentarios del público, la EPA organizó una
reunión pública el 13 de agosto a las 7 p.m. en la Escuela Primaria Gloria Sabater, 301 So. East Blvd.,
Vineland, N.J. Debido a problemas imprevistos con el anuncio del periodo para recibir comentarios del
público, la EPA extenderá el periodo de comentarios hasta el 26 de septiembre de 2019 y celebrar otra
reunión pública en septiembre 4 a las 6:30 p.m. en las Cámaras del Consejo de Vineland, 640 East Wood
Street, en el 2° piso, Vineland, New Jersey.


El Plan propuesto se encuentra disponible electrónicamente en la dirección siguiente:

https://www.epa.gov/superfund/former-kil-tone

Pueden enviarse comentarios por escrito sobre el Plan propuesto, con sello postal que no sea posterior
al término de la jornada laboral del 26 de septiembre de 2019, dirigidos a Hartzell.sharon@epa.gov o a
Sharon Hartzell, US EPA, 290 Broadway, 19th Floor, New York, NY 10007-1866.

Los archivos de Registro administrativo están a disposición del público para su evaluación en el siguiente
depósito de información:

USEPA – Region 2, Superfund Records Center, 290 Broadway, 19th Floor, New York, NY 10007-1866.

Para obtener más información, sírvase contactar a Pat Seppi, Coordinador Comunitario de la EPA,
llamando al 646.369.0068 o por correo electrónico seppi.pat@epa.gov.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 108 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      Attachment C

Public Meeting Transcripts

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 109 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 1
1

2

3

4

5

6                            FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY

7                                    SUPERFUND SITE

8                         PROPOSED PLAN PUBLIC MEETING

9                                 Operable Unit Two

10                              Non-Residential Soil

11

12

13                                 August 13, 2019

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 110 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 2
1                                         -   -    -

2                                     APPEARANCES

3                                         -   -    -

4

5

6     EPA OFFICIALS

7     Patricia Seppi, Community Liaison

8     Sharon Hartzell, Project Manager

9     Stephanie Vaughn, Section Chief

10    Lora Smith, Risk Assessor

11

12

13    PUBLIC PARTICIPATION

14    Seth Davis

15    Larry Pincents

16    Victor Ruis

17    Michelle Post

18

19

20

21

22

23

24


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 111 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 3
1                                         -   -    -

2                                     PROCEEDINGS

3                                         -   -    -

4                    MS. SEPPI:         I thank you for attending our

5             meeting this evening.                And the purpose that

6             we're here tonight is to present to you EPA's

7             preferred remedy to clean up the 40 to 50

8             commercial properties that have been affected

9             by the Kil-Tone Superfund Site.

10                   Now you may have noticed if you've been

11            driving around the neighborhood that we're

12            still doing a lot of work on the residential

13            properties, so that is ongoing.                      This will be

14            like in stages.

15                   I'd like to have the people from the EPA

16            who are here and also a few other people in

17            the audience introduce themselves.

18                   MS. VAUGHN:          Hi, my name is Stephanie

19            Vaughn.        I'm the Section Chief at EPA.

20                   MS. HARTZELL:            Hello.      My name is Sharon

21            Hartzell and I am a Project Manager at EPA for

22            this portion of the Kil-Tone site.

23                   MS. SMITH:         Good evening, Lora Smith.                  I'm

24            the Risk Assessor for the site.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 112 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 4
1                    MS. SEPPI:         And my name is Pat Seppi.                  And

2             I'm the Community Liaison for the EPA for this

3             site.       And we have a few other people here

4             that I'd also like to introduce.

5                    One of them is standing over there, but

6             why don't we have our interpreters introduce

7             themselves.

8                    MR. TELLE:         I'm Rudy Telle.

9                    MR. GARCIA:          My name is Enrique Garcia.

10                   MS. SEPPI:         And we also have a technical

11            back there.

12                   MR. ENGLISH:          Scott English and I'm

13            helping with the technology.

14                   MS. SEPPI:         Now, one other thing I wanted

15            to mention, if you'll notice tonight, if

16            you've come to a meeting before, these

17            meetings are a little more formal.                        We have

18            the stenographer here, Florence, who will be

19            taking down everything that everybody says.

20                   And we do have the capability to have the

21            presentation and your questions and comments

22            translated into Spanish.                  So we have three

23            headsets I believe, so if anybody would like

24            to take advantage of that, that's fine.                           Just


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 113 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 5
1             let me know.

2                    Would anybody like to have the

3             translation?

4                                         -   -    -

5                 (Whereupon, the translator translated

6                         the request into Spanish for

7                         the audience at this time.)

8                                         -   -    -

9                    MS. SEPPI:         It's very important to us to

10            hear your comments and questions.                       In public

11            participation, it's an important part of

12            presenting a plan like this.                    So what happens

13            is, Sharon will give her presentation and we

14            ask please if you could hold your comments and

15            questions until after the presentation.                           A lot

16            of times those questions get answered.                          So if

17            you could wait, we would appreciate that.

18                   Then we'll ask you to come up, give us

19            your questions or your comment into the mike

20            and Florence will record it and she would ask

21            if you could say and spell your name so we

22            have that correctly for the record also.

23                   The one other thing I want you to know is

24            that we're in the middle of what's called a


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 114 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 6
1             public commentary.              If you saw the most recent

2             article in the paper, it did mention that.

3             The end of the public comment period for this

4             site is August 28th.

5                    So if you were here tonight and you have a

6             couple other questions, that's fine.                         You can

7             send them to Sharon either by email or snail

8             mail and that would both be included.

9                    After this, and I think Sharon will

10            probably go over this again, like our big

11            defining document is called the Record of

12            Decision.         And the transcript from tonight's

13            meeting will be included and your questions

14            and comments that are answered in what's

15            called a responsive summary.

16                   So when that is available, which should be

17            sometime in September, if everything goes

18            according to plan, you'll be able to see the

19            responses to your comments and everybody

20            else's comments that are taken tonight or we

21            receive before or after the commentary.

22                   So I think that's really all I have to

23            say.      I wanted to keep it short and I want to

24            turn this over to Sharon.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 115 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 7
1                    MS. HARTZELL:           Thank you Pat and thanks

2             for the introduction.                And thank you everybody

3             here for coming tonight.                  My name is Sharon

4             Hartzell and I am EPA's Project Manager for

5             this portion of the Kil-Tone cleanup which is

6             the portion of the site that we call Operable

7             Unit Two.         I'll explain what that means later,

8             but it's the non-essential soils that are

9             surrounding the former Kil-Tone property.

10                   So tonight we're going to go over some of

11            the basics of the Superfund Program, how the

12            process works, the specific investigation

13            history of this site, and what the EPA plans

14            to do going forward and we'll have an

15            opportunity for everyone here to give input

16            and ask questions.              And as Pat said, all of

17            that will be formally recorded in the Record

18            of Decision which we hope to issue next month.

19                   So yes, we will be accepting written

20            comments as well as verbal comments until

21            August 28th.           I have business cards up here at

22            the front with my information and also in the

23            proposed plan which you can find on the EPA's

24            website.        And we will be considering all


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 116 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 8
1             comments and responding to those as part of

2             our formal legal contract.

3                    So just to give a little overview of the

4             Superfund process, some of you may be familiar

5             with this from having seen the work go on with

6             the first portion of the site, which we have

7             clear properties under construction right now.

8                    But EPA's Superfund Program is responsible

9             for cleaning up some of the worst contaminated

10            waste sites in the country.                    We are doing this

11            in order to protect public health, the

12            environment, and make sure that we are making

13            this community safe and healthy to live in.

14                   So the process has several steps.                       First,

15            the site will be investigated in sort of a

16            preliminary way.             Essentially it's added to a

17            list called the National Priority List,

18            otherwise known as the Superfund List.                          After

19            that we do a more thorough investigation of

20            the site called a remedial investigation,

21            which I'll go over the results from that for

22            the portion of Kil-Tone.

23                   And following the remedial investigation,

24            is the feasibility study where we look into


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 117 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                          Page 9
1             all of the different options for cleaning up

2             the contamination of the site.

3                    And then we come to the current stage that

4             we're at which is the                public noticing of the

5             proposed plan.            We give everybody in the room

6             tonight and all other folks who might read the

7             plan on our website the opportunity to give

8             comments and ask questions about what we're

9             proposing.

10                   So we'll follow that up with the process

11            of actually issuing the decision once comments

12            are addressed and then designing and actually

13            implementing the remedy.

14                   So just to situate us, we are looking at

15            the former Kil-Tone site which is the City of

16            Vineland, just a few minutes down the road.                             I

17            have a few figures that are pointing out some

18            of the boundaries of the area that we're

19            talking about.

20                   You can see the blue outlined area in this

21            presentation is pretty much the boundary of

22            what we've studied for areas that may have

23            been impacted by the former Kil-Tone property

24            in the past.           We have the other two outlined


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 118 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 10
1             properties where most of the action happened

2             during the time the facility was operating.

3             We have the Kil-Tone property itself which is

4             outlined in red.             And the yellow outlined area

5             is the Lerco Fuel Company, former Lerco Fuel

6             Company site which was also involved in some

7             of the processes at Kil-Tone.

8                    So Kil-Tone was a major manufacturer of

9             agricultural sprays and chemicals and they got

10            started around 1917 and began operations with

11            creating pesticides that included a lot of

12            arsenic and lead.

13                   We have products here with a lot of

14            interesting names, London purple, Paris green.

15            Most of these pesticides were manufactured

16            until 1933.          And then the property is

17            currently occupied by Urban Sign and Crane

18            which is a company manufacturing and

19            installing signs.

20                   So the cleanup of the fuel distribution

21            facility across the street actually triggered

22            the investigation into the former Kil-Tone

23            property in 2014 and that is when the EPA

24            started realizing that there was contamination


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 119 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 11
1             that needed to be dealt with related to the

2             former operation.

3                    So that was in August that New Jersey

4             Department of Environmental Protection started

5             their investigation into Kil-Tone.                        In

6             November of 2014 the New Jersey Department of

7             Environmental Protection referred the site to

8             the EPA.        We had some sampling and action

9             conducted during 2015 and 2016.

10                   So we have a removal program that

11            conducted sampling in the vicinity of the

12            former Kil-Tone site and conducted an action

13            to provide temporary protection at a few

14            properties that were above the action level

15            with respect to the removal program.                         So that

16            occurred in March 2016.                 And then in April

17            2016 it was finally added to the national

18            priority list.

19                   So here's another figure that helps

20            illustrate some of the different portions of

21            the site.         We have the Kil-Tone facility

22            itself included in a box towards the upper

23            right-hand corner.              And then the Tarklin

24            Branch which flows into the Maurice River is


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 120 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 12
1             also a portion of the site.

2                    Now I mentioned the term operable units

3             earlier.        And we at EPA divide sites into a

4             number of distinct areas that can be based on

5             what specific issues we're working on cleaning

6             up.     So it's a way to make the cleanup process

7             more efficient.             And these areas can address

8             either geographic areas of the site or

9             specific types of environmental contamination,

10            like water versus soil.

11                   Kil-Tone has four operable units

12            currently.          The first operable unit is dealing

13            with the soil and the residential properties

14            that are in the vicinity of the former

15            Kil-Tone property.              And we mentioned earlier

16            and you could probably see on your way to the

17            school, we currently have cleanup ongoing at

18            those properties.

19                   The operable unit that we're discussing

20            tonight is Operable Unit 2 which are the

21            non-residential properties in the vicinity of

22            the site.         And we have the Kil-Tone site again

23            marked with a star on this figure.                        And the

24            colors in that figure designate what


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 121 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                        Page 13
1             properties are used for.

2                    So the red properties are those that are

3             currently non-residential, the yellow are

4             residential.           So you can see that we have kind

5             of a blend of different properties going on in

6             this area of Vineland.

7                    Operable Unit 3 concerns the ground water

8             that was in the vicinity of the former

9             Kil-Tone site.            And then Operable Unit 4

10            includes the Tarklin Branch, both the waters

11            of the creek and the sediment and adjacent

12            properties.          And we're in the investigation

13            phase for Operable Unit 3, ground water and

14            Operable Unit 4 will be following after that.

15                   Tonight Operable Unit 2 is the focus.                         So

16            we conducted that investigation, the remedial

17            investigation, which was finalized in 2018 and

18            that was to characterize the site to figure

19            out the nature and extent of the contamination

20            and to assess what risks there might be to

21            human health and the environment for the

22            former Kil-Tone facility.

23                   Following the remedial investigation, we

24            conducted the feasibility study which was


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 122 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 14
1             finalized just last month.                   And in the

2             feasibility study we looked at several

3             different options for cleaning up the

4             contamination at the former Kil-Tone site.                             We

5             screened those for how effective they would be

6             and compared them against one another.                          And

7             that's how we arrived at the decision -- or

8             not decision yet, but the proposal that we're

9             coming to you with tonight.

10                   So just to give you some background on

11            what we actually investigated during that

12            remedial investigation, we did two broad

13            categories of soil sampling.                    The first was

14            the Tier A soil sampling which was conducted

15            in August of 2017.              And that sampling included

16            the Kil-Tone facility itself as well as the

17            Lerco Property.             These were sites that were

18            most heavily impacted and were really

19            centrally used during the operation of

20            Kil-Tone, as well as another property that was

21            less involved with the actual operation but

22            still representative of other properties

23            in the area.

24                   And so we took surface and subsurface soil


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 123 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 15
1             samples from those properties and analyzed

2             them for the full list of contaminants the EPA

3             looks at.         And the purpose of all of that was

4             to determine which contaminants in the area

5             were related to the operation of the former

6             Kil-Tone site so that we could narrow the list

7             down and figure out what we actually need to

8             focus on as well as to start determining the

9             nature and extent of the contamination, how

10            far away from the site it goes, et cetera.

11                   Following that we had another round of

12            soil sampling on what we call the Tier B

13            properties.          That was conducted between

14            September 2017 and March 2018 and that was on

15            basically the rest of the non-residential

16            properties in the area.                 And the total number

17            of properties looked at was approximately 50.

18            And those we had already kind of pinpointed as

19            lead and the arsenic that we looked at those

20            properties for metals as well as for

21            Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons, which are

22            another type of pollutant.

23                   So in terms of the investigation findings,

24            we found that we had a fairly high


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 124 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 16
1             concentration of both arsenic and lead on the

2             former Kil-Tone property itself and the

3             elevated concentrations were found at some

4             locations pretty deep.                 At the other OU2

5             properties, we found still elevated levels of

6             arsenic and lead, but generally we saw a

7             decrease in soil concentration as you get

8             further from the Kil-Tone property.                         So the

9             most highly concentrated soil contaminants are

10            at the facility itself and generally lower as

11            you move further away.

12                   In general, at the other properties, the

13            elevated concentrations were found in the

14            shallow soil, but in a few cases we do have

15            deeper soils that are contaminated as well,

16            but primarily about 4 feet below the ground

17            surface.

18                   After getting this data, a EPA goes

19            through a process called the risk assessment.

20            And we assess risks to human health for both

21            current folks who might be exposed to the site

22            and that includes industrial workers,

23            construction workers, as well as any future

24            people who might be using the site, whether


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 125 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 17
1             it's for the same purposes or residential

2             uses.

3                    So we look at risks to all these different

4             categories of people for both cancer and non

5             cancer and we found that at the Kil-Tone site

6             and that these other sites that were evaluated

7             for the risk assessment, we did have levels

8             that were exceeding EPA's acceptable risk

9             levels due to the arsenic in the soil

10            primarily as well as some due to lead.

11                   We also looked at ecological risks which

12            is determining what the risks are to plants

13            and invertebrates and other wildlife.                          And we

14            do have the potential for ecological risk but

15            that is also going to be further evaluated

16            during the phase of the project that deals

17            with the Tarklin Branch.

18                   So since unacceptable risks are present at

19            the site, EPA has determined that an action

20            must be taken and we will be proposing that

21            action tonight.

22                   So for each Superfund site we set goals

23            for the cleanup which we refer to as remedial

24            action objectives.              And those are the specific


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 126 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 18
1             cleanup goals to insure protection to human

2             health and the environment.                    So for this site

3             our first goal is to prevent any current

4             exposure as well as any exposure to any future

5             users for direct contact with contaminated

6             soil.

7                    And then the second is to prevent the

8             migration of contaminants that are at these

9             properties to any other properties in the area

10            and that might happen with the flow of water

11            or with air dispersion.

12                   The third objective is to prevent and

13            reduce the migration of these contaminants

14            into the ground water.                 And the fourth is to

15            prevent risks to ecological receptors.                          So

16            everything that we're evaluating tonight is a

17            remedy that we're proposing and we look at

18            these with goals in mind.

19                   So the EPA has a number of different

20            cleanup goal levels that we looked at for

21            various contaminants.                And the two

22            contaminants of concern at this site are

23            arsenic and lead.              You can see that we have

24            different categories based on non-residential


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 127 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 19
1             use as well as residential use.                      And we have a

2             separate number for whether the ground -- what

3             level would be protected for ground water, and

4             we have separate numbers for impact ecological

5             receptors.

6                    So a lot of different numbers in the mix

7             here, but it's most important to note that for

8             arsenic, the level is 19, the lowest level is

9             19 for all of these first three categories.

10            So that will be the level that we clean up to.

11                   Lead is slightly more complicated.                       We

12            have two different levels based on whether you

13            have somebody living at the site versus

14            somebody working at the site.                     And so we'll be

15            deciding which level to use on a case by case

16            basis based on what the site is used for now

17            and what it might be used for in the future.

18            And we have had some conversations with the

19            City of Vineland and have learned that most of

20            the properties in this area have the potential

21            for being used for residences in the future.

22            So if that's the case, then we will go with

23            the residential level.

24                   We also are in the process of determining


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 128 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 20
1             what level would be protected of ground water.

2             So that number is still pending, but we'll

3             evaluate that and compare it to the others

4             once we have the number figured out.

5                    So we've evaluated several different

6             options for the site.                The first which we

7             always look at is no action, which in this

8             case was not protective of anything.                         So that

9             one gets -- you know, we won't talk too much

10            about.

11                   Alternative 2 involves using engineering

12            controls which is anything physical that you

13            do to the site to prevent exposure to the

14            contaminants.           Like installing a cap would be

15            an example of an engineering control.                          And

16            institutional control which would be anything

17            legal the EPA would do to prevent access to

18            the site.         And that might be something like a

19            deed restriction.

20                   Alternative 3 includes those same elements

21            that were in Alternative 2 but also the main

22            focus of Alternative 3 is excavation of the

23            contaminated soil itself.                   And both

24            Alternative 3 and 4 involve excavation.                           The


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 129 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 21
1             difference is that Alternative 3 excavates

2             down to the level of the ground water table

3             and Alternative 4 excavates to the full depth

4             of the contamination.

5                    The EPA has nine criteria that we use to

6             evaluate each of the options and then we

7             compare them to one another.                    The first two,

8             which are the most critical are, will this

9             remedy be protective of human health and the

10            environment and will it be in compliance with

11            the levels that the EPA has set for the site

12            itself.        And that's the chart that I was just

13            going over a few slides ago.

14                   The other balancing criteria that we call

15            it are whether how it will be affected in the

16            long-term, whether the remedy is permanent,

17            whether we're reducing the toxicity mobility

18            and volume of the contaminants through

19            treatment, as well as the implementability and

20            cost.       And then we have two criteria as well,

21            the community acceptance, which we're here

22            tonight to get your input on, and state

23            acceptance.

24                   So we look at all of those factors with


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 130 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 22
1             each of the alternatives but here are some of

2             the more specifics of how much soil will be

3             excavated in each of the cases.                      So you can

4             see that from Alternative 2 to Alternative 4,

5             the amount of excavation increases as well as

6             the cost and the time it would take to

7             actually implement the remedy.

8                    So we are presenting EPA's Preferred

9             Alternative of Alternative 3 and that is

10            excavation of contamination, not to exceed

11            depth of ground water table as well as

12            engineering controls and institutional

13            controls.

14                   So under this remedy, we would excavate

15            down to the level of the water table.                          We

16            would dispose of that contaminated soil off

17            site, and we would also apply any

18            institutional controls that were needed to any

19            of the areas that we couldn't excavate, as

20            well as long-term monitoring to make sure that

21            the site remains, the usage remains the same

22            and the site remedy remains protected.

23                   And so Alternative 3 is slightly

24            preferable to the others.                   It meets all of our


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 131 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 23
1             objectives in terms of protecting human health

2             and the environment by removing the

3             contaminated soil.              It does meet our remedial

4             objective.          It relies less heavily than

5             Alternative 2 on those institutional controls

6             that include things like deed restriction

7             which limit what property owners can do with

8             the property.           So you know, we prefer to not

9             rely too heavily on that.                   And it's more cost

10            effective and easily implementable than

11            Alternative 4.

12                   It also avoids the potential of having to

13            return to the site in a couple of instances.

14            I mentioned that there were a couple of areas

15            where the contamination does go down below the

16            ground water table.               We're currently in the

17            middle of the investigation of that ground

18            water contamination.                And right now we have

19            like I think three to five properties that may

20            actually have ground water impact.

21                   The way the time line is going to work

22            out, we're going to try to defer our

23            excavation on those properties until the

24            ground water investigation is completed


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 132 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 24
1             because right now we're still refining our

2             understanding of whether the ground water is

3             being impacted and how much and we're going to

4             try to avoid having to implement something now

5             and then have to go back and dig it up again

6             and do something different once we have the

7             ground water figured out.                   We want to do that

8             investigation and try to time things so that

9             the excavation of those few properties happen

10            once we have our answers of ground water.

11                   So the next steps from here are to review

12            and address any comments that we receive

13            tonight as well as comments that you might

14            send me after the meeting.

15                   Next we're going to sign the Record of

16            Decision for the site which is the legally

17            binding document declaring what the EPA is

18            going to do.           After that, we'll actually go

19            through the process of designing the remedy

20            and then completing the remedial action

21            itself.

22                   So we're at the proposed plan public

23            comment period and are ready to take your

24            questions and comments.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 133 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 25
1                    MS. SEPPI:         Thank you.         Very nice.         So

2             here is the information if you have additional

3             comments that you want to send to Sharon

4             afterwards and also at the bottom there,

5             that's the web address for the Kil-Tone, EPA

6             Kil-Tone web page and it has a lot of good

7             information on it.              And what we will do is,

8             once Sharon sends me the presentation probably

9             tomorrow or Friday, we'll have that posted to

10            the web page also so you'll be able to take a

11            look at that in more depth.

12                   So with that, I would just like to remind

13            you, I'll go around and if anybody has

14            questions or comments, please remember to give

15            us your name and spell it for Florence.

16                   Does anybody have any questions or

17            comments?

18                   MR. DAVIS:         Seth Davis, property owner

19            for the Kil-Tone 527 East Chestnut Avenue.

20            What are the properties that are affected by

21            ground water, which properties?

22                   MS. VAUGHN:          I don't have the list of

23            addresses, but the former Kil-Tone property

24            would be one of the ones that we deferred


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 134 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 26
1             action on.          There is contamination.                 And when

2             we say defer action, there may not actually be

3             a delay because once the Record of Decision is

4             signed, then we'll have to decide the remedy.

5                    So it will take some time before we get to

6             remedial action, but we might have those

7             answers on the ground water before we're ready

8             to start.         So it might not actually be a

9             delay, it's just, as Sharon said, we don't

10            want to have to re-do the process.                        We want to

11            do things as efficient as we have to.

12                   MS. SEPPI:         Does that help?

13                   MR. DAVIS:         It still doesn't tell me --

14                   MS. VAUGHN:          I don't know if it's

15            something that I publicly should share.                           We

16            can talk about it separately.

17                   MS. SEPPI:         Only because we're concerned

18            about properties.              So that's -- we can talk to

19            you after this, if you would like.

20                   MR. PINCENTS:           My name is Larry Pincents,

21            P-I-N-C-E-N-T-S.             You have three

22            non-residential sites listed.                     One of them is

23            Kil-Tone, one of them is Lerco.                      There's a

24            third undeveloped area.                 I believe that I live


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 135 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 27
1             across the street from it.                   Can you specify

2             where that one is?              Is it a large field area?

3                    MS. HARTZELL:           We can go back to that area

4             here.

5                    MR. PINCENTS:           I've looked at the

6             documents and it was unclear.                     I believe I

7             live across the street from it, 600 Belair

8             Avenue.

9                    MS. HARTZELL:           That third property is the

10            one with the red outlined area that's not a

11            square.

12                   MR. PINCENTS:           It's between the Boulevard

13            and 6th Street and Washington Avenue.

14                   MS. HARTZELL:           That's the third property.

15                   MR. PINCENTS:           I live right across the

16            street from that.              And my question is, is that

17            going to be dug up, that area?                      Is that going

18            to be remediated, that whole field?

19                   MS. HARTZELL:           I'm unclear.          I'm going to

20            have to check.

21                   MR. PINCENTS:           I know it was tested

22            because I've seen them.

23                   MS. HARTZELL:           It was tested.

24                   MR. PINCENTS:           So you don't know if that's


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 136 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 28
1             part of that process?

2                    MS. HARTZELL:           I would have to check the

3             list of properties that are to be cleaned up.

4                    MR. PINCENTS:           Okay.      Very good.

5                    MS. VAUGHN:          Just to be clear, it was

6             definitely investigated as part of the process

7             and we looked at that property closely across

8             the street from the former Kil-Tone property,

9             but we're not sure if it's one that requires

10            clean up or we did not find elevated

11            concentrations that required clean up so that

12            we can verify with you.

13                   And for any property owners out there, we

14            will -- once we sign the Record of Decision,

15            we will start contacting you to get access to

16            do the design of the cleanup and all of that.

17            So -- you know.

18                   MR. PINCENTS:           (Inaudible) residential

19            property?

20                   MS. VAUGHN:          You're a residential

21            property?

22                   MR. PINCENTS:           My property was tested a

23            year ago this month and I was told by EPA

24            personnel that I would be notified within a


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 137 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 29
1             couple of months whether or not it was

2             contaminated or not.                And as of this date,

3             I've heard nothing.               I've called the office in

4             New York a couple times.                  I've talked to

5             representatives and I was told that I would be

6             contacted by the EPA site manager for this

7             area and I've heard nothing.                    So I'm curious

8             as to when do we hear?

9                    MS. VAUGHN:          I apologize for that.               When

10            we're done here, why don't you give me your

11            name and number and I'll call you back

12            tomorrow and let you know?

13                   MR. DAVIS:         527 East Chestnut Avenue,

14            we've seen several residential properties that

15            have undergone cleanup and remediation, some

16            have stayed with the property owners.                          I've

17            seen one where the property's been sold.                            What

18            type of kind clean bill of health are you

19            giving these residents after they've been

20            remediated?

21                   So from what I'm understanding here, it's

22            a permanent solution that you've been doing

23            here, going down.              So what's the document look

24            like that you're giving residents?


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 138 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 30
1                    MS. VAUGHN:          So typically what we do for a

2             residential property that's been cleaned up to

3             an unrestricted use standard, we would give

4             them a letter stating that there's no

5             restrictions and all contamination to the

6             property related to the site has been

7             remediated, there are no restrictions, and

8             we'll give them the file with the results from

9             that standpoint and the work that was done on

10            the property.

11                   And if it were a non-residential property

12            that did require restrictions, our goal is to

13            fully remediate all properties, whether

14            they're residential or non-residential to an

15            unrestricted use standard so they can get such

16            a letter.         But there may be some properties

17            that that's not possible on, in which case we

18            would give them a letter indicating exactly

19            what the restrictions might be.

20                   And that would be on a case-by-case basis,

21            but we anticipate that at Kil-Tone, there

22            would only be a small handful of properties

23            that might not be addressed to the

24            unrestricted use standard.                   If that answers


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 139 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 31
1             your question.

2                    MR. DAVIS:         It does in part.             I know one

3             thing we've been searching for is a document

4             saying that it's going to be addressed to a

5             certain standard and it's funded and we've

6             gotten nothing.             We've got letters that say

7             basically nothing, that there's a hypothetical

8             where this could happen or may happen.

9                    Is that available now, today, after this

10            thing is signed, if there's an action going to

11            be done on any owned particular property to a

12            definite, you know, definition of what's going

13            to happen?

14                   MS. VAUGHN:          No, not yet.          Once we design

15            the remedy for each property, then we'll give

16            those plans to the property owner so they can

17            see what the plans are.                 And then once that

18            was complete, then they would get the letter

19            saying the property is clear effectively.

20                   That's going to take some time.                      I mean,

21            the work on this site is actually moving

22            pretty quickly, but it's not going to be a

23            matter of months.              It's going to be a few

24            years before we are done with the work


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 140 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 32
1             particularly on the property that I know

2             you're interested in.

3                    The property that -- the work that we've

4             done to date on the former Kil-Tone property

5             was part of the removal action.                      So that was

6             conducted to provide some short-term,

7             immediate protectiveness given that we found

8             five levels of contamination at the surface.

9             But the permanent final remedy has not yet

10            even been designed.

11                   So I understand it's a frustratingly long

12            process, but signing the Record of Decision in

13            September will be the next step towards

14            reaching that permanent solution.

15                   MR. DAVIS:         What, the residential or the

16            non-residential?

17                   MS. VAUGHN:          No, for the non-residential.

18            So we already signed the Record of Decision

19            for the residential properties and we're

20            currently doing the clean up.                     We've cleaned

21            up six properties in 2017 to sort of get

22            started and then we're working on another 30

23            or so that should be complete next spring.

24            And then the final set of residential


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 141 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 33
1             properties will be addressed over the

2             following 2020 to '21.                 Hopefully, the plan is

3             that the non-residential work will start

4             shortly after the residential work ends.

5                    MR. DAVIS:         One last question.              So we have

6             at 527 East Chestnut Avenue, we have a large

7             section that was not paved on the east of the

8             property that was utilized by the contractors

9             to move dirt and do whatever they needed to do

10            to clean up the first set of residential

11            things.        What do I have to do to have that

12            paving completed?

13                   Right now I have, you know, two-thirds of

14            the property paved and I have a third of the

15            property just sitting there unpaved.

16            I don't know that it's doing its job if it's

17            not complete.           So who should I talk to to try

18            to move that along?

19                   MS. VAUGHN:          You can -- I'm not sure --

20            are they still actively using that part or

21            they're no longer using that?                     Okay.      So what

22            I think is, either me or Caroline, if you can

23            give us a call tomorrow or whenever you get a

24            chance and we can discuss that.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 142 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 34
1                    MS. SEPPI:         Or you can call me also.                  I

2             can get in touch with Caroline, you know,

3             she's at the site quite often and you can give

4             me a call tomorrow.               And that was 527 East

5             Chestnut?

6                    MR. DAVIS:         (Inaudible) what was, but

7             there's no work going on there and it's just a

8             patch of ground with weeds.                    (Inaudible.)

9                    MS. SEPPI:         Right.       I think I know where

10            the property is.             And we can check with the

11            contractor to see what the schedule is and

12            look at that tomorrow.                 Thank you.

13                   Sir, did you have another question?

14                   MR. RUIS:        My name is Victor Ruis and I

15            have a couple.            Actually, I've got two

16            questions.          The first one is I'm a tenant, so

17            my landlord has been very resistant to the

18            testing of the soil and everything.

19                   So now that I see the risk of cancer, it

20            gets me worried because I was talking to

21            another friend and he said that once

22            everything is done, you guys aren't coming

23            back.       So if my landlord decides not to let

24            you guys go in and do all your tests, I'm just


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 143 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 35
1             going to be -- I mean, for now I'm just

2             staying there, but is there a way for me to

3             force him to agree to get in the process or is

4             it his decision?

5                    MS. SEPPI:         Do you know, has the owner of

6             the property spoken to you about it at all?

7                    MR. RUIS:        Well, he said -- I don't know

8             what he wants and I talked to someone else and

9             he said, no, to let you guys in, but I think

10            at the end he allows some of the workers to

11            get into the property.                 But from what I know,

12            he seems like he doesn't want to go through

13            the process.

14                   MS. SEPPI:         Maybe after this meeting, if

15            you come up and give us the address, we can

16            check with the contractor and the people at

17            EPA and see if we have access and see if there

18            is a plan to do that property also, because we

19            do have to reach out to the property owners

20            first, you know.

21                   But we certainly do try to encourage them

22            to provide access for us to do the cleanup.

23            That's very important to us.                    And then also,

24            once we have his okay, we can talk to you


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 144 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 36
1             directly as the tenant.                 So I want to check

2             with them first and then we'll get back to you

3             tomorrow.         Okay.      Thank you.         Do you have

4             another one?

5                    MR. RUIS:        I don't know how to ask this

6             question, but I hear something about

7             institutional control and does that mean that

8             most of time for the work to get done or

9             everything's going to get done and I'm going

10            to be able to open my business every day as

11            usual?

12                   MS. SEPPI:         Now, that's a good question.

13            I'm going to let Stephanie answer that because

14            she knows more about institutional control.

15                   MS. VAUGHN:          So no, the majority of the

16            properties we will try to clean up to what we

17            call unrestricted use so that we won't need

18            any institutional control.                   But if let's say

19            there was some reason that we couldn't remove

20            all of the contamination on the property,

21            let's say there were utilities that we just

22            could not get the contamination away from,

23            then we might have to put some sort of deed

24            notice or use restriction on the property


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 145 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 37
1             saying if someone wanted to do work on this

2             property, they couldn't excavate below 2 feet

3             in this portion, something like that.

4                    So it's not that the business would have

5             to close, but there might be some restrictions

6             on future development.                 That's just one

7             example, but the goal would be to complete

8             this work and not have institutional control.

9                    MS. SEPPI:         Did that answer your question?

10                   MR. RUIS:        Yes.

11                   MS. POST:        Michelle Post, I'm with the

12            Atlantic City Press.                The gentleman over here

13            has said that his yard was tested but and it

14            sounded like a residential property.                         So are

15            there still residential properties that may

16            need to be brought into the program and would

17            they be brought in under this Phase 2 or

18            how would that work?

19                   MS. VAUGHN:          So at this point, we think --

20            so the way we think the contamination got

21            spread through the community is basically

22            through overflow like when it rains, the soil

23            spreads and while the facility was operating

24            somewhat without restriction.                     So we think we


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 146 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 38
1             have sort of reached the limits of how far the

2             contamination has gone.

3                    You know, we kept moving out how far we

4             investigate until we were finding clean soil

5             and non-impacted properties.                    There are still

6             a few residential properties within that ring

7             that we have not been given access to.                          So we

8             are still actively trying to get access to

9             those properties.

10                   So I don't know if the property

11            that you're concerned about is one that we

12            either haven't investigated at all and should

13            or one that we may need to or properties where

14            we've collected limited samples and need to

15            collect more and for some reason the owner is

16            no longer giving us access.                    So we are

17            actively still trying to get access to all

18            those properties that we have reason to

19            believe might be affected.

20                   And you know, if we have data showing

21            there's an impact, we will -- we will keep

22            persuing it aggressively so that we get to,

23            you know -- if we need to clean up the

24            property, we will.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 147 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 39
1                    MS. SEPPI:         Any other questions?

2                    MR. DAVIS:         Seth Davis, 527 East Chestnut

3             Avenue.        I was told by a couple of the

4             environmental folks that have been testing

5             that the Lerco property across the street from

6             the Kil-Tone site actually has the highest

7             contamination levels; is that true?                         The Lerco

8             property?

9                    MS. VAUGHN:          I'd have to look at the data.

10            I know that Kil-Tone and Lerco, the former

11            Kil-Tone facility and Lerco have the highest

12            concentration.            I don't know what the actual

13            highest concentration will be at Kil-Tone and

14            Lerco.

15                   MS. HARTZELL:           I believe it was Kil-Tone,

16            but I can verify it and check whether, what

17            the levels were at Lerco as well.

18                   MS. VAUGHN:          It appears that the Lerco

19            facility was used to store waste materials

20            from Kil-Tone.            So it's almost like it could

21            be one facility with Kil-Tone.                      And this was

22            all the way back in the past, nothing to do

23            with current owners or operators, when it

24            stopped operating in like 1933.                      So this is


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 148 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 40
1             all historic operations, nothing to do with

2             current people that are there.

3                    MS. SEPPI:         We're certainly here to answer

4             any more questions that you may have.                          And if

5             you don't have any more questions, we thank

6             you for coming.

7                    MS. POST:        About the non-residential

8             properties, how would you describe the

9             neighborhood?           Is it a mix of residential and

10            non-residential?             You know, like describe the

11            neighborhood.

12                   MS. VAUGHN:          So I would say based on this

13            figure, if you go, so as you move this way,

14            down left, it becomes more less residential,

15            more commercial/industrial.

16                   MS. POST:        But Kil-Tone in relation to

17            that, I see the little thing at the top.                            Is

18            that Kil-Tone?

19                   MS. HARTZELL:           This slashed one is

20            Kil-Tone, yes.            Okay.      This slashed property

21            is Kil-Tone.           And all of the properties in red

22            is commercial and the purple color is

23            industrial.          And then the yellow is

24            residential.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 149 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 41
1                    So we have sort of -- we have some areas

2             where it's very mixed of residential

3             properties and kind of businesses that are in

4             some structures that could be re-used for

5             residential in the future.

6                    MS. POST:        Where have you already done the

7             work residentially?               Is that on there?             Is

8             that neighborhood on there where you've

9             already excavated?              Where would that be on

10            there?

11                   MS. HARTZELL:           So -- do you have the exact

12            areas --

13                   MS. VAUGHN:          The residential properties we

14            are currently addressing and have addressed

15            are in this area.              And it's the same area as

16            the non-residential properties.                      It's just

17            sort of because you might wonder why we

18            separated it out.              Part of the reason is

19            because the residential and non-residential

20            properties might have different clean up

21            goals, so we often address those in different

22            Records of Decision.

23                   In this case, almost most, if not all,

24            have been non-residential properties that


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 150 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 42
1             won't always be addressed with residential

2             standards.          So that's why we're hoping the

3             work will just be able to continue sort of

4             fluently from the residential to the

5             non-residential because it is the same

6             neighborhood and there might be a non

7             residential property next to a residential.

8                    MS. SEPPI:         Any other questions?               Thank

9             you so much for coming.                  And as I mentioned,

10            give it a day or two and this presentation

11            will be up on the webpage.                   And if you just

12            Google, Kil-Tone Superfund Site, it'll bring

13            you right to it.             So you don't even have to

14            put in all that other information if you don't

15            want to.

16                   Other than that, I don't think there's

17            anything else to share.                  We thank the

18            interpreters for coming tonight and Scott.                             So

19            thank you very much and the few people that

20            had questions, please stay behind and we'll

21            get your names and your questions.                        Thank you.

22                                        -   -    -

23                           (Whereupon, the hearing

24                        was concluded at 8:00 p.m.)


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 151 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 43
1                                          -   -   -

2                               C E R T I F I C A T E

3                                          -   -   -

4                  I hereby        certify that           the proceedings and

5                  evidence        noted       are contained fully and

6                  accurately         in       the notes taken by me in the

7                  hearing of the above matter, and that this is

8            a correct transcript of the same.

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16                      (The    foregoing certification of this

17                transcript does not apply to any reproduction

18                 of     the     same by any means, unless under the

19                 direct       control        and/or supervision of the

20           certifying reporter.)

21

22

23

24


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 152 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 1
1
2
3
4       UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY REGION 2
5     - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
6          FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY SUPERFUND SITE
7          PROPOSED PLAN PUBLIC MEETING
8          OPERABLE UNIT TWO
9          NON-RESIDENTIAL SOIL
10    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
11
12                                      City of Vineland Council Chambers
                                        640 East Wood Street, 2nd Floor
13                                      Vineland, New Jersey 08360
14
15                                      September 4, 2019.
                                        6:30 p.m.
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 153 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 2
1                                 - - -
2                            APPEARANCES
3                                 - - -
4
5     EPA PRESENT:
6
7     PAT SEPPI, COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT COORDINATOR
8     SHARON HARTZELL, PROJECT MANAGER
9     ABBEY STATES, HUMAN HEALTH RISK ASSESSOR
10    ANGELA CARPENTER, CHIEF OF SPECIAL PROJECTS BRANCH
11    STEPHANIE VAUGHN, SECTION CHIEF
12
13
14    PUBLIC PARTICIPATION:
15    STEPHEN HAWK
16    PERRY NOVAK
17    IAN STEWART
18    JESSE ALBERT
19    STEVEN CREIGHTON
20
21
22
23
24
25


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 154 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 3
1                                                 - - -
2                                    P R O C E E D I N G S
3                                                 - - -
4                             MS. SEPPI:          If everyone is ready, let's
5                     get started.           First off, thank you for
6                     attending our public meeting tonight.                          We know
7                     you couldn't make the first one, so we're
8                     happy to do this again for you.                      And maybe for
9                     anyone else who showed up.
10                            What I would like to do first is go
11                    around and have everybody who is here
12                    introduce themselves and their relationship to
13                    the site.
14                            So let's start -- there.
15                            MS. VAUGHN:          Hi.     I am Stephanie Vaughn.
16                    I am with EPA.            I am the Section Chief.
17                            MS. CARPENTER:            I am Angela Carpenter.                I
18                    am the Chief of the Special Projects Branch,
19                    and this project is within my current
20                    portfolio, as they like to say.
21                            AUDIENCE MEMBER:             Current?
22                            MS. CARPENTER:            Portfolios change.
23                            MS. HARTZELL:           Hi.     My name is Sharon
24                    Hartzell.         I am the Remedial Project Manager
25                    for Kil-Tone OU2.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 155 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 4
1                             MS. SEPPI:          Abbey.
2                             MS. STATES:          I am Abbey States.              I am the
3                     Human Health Risk Assessor for the site.
4                             MS. SEPPI:          And to end up, EPA people, my
5                     name is Pat Seppi.              I am the Community Liaison
6                     for this site.
7                             We have a couple of people tonight from
8                     the core of engineers who I would like to have
9                     introduce themselves.
10                            Steve.
11                            MR. CREIGHTON:            I am Steve Creighton.                I
12                    am the Resident Engineer on the project, core
13                    of engineering.
14                            MR. STEWART:           And I am Ian Stewart,
15                    Project Engineer of the project.
16                            MS. SEPPI:          We also have a couple of
17                    people from our con -- the course contractor
18                    who is actually doing the work right now.
19                            So why don't you introduce yourself also.
20                            MR. NOVAK:          Perry Novak, Superintendent
21                    of 7C.
22                            MR. ALBERT:          Jesse Albert, Project
23                    Engineer for 7C.
24                            MS. SEPPI:          All right.
25                            Now, the gentlemen in the back, please


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 156 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 5
1                     introduce themselves.                The two gentlemen at
2                     the side of the table are translators who we
3                     provide just in case there was anybody who
4                     came to this meeting tonight who needed to
5                     have the information translated.
6                             So would you introduce yourselves?
7                             MR. GARCIA:          My name is Enrique Garcia.
8                             MR. TELLE:          My name is Rudy Telle.
9                             MR. AMBER:          And I am Scott Amber.               I am
10                    here to set all this up.
11                            MS. SEPPI:          And our stenographer.               Would
12                    you like to introduce yourself?
13                            MS. RICCI:          Sharon Ricci.
14                            MS. SEPPI:          Thank you, Sharon.              Now, this
15                    is a little bit different.                   I don't know if
16                    you've been to EPA meetings before.                         This is a
17                    more formal public meeting where we do have
18                    Sharon, our stenographer, who will take down
19                    any comments or questions you may have at the
20                    end of the presentation.
21                            So we want to make sure that you have
22                    time.       You know, if you have any comments.                        If
23                    you leave here tonight and you think of a few
24                    more things, you have until the 23rd -- 26th.
25                    I am sorry.          I keep saying 23rd -- of


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 157 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 6
1                     September to send that information into
2                     Sharon.
3                             I don't know if you've seen a copy of the
4                     proposed plan.
5                             MR. HAWK:         I have not.
6                             MS. SEPPI:          We have some here that I can
7                     give you when I leave.                 It's online too.
8                     Yeah.       It's right there.
9                             Don't fear reading it while we're doing
10                    the presentation, though.
11                            MR. HAWK:         No, I am not going to read it.
12                    I want to pay attention.
13                            MS. SEPPI:          You want to pay attention.
14                    All right.          Thank you.
15                            I think that that's pretty much
16                    everything to get started.                   When we do have
17                    the -- when the presentation has ended, we do
18                    ask if you could please hold your questions
19                    until the end.            And then before you come up
20                    and ask your question or give your comments,
21                    if you could just say and spell your name so
22                    Sharon gets that information.                     Okay.      All
23                    right.
24                            I think then we're all set for you.
25                            MS. HARTZELL:           All right.          Well, welcome,


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 158 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 7
1                     everyone.         Can everyone hear me okay without
2                     the microphone?
3                             Okay.       Wonderful.
4                             Thank you for being here tonight for our
5                     public meeting part two on the Kil-Tone
6                     project for OU2.             Tonight I will be covering
7                     the proposed plan for the project.                        I'll also
8                     go over some of the basics of the Superfund
9                     process, the site history that's gotten us
10                    where we are today, what we've done so far to
11                    investigate this section of the project, the
12                    remedial alternatives that we considered, as
13                    well as the preferred alternative that we have
14                    put forth in the proposed plan.                      And we'll
15                    discuss the next steps and you will have a
16                    chance to give questions and comments in
17                    person, as well as an opportunity to submit
18                    them to me after the meeting.
19                            So we are here tonight to discuss the
20                    proposed remedial action plan for Operable
21                    Unit 2 of the Kil-Tone site.                    This operable
22                    unit is encompassing the non-residential
23                    properties in the vicinity of Kil-Tone,
24                    including the Kil-Tone facility itself.
25                            So as Pat stated in her introduction, we


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 159 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 8
1                     will be accepting written and verbal comments
2                     until Thursday, September 26th.                      And all of
3                     these comments will be formally addressed
4                     within the record of decision that will be
5                     producing and it will be included in the
6                     official administrative record for the site.
7                             So to discuss a little background of the
8                     Superfund process, we start with all of the
9                     sites at the preliminary assessment and site
10                    investigation stage.                This is to determine
11                    whether the site has significant risk to human
12                    health or to ecological health.                      And that
13                    process eventually leads to -- for sites like
14                    this, to the placement of the site on the
15                    national priorities list.
16                            After that, we commence a more in-depth
17                    investigation called the remedial
18                    investigation, and that process is tied in
19                    with a process called the feasibility study
20                    where we look at different options for dealing
21                    with the contamination that we're dealing
22                    with.
23                            So following that is the stage that we're
24                    at right now, the proposed plan stage.                          And
25                    that will lead into a record of decision once


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 160 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         Page 9
1                     we have fully addressed any public comments on
2                     the proposed plan.
3                             After that, we'll work on the remedial
4                     design and put that into place with the
5                     remedial action.             And that will involve a
6                     period of -- you know, since conduction,
7                     completion and then whatever monitoring we
8                     need to do after the site is finished.                          And
9                     throughout all of that, community involvement
10                    is a very important part of our process and we
11                    are here to take your comments and questions
12                    and respond to whatever concerns you might
13                    have.
14                            So to situate us, we are discussing the
15                    formal Kil-Tone site in Vineland, New Jersey.
16                    It is located in the pinpointed area of the
17                    map.      I think I have -- did I have a laser
18                    pointer?        I did have a laser pointer.                    Yes.     I
19                    am pretty sure that you can all see that.
20                            It's a little light, but we're here right
21                    in Vineland.           To go over some of the main
22                    areas at the site, this blue outline is the
23                    approximate boundary of the site that we have
24                    been looking at for potential environmental
25                    impacts from Kil-Tone itself.                     The red


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 161 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 10
1                     outlined area of this map is the former
2                     Kil-Tone facility, which is included in this
3                     portion of the project.
4                             And the Lerco fuel company, which is
5                     across the street from the former Kil-Tone
6                     facility, was also used as apart of a lot of
7                     the operations of Kil-Tone, including waste
8                     management.          So we're considering that a
9                     highly impacted site as well.
10                            So the Kil-Tone company was operating
11                    here in the early 20th century.                      It started
12                    operations at the property on or about 1917
13                    and proceeded to manufacture lead and
14                    arsenic-based pesticides until about 1933.                             So
15                    some of the specific compounds that they made
16                    here are pictured below.                  They have some very
17                    vocative names.             London purple, Paris Green.
18                    But all of them included arsenic compounds,
19                    which is one of the primary contaminants that
20                    we're looking at here.
21                            The property itself is currently operated
22                    by Urban Sign & Crane, which installs and
23                    manufactures signs for commercial businesses.
24                    And so I pointed out the Lerco facility
25                    before, but that was sort of -- the


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 162 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 11
1                     investigation of that area triggered an
2                     investigation into Kil-Tone itself in 2014.
3                     And so at that point we began to realize some
4                     of the environmental problems that we were
5                     dealing with.
6                             So August of 2014, the New Jersey
7                     Department of Environmental Protection started
8                     their investigation into the site.                        In
9                     November of that year, they referred the site
10                    to us.       And then our removal program, which
11                    deals with risks above a certain level,
12                    conducted sampling in the vicinity of the
13                    former property and conducted a few actions to
14                    provide temporary protection at some of the
15                    properties in the vicinity of Kil-Tone,
16                    including the Kil-Tone property, that exceeded
17                    their specific action levels.                     So that was a
18                    temporary measure to prevent exposures.
19                            In April 2016, the site was added to the
20                    national priorities list, which designates it
21                    an official Superfund site, and here we are.
22                            So to look at the site itself, we see we
23                    have the former Kil-Tone property in this red
24                    area.       This is the broad outline that you saw
25                    in blue on one of the earlier maps.                         And then


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 163 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 12
1                     the Tarklin Branch is also a portion of the
2                     project that we'll be dealing with at a future
3                     point.       So the Tarklin itself actually
4                     originates on the Kil-Tone property and we'll
5                     be investigating that going forward.
6                             So I mentioned operable units before.
7                     Just to go over what that phrase means.                           A
8                     site on the Superfund list can be divided into
9                     a number of different areas.                    That's usually
10                    based on how complex the problems associated
11                    with the site are.              And we kind of group parts
12                    of the project together so that we can deal
13                    with them most efficiently.                    They can address
14                    geographic areas or specific portions of the
15                    environment like groundwater or soil.
16                            The Kil-Tone site has four operable
17                    units.       The first, operable unit one, involves
18                    the residential properties in the vicinity of
19                    Kil-Tone.         And that is currently undergoing
20                    cleanup.        So if you've seen any of the
21                    excavation and refilling work that's been
22                    going on in the neighborhood, that's all
23                    associated with this first portion of the
24                    project.
25                            Operable unit two, which is what we're


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 164 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 13
1                     here to talk about tonight, is the
2                     non-residential properties in the vicinity of
3                     Kil-Tone.         So you can see from this map that
4                     we have the property itself and then kind of a
5                     wide variety of different land uses that are
6                     scattered around the property.
7                             So these purple sites are industrial.
8                     The red are considered commercial.                        And then
9                     we have some commercial sites that are
10                    interspersed with residential sites that are
11                    being dealt with through OU1.                     So it's an
12                    interesting blend of different land uses that
13                    we are contending with.
14                            Operable unit three concerns the
15                    groundwater in the vicinity of the former
16                    Kil-Tone site.            So that is -- that portion of
17                    the project is currently in the remedial
18                    investigation stage.                So we are -- we just
19                    finished up around a Hydropunch sampling on
20                    various properties around the Kil-Tone site,
21                    and we'll be going out and installing some
22                    other more permanent wells and getting a
23                    better idea of how the groundwater might be
24                    impacted.
25                            And operable unit four, which I mentioned


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 165 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 14
1                     a moment ago, concerns the Tarklin branch and
2                     the sediments and service water of the
3                     Tarklin, as well as adjacent properties in the
4                     flood plan.
5                             So the remedial investigation for
6                     operable unit two, the non-residential
7                     properties, was finalized in 2018.                        That
8                     investigation characterized the overall
9                     conditions of the site.                 We were looking at
10                    what contaminants we were dealing with and
11                    determining the nature and extend of that
12                    contamination, as well as looking at what
13                    risks were present to the human health and the
14                    environment.
15                            Following that, we developed a focus
16                    feasibility study, which was finalized just a
17                    month or two ago.              And that is the part,
18                    portion of the project where we look at
19                    different alternatives for dealing with the
20                    contamination.            So we screened all of these
21                    remedial alternatives against one another for
22                    effectiveness and evaluated which would meet
23                    the project objectives and which might not.
24                            To go over some of the results, the
25                    sampling process and the results from the


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 166 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 15
1                     remedial investigation, we did the sampling in
2                     two different phases.                The first section of
3                     the sampling was the Tier A soil sampling, and
4                     that was conducted in August of 2017.                          So that
5                     Tier A portion involved the sampling of the
6                     former Kil-Tone facility itself and the Lerco
7                     property, as well as another property in the
8                     vicinity.
9                             These, this process involved collecting
10                    surface and subsurface soil samples and
11                    analyzing them for the full suite of potential
12                    contaminants including heavy metals and
13                    organic constituents that we though might
14                    potentially be present at the site.
15                            So the purpose of this was to determine
16                    which contaminants present in soil were
17                    related to operations of Kil-Tone or
18                    potentially related, and also to get a head
19                    start in figuring out the extent of
20                    contamination in the properties.
21                            The next portion, the Tier B soil
22                    sampling, was conducted between September 2017
23                    and March of 2018.              And that involved sampling
24                    approximately 50 of the non-residential
25                    properties in the vicinity of Kil-Tone.                           And


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 167 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 16
1                     these properties we collected samples and
2                     analyzed them as well for metals and organic
3                     constituents including PAHs.
4                             So in terms of findings, the highest
5                     contamination was found on the Kil-Tone
6                     property itself.             Not surprising since that is
7                     the center of arsenic pesticide manufacturing.
8                     We found arsenic in soil up to 45,900
9                     milligrams per kilogram, lead and soil up to
10                    91,700.        And -- at the Kil-Tone property
11                    itself, some of these elevated concentrations
12                    were found at locations below the depth of
13                    groundwater table.              For the most part,
14                    concentrations were found in the shallow soil,
15                    though.        Like in the zero to four-foot range.
16                            At the other OU2 properties we still saw
17                    elevated levels of arsenic and lead, although
18                    at much lower levels than at Kil-Tone itself.
19                    And another trend to observe that we observed
20                    about the properties was that elevated
21                    concentrations generally decreased with
22                    distance from former Kil-Tone.
23                            And that's just an image of some of our
24                    soil borings because we were investigating the
25                    soils both at surface and at depth.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 168 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 17
1                             So the next portion of the remedial
2                     investigation was to look at human health
3                     risk.       And we looked at risks to several
4                     different categories of potential, what we
5                     call, receptors.             But in general it included
6                     future and current workers and residents in
7                     the vicinity of the site.
8                             We looked at two categories of risks,
9                     both cancer risks and non-cancer risks, and
10                    found that both of these categories of risks
11                    had exceedances of EPA's risk levels for the
12                    region.        We also had some instances of
13                    ecological risk, the potential for adverse
14                    effects to terrestrial plants, to soil
15                    invertebrates.
16                            And so the take-home message for this is
17                    since unacceptable risks are present, the
18                    remedial action is necessary for the site.
19                    And so that leads us to this, the stage that
20                    we're in now.
21                            So once we identify an unacceptable risk
22                    and determine that we need to take action, the
23                    next step is determining what the goals of
24                    those actions are so we can make sure that we
25                    meet them with the remedy that we've selected.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 169 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 18
1                             So we have four remedial action
2                     objectives for this portion of the site, which
3                     are specific cleanup goals to make sure that
4                     human health and the environment are both
5                     protected.
6                             So the first is to prevent current and
7                     potential future unacceptable risks to human
8                     receptors.          That includes the workers,
9                     potential future residents at any of these
10                    properties included in OU2.
11                            The second is to prevent migration of the
12                    contaminants from the soil via either overland
13                    flow of water or air dispersion.                       We want to
14                    stop them from getting anywhere else.
15                            Our third REO is to prevent or reduce the
16                    migration of COCs into the groundwater from
17                    the soil.         And the fourth is to prevent these
18                    same unacceptable risks to our ecological
19                    receptors.
20                            So EPA sets specific soil cleanup goals
21                    for projects like these.                  And so you can see
22                    that we have a couple of different numbers put
23                    up here for each of the two contaminants that
24                    we're dealing with at the site.                      Arsenic is
25                    the easiest one to grapple with.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 170 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 19
1                             So the non-residential level, the
2                     residential level and the level that
3                     determines whether groundwater is impacted are
4                     all the same and are the lowest of all of the
5                     levels that we look at here.                    So for arsenic,
6                     the cleanup goal is going to be 19 milligrams
7                     per kilogram.
8                             Lead is a little bit more complicated
9                     because there are a few different levels.                            So
10                    we have 800 milligrams per kilograms of lead
11                    in soil is the level that EPA sets for
12                    non-residential properties use versus 400 for
13                    residential use.
14                            So we had some discussions with the city
15                    of Vineland and determined that most of the
16                    properties in OU2, even though it deals with
17                    commercial and industrial properties, could
18                    potentially be zoned as residential in the
19                    future.        So for most of these properties we
20                    are, with the exception of a few that will
21                    definitely be industrial going forward, we
22                    will be pursuing residential cleanup levels
23                    for lead.
24                            There's also a separate number for lead
25                    that we're in the process of calculating that


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 171 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 20
1                     determines whether groundwater can potentially
2                     be impacted, so we'll be looking at that
3                     number as well for the properties that have a
4                     potential to impact groundwater.
5                             But it will be a case-by-case evaluation
6                     of each of the properties to determine what
7                     the future site use is going to be and,
8                     therefore, what level we're going to use.                            But
9                     in general, aiming for residential.
10                            So we looked at several remedial
11                    alternatives in the feasibility study and we
12                    presented the one that we decided to put
13                    forward as our proposed remedy in the proposed
14                    plan.       So we always look at alternative one,
15                    which is no action.               That would be essentially
16                    leaving the site as-is and not doing anything.
17                            Alternative two includes engineering
18                    controls, and that might be something like
19                    adding a cap on the site, any physical barrier
20                    to prevent contaminants from reaching
21                    receptors, as well as institutional controls.
22                    And an institutional control would include
23                    something like a deed restriction or
24                    restriction on property use.
25                            Alternative three includes excavation to


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 172 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 21
1                     the groundwater table, as well as those
2                     engineering and institutional controls.                           And
3                     alternative four includes excavation below the
4                     groundwater table, in addition to the controls
5                     discussed.
6                             Alternative three and alternative four
7                     are the same essentially, except for the depth
8                     of excavation.            One stops at the water table
9                     and one goes below.
10                            In looking at each of the remedial
11                    alternatives, EPA has nine evaluation criteria
12                    that we apply.            The two most important are the
13                    threshold criteria.               And those determine
14                    whether the remedy is overall protective of
15                    human health and the environment and whether
16                    it complies with those standards that I had
17                    showed in the table a few slides ago.
18                            The balancing criteria include how
19                    effective the remedy will be in both the short
20                    term and the long term, whether the remedy
21                    includes reducing toxicity and mobility
22                    through the processes, and as well as cost.
23                    And modifying criteria include community
24                    acceptance and state acceptance.
25                            So the state has agreed with the remedy


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 173 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 22
1                     that we put forth in the proposed plan and we
2                     are here tonight to discuss with the community
3                     and find out if there are any concerns there,
4                     which we'll take into consideration in
5                     deciding on the final remedy.
6                             This table goes over some of the -- you
7                     know, the numbers associated with each of the
8                     remedies, including the excavation of --
9                     quantity of excavated soil that we're
10                    anticipating.           This is pending change based on
11                    what we find during the remedial design
12                    process, but in general you could see that the
13                    estimated quantity of soil that we'll be
14                    taking out increases through the four
15                    alternatives.           Cost estimates and the
16                    estimated timeframe of how long it will
17                    take to put this remedy in place also
18                    increases.
19                            So after evaluating the four alternatives
20                    presented, EPA has decided that our preferred
21                    alternative is alternative three, excavation
22                    to depth of contamination, not to exceed depth
23                    of groundwater table, engineering controls and
24                    institutional controls.                 And the parts of this
25                    remedy are the actual excavation process


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 174 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 23
1                     itself where we'll take out any soil that
2                     exceeds our standards, off-site disposal of
3                     that contaminated soil in the proper place,
4                     institutional controls and long-term
5                     monitoring of any properties that have
6                     contamination remaining in place that we can't
7                     get to for whatever reason.
8                             This alternative provides protection of
9                     human health and the environment by removing
10                    the contaminated soil.                 It meets our remedial
11                    action objectives through achieving property
12                    specific soil cleanup standards.                       It's
13                    preferable to alternative two in that it
14                    relies less heavily on institutional controls
15                    and more heavily on actually removing the
16                    contaminated soil.              And it's superior to
17                    alternative four in that it's more cost
18                    effective and easily implementable.
19                            Now, I did mention that a few properties
20                    have soil below the level of the groundwater
21                    table.       What we are doing with those
22                    properties -- we're still in the investigation
23                    process with OU3, which is the groundwater
24                    portion of the project.                 And so the Kil-Tone
25                    property itself and a couple of other


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 175 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 24
1                     properties that have contamination below the
2                     groundwater table level, we'll be trying to
3                     time the implementation of the remedy for when
4                     we have a better understanding of the
5                     groundwater contamination.
6                             We're expecting that there will be a
7                     remedy for groundwater and we want to avoid
8                     doing excavation on these properties that
9                     might have to -- we might have to return to
10                    them in the future once we have the
11                    groundwater figured out.                  We don't want to do
12                    something that we are going to have to undo
13                    and then redo in the future.
14                            So in terms of timing, we think that we
15                    can work it out that our dealing with the
16                    Kil-Tone property and a few other properties
17                    with very deep contamination will work out
18                    with having a better understanding of the
19                    groundwater and at that point we'll have a
20                    clearer path forward on those.
21                            So our next steps in this process are to
22                    review and address public comments, which we
23                    will be taking tonight, as well as verbally or
24                    in writing to me.              My contact information will
25                    be on the next slide.                The next step in the


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 176 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 25
1                     process is actually signing the record of
2                     decision, and then we will go through the
3                     remedial design process to decide how we're
4                     actually going to do the remedy on each
5                     property and then completing the action
6                     itself.
7                             So as we stated at the beginning, the
8                     public comment period opened initially at the
9                     end of July, but we have extended it through
10                    September 26th.             And we can take comments in
11                    written form or in verbal form any time during
12                    that period.           And we also have a few copies of
13                    the proposed plan, if you're interested in
14                    more information, up at the front.                        And it's
15                    also available on the website.
16                            So with that, I can take any questions
17                    that anyone has about the proposed remedy or
18                    the site in general.
19                            MS. SEPPI:          Thank you, Sharon.              That was
20                    very interesting.
21                            Just one thing I want to mention before
22                    we turn it over to Steve.                   When we were
23                    talking before the meeting, he said -- he was
24                    commenting about how nice the residential
25                    properties look and he said, and I heard a


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 177 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 26
1                     rumor that you have to go back and dig them up
2                     again to do something else and completion.
3                             So maybe that was what -- whoever has
4                     told you that was referring to, the fact that
5                     some of these properties, you know, with the
6                     groundwater table.              But we sure didn't know we
7                     had to go back and dig up those properties
8                     again.
9                             MR. HAWK:         Sure.
10                            MS. SEPPI:          So certainly if you have any
11                    questions or comments.
12                            MR. HAWK:         Yeah, I'll come up.               It's been
13                    very informative.
14                            So I need to give my name, right?                       It's
15                    Stephen with a P-H, and the last name is
16                    H-A-W-K.        And I own a property at 633 Almond
17                    Street.        It's within the study area.                   My first
18                    question has to deal with that.
19                            What was the closest spot that you tested
20                    to that area?           Do you know?           Or -- and what
21                    kind of testing did you do?
22                            MS. HARTZELL:           Which property is it
23                    again?
24                            MR. HAWK:         It's near the school.                It's on
25                    Almond Street.            And probably as you go farther


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 178 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 27
1                     north and east of the site itself, you
2                     probably didn't do much in the way of deep
3                     testing.
4                             But you did soil borings it looks like,
5                     right?
6                             MS. HARTZELL:           So we have done surface
7                     soil sampling and soil borings on a lot of
8                     different properties.                I would have to find
9                     your specific property.
10                            Do you know if there was sampling on your
11                    property, or you're just wondering what the
12                    closest was?
13                            MR. HAWK:         Yeah, I was wondering what the
14                    closest was given the fact that I lived there
15                    two years and did a lot of yard work and was
16                    wondering what I was encountering as I was
17                    doing that.
18                            And if you can give me information -- you
19                    don't have to give it now.                   You can contact
20                    me.     Like I said before -- and I asked this
21                    question.         It just blows me away that there's
22                    contamination north and east of the Kil-Tone
23                    site because of groundwater flows going in a
24                    southwesterly direction and I would love to
25                    hear -- Steve gave me a little explanation,


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 179 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 28
1                     but I would love to hear how you think that
2                     those contaminations got north of the site.
3                             MS. HARTZELL:           So you're on Almond
4                     Street, you said?
5                             MR. HAWK:         Yeah.      It would be right here.
6                             MS. HARTZELL:           Okay.       So this map only
7                     has the OU2 properties.                 I am not sure if we
8                     have anything that's closer.                    But the two
9                     closest would be these 223 and 233.                         And I
10                    would have to check our --
11                            MR. HAWK:         Okay.      And they look like
12                    they're on -- if I look at it, they're on 6th
13                    and Quince area.             I see that.          So those are
14                    two close soil sample spots.
15                            MS. HARTZELL:           And those are no action
16                    required.
17                            MR. HAWK:         Okay.      So that's good.
18                            MS. HARTZELL:           So that's what I know from
19                    what I have here.              But I would have to look at
20                    the maps to see if there's anything else
21                    that's not on this map.
22                            MS. SEPPI:          And I think Stephanie had
23                    something to add.
24                            MS. VAUGHN:          I was just going to say, we
25                    could get back to you with more detail.                           And


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 180 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 29
1                     also if you want to go to the website, the
2                     remedial investigation reports for both OU1,
3                     the residential, and OU2, this action, the
4                     non-residential, are online.
5                             So you can --
6                             MR. HAWK:         Yeah.      You don't have to get
7                     back to me.          I think I'll do that through the
8                     website.        And I am sure I'll be satisfied.
9                             And the other thing is, I am curious
10                    what's going to happen with the commercial
11                    remediation that you're going to do.                         You're
12                    actually going to take down buildings in some
13                    cases?       Smaller buildings?              And remediate
14                    sites?       Or you are going to work around
15                    buildings and just take out site improvements
16                    and then remove soil.
17                            MS. HARTZELL:           So in every case that we
18                    can, we're going to try to avoid demolishing
19                    structures, aside from sheds and garages that
20                    has been done with OU1, where we can't deal
21                    with contamination via underpinning or some
22                    other form of getting underneath the building.
23                            It's possible that demolition will be
24                    needed, but that will all be further
25                    investigated during the design process.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 181 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 30
1                             MR. HAWK:         Okay.      And did you find -- you
2                     found that there was the hotspot across the
3                     street in the Lerco fuel site because I guess
4                     they dumped some of the residuals there.
5                             Did you find any other spots that you
6                     thought might be along those lines where there
7                     was dumping?           Any other --
8                             MR. CREIGHTON:            That was the only major
9                     hotspot that we found.
10                            COURT REPORTER:             Sir, can you state your
11                    name.
12                            MR. CREIGHTON:            I am sorry.          Steve
13                    Creighton, core of engineers.
14                            MS. VAUGHN:          So the investigation is
15                    still ongoing.            There might be another -- so
16                    there's the Lerco property, the one -- another
17                    nearby property may also have some of that
18                    residual contamination.
19                            So as we're sort of conducting the
20                    remedial action for the residential properties
21                    and when we start with the non-residential,
22                    you know, we may -- once you put a shovel in
23                    the ground --
24                            MR. HAWK:         You'll find out.
25                            MS. VAUGHN:          Yeah, you'll find more.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 182 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 31
1                             MR. HAWK:         Yeah.      Unfortunately, 40, 50
2                     years ago there wasn't the same amount of
3                     scrutiny and if an industrial user owned a
4                     property they often used it as a dumping
5                     ground without any public scrutiny.
6                             You may find some others.                   I hope you
7                     don't but --
8                             MS. HARTZELL:           So far Lerco and Kil-Tone
9                     has had by far the highest levels.                        We
10                    consider that the epicenter.                    But you never
11                    know what we're going to find.
12                            MR. HAWK:         Yeah.      I was -- I mentioned it
13                    to a few of you, but I was on the planning
14                    staff here in Vineland for a long time and I
15                    was on the staff when the Lerco came before
16                    the city planning board for the site plan
17                    approval.         And there was a lot of opposition
18                    to the Lerco site because it was going to be
19                    storage of natural gas in high quantities and
20                    there was a lot of public concern.
21                            And that's when the Kil-Tone issue came
22                    up; is that correct?
23                            MS. HARTZELL:           Right.
24                            MR. HAWK:         And there was actually some
25                    written testimony from a gentleman who


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 183 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 32
1                     remembers there being quite a lot of life and
2                     aquatic life in the Tarklin branch, and at one
3                     point he found it was dead one summer when he
4                     went back there to fish.                  I don't know if you
5                     ever got ahold of that testimony.                       But he had
6                     very specific recollections of that and that
7                     the aquatic life actually died and he wondered
8                     why.
9                             MS. VAUGHN:          Yeah.      Yeah.       I think that
10                    is included in the investigation report for
11                    the first operable unit, yeah.
12                            MR. HAWK:         So that was pretty revealing
13                    testimony to us.             You know, we couldn't do
14                    anything about Lerco because there was an LSRP
15                    that gave an approval for them to pave most of
16                    it to capsulate it, but at this point you're
17                    probably going to just tear it all out, the
18                    soil out.
19                            MS. VAUGHN:          Sorry.       What you may have
20                    heard is that there was a removal action
21                    conducted on several properties sort of -- its
22                    ability EPA has to address a risk in a quick
23                    way.
24                            So our removal program did go out and put
25                    caps on a number of these properties.                          So


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 184 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 33
1                     those may need to come up when we do the full
2                     remedial action, which will be permanent.                            But
3                     the remedial actions we're taking where we're
4                     digging up the soil, we do not think we will
5                     need to go back to any property.
6                             MR. HAWK:         Oh, good.         When do you think
7                     you might start and how long do you think it
8                     will last?
9                             MS. HARTZELL:           So that's dependant on a
10                    number of factors.              We still have to get the
11                    raw design, which we are trying to do this
12                    month.       And then following that, we'll have
13                    the remedial design process that takes maybe
14                    six months to a year.                But --
15                            MS. VAUGHN:          Two years.
16                            MS. HARTZELL:           Two years.          Beyond
17                    that -- sorry.
18                            MR. HAWK:         So no shovels in the ground
19                    for a while.
20                            MS. HARTZELL:           There will be no shovels
21                    in the ground until about two years.
22                            MR. HAWK:         And then it's hard to tell how
23                    long it will take to take care of all these
24                    sites?
25                            MS. HARTZELL:           We have estimates on that.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 185 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 34
1                     So during the feasibility study we estimated
2                     that the -- for the selected or the proposed
3                     remedy, that it might take 35 months.
4                             MR. HAWK:         Oh, yeah.
5                             MS. VAUGHN:          So but that's if we sign the
6                     record of decision in September -- assume it
7                     could be quicker, but two years for design.                             I
8                     am just being realistic here.                     We have a
9                     design ready to go in Septemberish 2021, and
10                    so then the remedial action would be 20 --
11                    for, you know, two, two and a half years.
12                            MR. HAWK:         Almost three years later.
13                    Okay.
14                            MS. SEPPI:          But I think Stephanie makes a
15                    good point, we are still continuing to move on
16                    with the residential properties.                       So it's not
17                    like we're leaving or anything.
18                            MR. HAWK:         You didn't stop that part.
19                            MS. SEPPI:          No.     That's still going on.
20                            MS. VAUGHN:          And we may be able to -- we
21                    may be able to start some work sooner.
22                            MR. HAWK:         Okay.      Great.       I learned a
23                    lot.
24                            MS. HARTZELL:             Well, thank you for your
25                    questions.


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 186 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 35
1                             MS. SEPPI:          Thank you.
2                             MS. HARTZELL:           And if you have any more,
3                     you can reach me at my email or a phone
4                     number.
5                             MS. SEPPI:          And you have the copy, right?
6                             MR. HAWK:         I do.
7                             And that concludes your presentation?
8                             MS. SEPPI:          That does, yes.            Unless you
9                     think of any more questions.
10                            MR. HAWK:         No.     I am sure you all want to
11                    head home, get out of here.
12                            MS. SEPPI:          Well, I am sure it's raining
13                    because every time I leave here to drive home,
14                    it's raining.           So I am sure it must be.
15                                 _ _ _
16                            (A brief discussion was held off the
17                    record)
18                                 _ _ _
19                            MS. SEPPI:          Well, thank you so much.                 It
20                    was a pleasure meeting you.                    Don't hesitate to
21                    contact us with any questions.
22                                _ _ _
23                           (Hearing adjourned at 7:24 p.m.)
24                                - - -
25


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 187 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       Page 36
1
2                         C E R T I F I C A T I O N
3
4
5                     I, hereby certify that the proceedings and
6     evidence noted are contained fully and accurately in the
7     stenographic notes taken by me in the foregoing matter,
8     and that this is a correct transcript of the same.
9
10
11
12
                          _______________________________
13                        Court Reporter - Notary Public
14
15
16                    (The foregoing certification of this
17    transcript does not apply to any reproduction of the
18    same by any means, unless under the direct control
19    and/or supervision of the certifying reporter.)
20
21
22
23
24
25


                                 Fink & Carney Reporting and Video Services
     39 West 37th Street * New York, New York 10018                   (800) NYC-FINK * (212) 869-3063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 188 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  Attachment D

Written Comments

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 189 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 190 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 191 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 192 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 193 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 194 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====


