LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: Record of Decision, South Jersey Clothing Company Site, Garden State Cleaners Site
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/55115
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 4c1c7024b0cd980849c4315584e84d032f880a38be1b6074c41f6ceb4a348fc1
Source PDF pages: 136
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             *55115*
                                                                   55115



        Records of Decision -
                                                         55115
        South Jersey Clothing Company and Garden State Cleaners
        Kathleen C. Callahan, Director-^,C/
        Emergency and Remedial Response Division
        Constantine Sidamon-Eristoff
        Regional Administrator
        Attached for your approval are the Records of Decision for the
        South Jersey Clothing Company (SJCC) and Garden State Cleaners
        (GSC) Superfund sites. The sites are located in Buena Borough,
        Atlantic County, New Jersey.
        The GSC site is 1'ocated approximately 500 feet south of the SJCC
        site. As a result of past waste disposal practices, soils at the
        sites have been contaminated. Also, the leaching of the
        contaminants from the soil into the underlying aquifer has
        resulted in widespread groundwater contamination.
         Due to the proximity of the sites to one another, EPA combined
         the remedial investigation and feasibility study (RI/FS)
         activities. The RI/FS and Proposed Plan for the sites were
         released to the public on Friday, July 19, 1991. The public
         comment period extended from this date to August 19, 1991. Also,
         a public meeting was held on August 8, 1991.
         The selected remedy for these sites includes groundwater
         extraction, treatment and reinjection. Our goal will be to
         attempt to reduce contaminant concentrations to within the
         appropriate drinking water standards. In addition, a soil vapor
         extraction system is selected to reduce contaminant
         concentrations in the soil. The contaminated soil currently
         represents the source of the groundwater contamination.
         The present worth cost of the groundwater cleanup is estimated to
         be $10,520,000. The overall remediation time exceeds 30 years.
         The cost of the soil remediation is estimated to be $649,000. It
         is expected to take less than one year to complete this action
         following construction of the vapor extraction system.
         These Records of Decision were prepared by my staff and were
         reviewed by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
         and Energy (NJDEPE). NJDEPE has reviewed, and concurred with,
         the selected remedies for the SJCC and GSC sites as indicated in
         the attached letters.
         ERRD:SNJS-I:S.ATKINSON:db:9/24/91:SHARON'S E DISK;SJGSROCO
SYMBOL. —— > SNJS-I    NJSBrI      ORC   NJP-DD   ERRD       OEP           DRA          RA

SURNAME — >           BORiELLINO         FRISCO   CALLAHAN   MARSHALL   MUSZYHSKI .   IIDAHON-ERISTOFF
DATE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               -2-

Should you have any questions or comments on these Records of
Decision, I would be available to discuss them with you at your
convenience.
Attachment




                                                                  CO
                                                                  o
                                                                  o
                                                                  o
                                                                  o
                                                                  to
                                                                  o
                                                                  *>.
                                                                  00

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                             State of New Jersey
                              Department of EnvironmentAl Protection «nd Energy
                                           Office of the Commissioner
                                                     CN40Z
                                            TYenton, NJ 08625-0402
                                             Tel. # 609-292-2885
Scott A. Weiner                              Fax. # 609-984-3962
Commissioner



                                                                            September 24, 2991

        Mr, Constantine Sidamon-Erietoff                                                     • .•   .   . •
        Administrator .
        U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
        Region II
        Jacob K. Javite Federal Building
        New York, New York 10278
        Dear Mr, Eristoff:
        The Department of Environmental Protection and Energy has evaluated and
        concurs with the selected remedy for the South Jersey Clothing Company
        Superfund site as stated below:
        "This final remedy addresses remediation of the entire contaminated ground
        water plume, one of the threats posed by the sites. In addition, the
        contaminated soil, which represents the source of ground vater
        contamination, is addresssd as the principal threat posed by the sites.
        Contaminant soil concentrations would be reduced thereby minimizing
        continued releases of contaminants to ground water. Current and future
        exposure to, and migration of, groundwater contaminants would be controlled,
        and contaminant concentrations reduced to within the appropriate drinking
        water standards.
        The major components of the selected remedy Include:
        Ground Water
                       extraction of the contaminated ground water;
                       treatment of the extracted ground water;
                                                                                                              CT5
                       reinjection of the treated ground water upgradient from the sites;                     °
                       long-term ground water monitoring.                                                     o
                                                                                                              to

                  ".                                                                                          o
                                                                                                              *>
                                                                                                              CO
                                                                                                              to


                                              Is «n tquil Opportunity Employer
                                                 Kteydttt nper

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

OS.   25.     91     12:35                          OF   BNV.   1PROT.      F>   S




       Soil

                    in-Bitu vapor extraction of volatile organic compounds from
                    approximately 1,600 cubic yards of contaminated soil".
      The Department reserves its final comments on the complete Record of
      Decision pending an opportunity to review the completed documents, Including
      the document's responslvenees summary.
                                              Ver


                                              Scott A. Weiner
                                              Commissioner

       SAW:EP/dfh




                                                                                     CO
                                                                                     o
                                                                                     rs
                                                                                     o
                                                                                     o
                                                                                     to


                                                                                     oo
                                                                                     w

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                        StAte of New Jersey
                         Department of Environmental rrotectfon and Energy
                                      Office of the Commissioner
                                                 CN402
                                       Trenton. NJ 08625-0402
                                          Td. f 609-292-2885
Scott A. Weiner                           Fax. f 609-984-3962
Commissioner



                                                                         September 24, 1991

                                             :
        Mr. Conetantins Sidamon-Eristoff
        Administrator
        U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
        Region II
        Jacob X. Javits Federal Building
        New York, New York 10278
        Dear Mr. Eristoff:
        The Department, of Environmental Protection and Energy has evaluated and
        concurs with the selected remedy for the Garden State Cleaners Superfund
        site ae stated below:
        "This final remedy addresses remediation of the entire contaminated ground
        water plume, one of the threats posed by the sites. In addition, the
        contaminated soil, which represents the source of ground water
        contamination, is addressed ae the principal threat posed by the sites.
        Contaminant soil concentrations would b« reduced thereby minimizing
        continued releases of contaminants to ground waeer. Current and future
        exposure to, and migration of, groundwater contaminants would be controlled,
        and contaminant concentrations reduced to within the appropriate drinking
        water standards.
        The major components of the selected remedy include:
        Ground Water
                  extraction of the contaminated ground water;
                  treatment of the extracted ground water;
                  reinjection of the treated ground water upgradient from the sites;
                                                                                               CO
                  long-term ground water monitoring,                                           £>
                                                                                              o
                                                                                              o
                                                                                              to
                                                                                              o
                                                                                              itk
                                                                                              00

                                Ntwjtrtey it tn fqu*t Opportunity employee
                                              Recycled Ptpcr

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                            or                            04




Soil
             in-situ vapor extraction of volatile organic, compounds from
             approximately 1,600 cubic yards of contaminated soil".
The Department reserves Its final comments on the complete Record of
Decision pending an opportunity to review the completed documents* including
the document's responsiveness summary.
                                       Ve


                                       Scott A. Veiner
                                       Commissioner

SAW:EP/dfh




                                                                               en
                                                                               o
                                                                               n
                                                                               o
                                                                               o



                                                                               OS
                                                                               en

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         DECLARATION STATEMENT

                          RECORD OF DECISION

                   Sonth Jersey Clothing Company
BITE NAME AND LOCATION

South Jersey Clothing Company
Buena Borough, Atlantic County, New Jersey
STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

This decision document presents the selected remedial action for
the South Jersey Clothing Company site developed in accordance
with the requirements of the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, as amended by
the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, and, to
the extent practicable, the National Oil and Hazardous Substances
Pollution Contingency Plan.
This decision is based on the administrative record file compiled
for the sites. An index of the contents of the file is attached.
The State of New Jersey concurs with the selected remedy.
ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE

Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from this
site, if not addressed by implementing the response action
selected in this Record of Decision, may present an imminent and
substantial endangerment to public health, welfare, or the
environment.                             .
DESCRIPTION OF SELECTED REMEDY

The remedial action described in this document represents the
final remedy for the South Jersey Clothing Company site and
nearby Garden State Cleaners site. It includes the removal of
volatile organics from soils at the sites. It also provides for
the remediation of contaminated groundwater, thereby addressing
the current and future threats posed by the sites.
The major components of the selected remedy include the
following:
Groundwater                                                         OT
                                                                    o
     - Extraction of contaminated groundwater above cleanup         °
      standards;                 .                                  0
                                                                    O
    - Treatment of the extracted groundwater via air stripping      *°
      and carbon adsorption;                                        o
                                                                    *»•
                                                                    CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       - Reinjection of the treated groundwater upgradient from
         the sites; and
       - Appropriate environmental monitoring to ensure the
         effectiveness of the remedy.
Soil
       - In situ vapor extraction of soil contaminated with
         volatile organic compounds.
STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS
The selected remedy is protective of human health and the
environment, complies with Federal and State requirements that
are legally applicable or relevant and appropriate to the
remedial action, and is cost-effective. This remedy utilizes
permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies to the
maximum extent practicable and satisfies the statutory preference
for remedies that employ treatment that reduces toxicity,
mobility, or volume as a principal element.



ConstantinX Si'da^on-Eri^tof f
Regional -Admin.istrator\/
U.S. EPA, Region II




                                                                    03



                                                                    o
                                                                    o
                                                                    ro

                                                                    CO
                                                                    -4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         DECLARATION STATEMENT

                          RECORD OF DECISION

                         Garden State Cleaners   ""
SITE NAME AND LOCATION

Garden State Cleaners
Buena Borough, Atlantic County, New Jersey
STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

This decision document presents the selected remedial action for
the Garden State Cleaners site developed in accordance with the
requirements of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, as amended by the
Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, and, to the
extent practicable, the National Oil and Hazardous Substances
Pollution Contingency Plan.
This decision is based on the administrative record file compiled
for the sites. An index of the contents of the file is attached.
The State of New Jersey concurs with the selected remedy.
ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE

Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from this
site, if not addressed by implementing the response action
selected in this Record of Decision, may present an imminent and
substantial endangerment to public health, welfare, or the
environment.
DESCRIPTION OF SELECTED REMEDY

The remedial action described in this document represents the
final remedy for the Garden State Cleaners site and nearby South
Jersey Clothing Company site. It includes the removal of
volatile organics from soils at the sites. It also provides for
the remediation of contaminated groundwater, thereby addressing
the current and future threats posed by the sites.
The major components of the selected remedy include the
following:
Groundwater
                                                                    CQ
     - Extraction of contaminated groundwater above cleanup         £>
       standards;
                                                                    o
    - Treatment of the extracted groundwater via air stripping      ^
      and carbon adsorption;
                                                                    o
                                                                    *»
                                                                    00
                                                                    00

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         - Reinjection of the treated groundwater upgradient from
           the sites; and
• •    •    . . 5.*                         •     -,  «i .  •   .•
        - Appropriate environmental monitoring to ensure the
           effectiveness of the remedy.
Soil
       - In situ vapor extraction of soil contaminated with
         volatile organic compounds.
STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

The selected remedy is protective of human health and the
environment, complies.with Federal and State requirements that
are legally applicable or relevant and appropriate to the
remedial action, and is cost-effective. This remedy utilizes
permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies to the
maximum extent practicable and satisfies the statutory preference
for remedies that employ treatment that reduces toxicity,
mobility, or volume as a principal element.



Constantine sidamon-^r'istoff 17^     '          Datfe
Regional Ad-rninistr^reor     \J                  *
U.S. EPA, Region II




                                                                      CO
                                                                      o
                                                                      o
                                                                     o
                                                                     o
                                                                     NJ



                                                                     00
                                                                     vo

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

              DECISION SUMMARY
       SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY/
         GARDEN STATE CLEANERS SITES

         BUENA BOROUGH, NEW JERSEY




UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
                  REGION II
                 NEW JERSEY


                                                03


                                                o
                                                o
                                                10



                                                VD
                                                O

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         Table of Contents

Section                                                       Page
Site Name, Location and Description.. . . . . . . . . . . .    1
Site History and Enforcement Activities. .........             2
Highlights of Community Involvement. . . . . . . . . . . .     5
Scope and Role of Response Action, . . . . . . . . . . . .     6
Site Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     6
Summary of Site Risks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     8
Description of Alternatives. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Summary of Comparative Analysis of Alternatives. . . . . . 19
Selected Remedy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    24
Statutory Determinations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Documentation of Significant Changes . . . . . . . . . . .    29

Attachments
                            Appendices
Appendix A     Figures
     See next page for index of figures .
Appendix B     Tables
    See next page for index of tables.
Appendix C     NJDEP Letter of Concurrence
Appendix D     Responsivehess Summary
Appendix E     Administrative Record Index

                                                                     o
                                                                     o
                                                                     to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 Table of Contents (continued)

Appendix A    Index of Figures                     Figure Number
Location of Sites and Selected Wells . . . . . . . .          1
SJCC - Facility Map. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          2
Garden State Cleaners Site . . . . . . . . . . . . .          3
SJCC - Area of Soil Contamination. .........                  4
GSC - Area of Soil Contamination. . . . . . . . . .           5
TCE Concentration Contours, RI Phase II. ......               6
PCE Concentration Contours, RI Phase II. . . . . . .          7
VOC Groundwater Contamination Cross Section A-A1 -
 RI Phase II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          8
Limited Extraction System (Alternatives GW2(a) and
 GW3(a). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          9
Total Plume Extraction System (Alternatives GW2(b)
 and GW3(b). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         10

Appendix B    Index of Tables                          Table Number
SJCC - Soil - RI Phases I and II Data Summary. ...            1
GSC - Soil - RI Phases I and II Data Summary. ...             2
Groundwater - RI Phase II Data Summary .......                3
Summary of Contaminants of Concern by Media. . . . .          4
Receptor Groups and Relevant Exposure Routes ....             5
Total Estimated Hazard Indicies for Current Exposure
 Media . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          6
Total Estimated Hazard Indicies for Future Exposure
 Media . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         7
Chronic Toxicity Values for Selected Chemicals of
 Concern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         8
Total Lifetime Excess Cancer Risk for Current
 Exposure Media. ..................                          9
Total Lifetime Excess Cancer Risk for Future
 Exposure Media. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        10




                                                                      Ui
                                                                      O
                                                                      o
                                                                      o
                                                                      o
                                                                      NJ



                                                                      ID
                                                                      to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE NAME, DESCRIPTION AND LOCATION
          /

The South Jersey Clothing Company (SJCC) is located on the
northwest corner of the intersection of Central and Atlantic
Avenues in an area known as Minotola, Buena Borough, New Jersey.
Garden State Cleaners (GSC) is located approximately 500 feet
south of SJCC, also west of Central Avenue and north of Summer
Road. The sites are located within Atlantic County, less than
two miles from the intersection of Atlantic, Gloucester and
Cumberland Counties. Figure 1 shows the locations of the sites
within the Town of Minotola.
The area of the SJCC property is approximately 1.2 acres.
The site topography in the immediate vicinity of SJCC is flat
with no predominant slope direction. Surface elevations at SJCC
range from between approximately 120 and 123 feet, National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD).
A line of the Central Railroad of New Jersey runs adjacent to the
northwest property boundary of SJCC. The track grade lies
approximately one to three feet below the elevation of the SJCC
property. Two buildings are currently located on this property.
In 1979, a fire at the facility destroyed much of the original
16,000 square foot manufacturing building. The remains of this
building occupy the northeast corner of the SJCC property.
Figure 2 shows the location of this building and other structures
at SJCC (note that the dumpsters, drum storage area and former
trichloroethylene (TCE) tank are no longer present at the SJCC
site). Following the fire, all operations of the company were
relocated to a separate building on the western portion of the
SJCC property. In addition, two single-family residences are
located on Central Avenue immediately south of the abandoned
manufacturing building.                                        »             •
The GSC property occupies an area of approximately 3,000 square
feet. The topography at the GSC site is also flat. Surface
elevations range from approximately 121 to 122 feet, NGVD. GSC
operates from a small building of approximately 1,800 square feet
which covers much of the property (Figure 3). The property is
surrounded by residential dwellings and small commercial
establishments.
The land area downgradient from the sites is occupied primarily
by residences and small businesses. A recreational area lies        OT
adjacent to the Cleary Junior High School, located approximately    &
2,000 feet south of the sites. The predominantly rural area
surrounding Minotola is considered to be one of New Jersey's        0
prime agricultural regions. While some of this area is               <=>
irrigated, only one irrigation well is known to exist between the
sites and Wheat Road (Figure 1) *                                        0
                                                                        *•
There are no surface water features in the immediate vicinity of        w
either site. The nearest surface water stream, Deep Run, is
located approximately 1.2 miles from the sites. Runoff collected

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

in storm drains in Minotola is discharged to this stream. While
the nearest catch basin is reportedly located approximately 600
feet from SJCC, surface runoff from SJCC appears to travel into
the drainage ditch along the railroad tracks adjacent to the SJCC
property. Surface water at GSC appears to infiltrate directly
into the soil surrounding the GSC building.
All residents in the vicinity of the sites are connected to the
borough water supply system. This system serves 50 percent of
the borough land area and 75 percent of the population and
extends approximately 4,000 feet downgradient from the sites.
The two deep wells which provide water for the system are located
approximately 2,000 feet northeast (upgradient) of the sites.

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES

The SJCC, in operation since 1940, is an active facility which
was once engaged in the manufacture of military clothing.
According to information obtained from the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) files, volatile organic
compounds (VOCs) , particularly TCE, were used in the dry cleaning
processes of the company's manufacturing operations. Wastewaters
containing VOCs were routinely discharged directly onto the
facility grounds located between the corner of the original
manufacturing building and the adjacent railroad tracks. Other
process wastes were also stored in leaking drums. These disposal
practices possibly occured since 1940. In addition, according to
NJDEP files, in 1979, a fire at the facility may have resulted in
the release of an estimated 275 gallons of TCE from an on-site
storage tank (Figure 2) .
In early 1981, in response to a complaint by a nearby resident,
the NJDEP performed several inspections of the SJCC facility.
The resident believed her well was polluted and was worried
"because a nearby clothing factory dumps a black waste onto the
ground." Samples were collected from liquid and solid wastes and
a puddle of surface water located beneath a discharge pipe of the
northwest corner of the manufacturing building. An additional
sample was collected from the contents of a leaking drum located
beside the building. Analysis of these samples revealed elevated
concentrations of VOCs with concentrations ranging as high as
620,000 parts per billion (ppb) .
According to information obtained from the NJDEP, in May 1981, a
limited soil removal was conducted by SJCC. Reportedly, thirty-
three 55-gallon drums of contaminated soil were removed from the
facility. No other details regarding this action are available.
In October 1981, SJCC agreed to install four groundwater
monitoring wells at locations specified by NJDEP. Laboratory
analysis of samples obtained from the wells indicated the
                                                                     o
                                                                     *>

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

presence of a variety of VOCs. The following VOCs (and the
highest concentrations detected) were identified in SJCC Well 2,
located downgradient from the abandoned manufacturing building:
TCE (9,860 ppb); toluene (82 ppb); 1,2-dichloroethane (59 ppb);
tetrachloroethylene (28 ppb)? and benzene (22 ppb).
During the following year, soil samples collected by NJDEP at
SJCC detected elevated concentrations of TCE, tetrachloroethylene
(PCE) and chloroform. TCE, PCE, and chloroform were detected at
concentrations of 940,000, 340,000 and 47,000 ppb, respectively.
Between November 1981 and December 1983, SJCC installed an
additional eight groundwater monitoring wells at, and
downgradient from the SJCC facility. Figure 1 shows the
locations of the SJCC monitoring wells. TCE concentrations were
highest in wells at, and immediately downgradient from the
manufacturing building. The highest reported concentration of
TCE, 79,000 ppb, was detected in SJCC Well 2 in July 1984. These
wells continue to be sampled in accordance with requirements
established by NJDEP.
In January 1984, SJCC entered into an Administrative Order on
Consent (AGO) with the NJDEP. Pursuant to this order, SJCC began
operation of a groundwater extraction and treatment system in
1985. Groundwater is extracted from two wells (3A and 12),
located near SJCC, at a continuous combined rate of approximately
25 gallons per minute (gpm) (Figure 1). Extracted groundwater is
then treated by a system comprised of two air stippers connected
in series. A third well (11), located on Summer Road,
continuously extracts groundwater at an estimated ten gpm for .
discharge directly to the Buena Borough Municipal Utilities
Authority (BBMUA) sewer system. Treatment system effluent is
discharged to the groundwater via an injection well. This
system, which remains in operation today, has served to contain
the contaminated groundwater plume to some extent.
In November 1984, NJDEP installed five groundwater monitoring
wells downgradient from the sites (Figure 1). Four VOCs were
detected during two sampling events. The maximum concentration
detected was 2.2 ppb of PCE in NJDEP Well 4 (NJ4).
                                         «
Garden State Cleaners is an active dry cleaner in operation since
1966. Until 1985, according to a NJDEP Administrative Order and
Notice of Civil Administrative Penalty Assessment, wastes were
discharged through pipes located on the north wall of the           w
building to the ground below. PCE was the primary compound used     n
by GSC in its processes.
                                                                    o
In 1984, when elevated concentrations of PCE were detected in        to
SJCC Wells 6 and 8, located adjacent to and immediately
downgradient from GSC, soil samples were collected from the GSC       =>
property. PCE and TCE were identified at 43,000 and 16,500 ppb      y>

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

respectively in a sample collected from beneath the steam
condensate pipe located on the north wall of the GSC building.
In 1988, analyses of samples collected from SJCC wells 6 and 8
indicated concentrations of PCE at 6,100 and 450 ppb,
respectively.
In 1985, GSC failed to enter into an AGO with the NJDEP. The
order would have required GSC to determine the nature and extent
of contamination at the site and evaluate appropriate measures
for remediation of the contamination. In July 1987, NJDEP issued
GSC an Administrative Order and Notice of Civil Administrative
Penalty Assessment.
In June 1986, the SJCC and GSC sites were recommended by NJDEP
for inclusion on the Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA)
National Priorities List (NPL) . Two years later, EPA proposed
adding the sites to the NPL. In March and October 1989, GSC and
SJCC, respectively, were officially added to the NPL.
On July 5, 1988, EPA sent a Special Notice letter to both SJCC
and GSC notifying the companies of EPA's intent to conduct the
necessary Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) .
Additionally, SJCC and GSC were presented with the opportunity to
undertake the work. SJCC declined the opportunity to participate
in the investigation. GSC gave no indication that it was either
interested in, or capable of, undertaking the RI/FS.
During January and March 1989, an initial soil gas survey was
conducted by EPA's Emergency Response Team. The survey was
intended to provide information concerning sources of contamina-
tion, as well as the extent of migration of contaminants in
groundwater. The sampling results showed that the highest TCE
concentrations were found adjacent to the SJCC property. In
addition, it was found that the highest PCE concentrations were
found near GSC. These results were expected based on the primary
cleaning solvents used at each facility. More details on the
soil gas survey can be found in the Remedial Investigation (RI)
Report.
On August 29, 1989, EPA provided SJCC with a second opportunity
to conduct or finance (in part) the RI/FS as outlined in the
final Work and Field Operations Plans developed for the sites in
August 1989. Again, SJCC declined the opportunity.
In November 1989, EPA began a RI/FS for both sites. Phase I of
the RI included primarily shallow and subsurface soil sampling,
shallow and intermediate well installation, and groundwater
sampling, and continued through February 1990. Phase II was
conducted between January and April 1991 and included shallow
soil sampling, intermediate and deep monitoring well installa-
tion, and groundwater sampling activities.
                                                                    o
                                                                    *.
                                                                    10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Also in 1989, SJCC began the installation of a limited soil vapor
extraction system in the vicinity of the TCE storage tank that
reportedly ruptured in the 1979 fire. This project was
abandoned, however, with the start of EPA's RI.
On July 18, 1991, both companies were informed of their potential
financial liabilities in connection with work performed at the
sites. The notice letter also informed the "potentially respon-
sible parties (PRPs)" that EPA may conduct, or require the PRPs
to conduct, response actions at the sites. Further, the letter
stated that if the response actions are performed by EPA, rather
than a PRP, EPA has the authority to recover the public funds
expended to respond to the release of hazardous substances at the
sites.

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT
In August 1989, EPA prepared a Community Relations Plan for the
sites. This document designated the Buena Borough Municipal
Building and EPA's Regional Public Docket Office in New York City
as information repositories for the sites (Appendix DD of the
Responsiveness Summary). All key, site-related documents
(including the administrative record file) are maintained at
these repository locations.
On November 20, 1989, a local public availability session was
held, at which representatives from EPA and its contractor were
available to answer any questions regarding the plans for
investigating the sites. Prior to the meeting, a fact sheet
outlining the components of the investigation was distributed
throughout the community.
In March 1991, at the start of Phase II of the remedial
investigation, an updated fact sheet was issued to summarize the
results of Phase I of the investigation and outline the plans for
Phase II.
The draft RI/FS Reports and Proposed Plan for the SJCC and GSC
sites were released to the public and both SJCC and GSC on
Thursday, July 18, 1991. These documents were made available to
the public at both information repository locations. On Friday,
July 19, a press release was issued announcing the availability
of the documents and the initiation of a public comment period.
Also, on this day, a notice of availability for the documents was
published in The Press of Atlantic City and The Daily Journal
newspapers. These notices outlined the remedial alternatives and    en
provided the dates for the public comment period and public         &
meeting. The public comment period was held from July 19 through
August 19, 1991. The public meeting was held on Thursday, August    0
8, at the Buena Borough Municipal Building. At this meeting,        °
representatives from EPA and its contractor presented the RI/FS
                                                                    o
                                5
                                3                                   **

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

results and remedial alternatives and answered questions about
the investigation and alternatives under consideration. A
transcript of the public meeting is included in the Administra-
tive Record file for the sites.
All comments which were received by EPA prior to the end of the
public comment period, including those expressed verbally at the
public meeting, are addressed in the Responsiveness Summary
.(Appendix D) of this Record of Decision (ROD).
This decision document presents the selected remedial action for
the South Jersey Clothing Company and Garden State Cleaners
sites, in Buena Borough, New Jersey, chosen in accordance with
the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA), as amended by the Superfund
Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, 42 U.S.C.A. 9601, et
seq., and to the extent practicable, the National Oil and
Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 CFR 300
et seq. The decision is based on the administrative record
established for these sites.

SCOPE AND ROLE OF RESPONSE ACTION
This ROD addresses remediation of the contaminated groundwater
plume, one of the primary threats posed by the sites. In
addition, the contaminated soil, which represents the source of
groundwater contamination, is addressed as the principal threat
to human health and the environment posed by the sites.
Contaminant soil concentrations would be reduced to comply with
the appropriate requirements and minimize continued releases of
contaminants to the groundwater. Current and future exposure to,
and migration of, groundwater contaminants would be controlled,
and contaminant concentrations reduced to within the appropriate
drinking water standards. This response action addresses all
known soil and groundwater contamination and is the final action
contemplated for the sites.

SITE CHARACTERISTICS
The scope of the RI for the SJCC and GSC sites included studies
for all media, that may be contaminated. Soil, groundwater and
air at and in the vicinity of the sites were investigated.
Soil                                      '                         en
                                                                    n
Figures 4 and 5 show the approximate areal extent of soil
contamination at the SJCC and GSC.sites as found during the RI.      o
The estimated volume of contaminated soil at both sites totals       °
1,600 cubic yards (1,400 and 200 cubic yards at SJCC and GSC,
respectively). Contaminants in soil in these areas exceed the       o
                                                                    it*
                                                                    <j>
                                6                                    «>

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

soil cleanup level goals developed for the sites. Based on the
results from other sampling efforts, including groundwater
samples collected from wells adjacent to and immediately
downgradient from these areas, and the high levels of
contaminants detected in the 9 to 10 foot depth range, soil
contamination in each of these areas is believed to extend to a
depth of 25 feet. Summaries of the compounds detected at SJCC
and GSC during both phases of the RI and the cleanup level goals
for those compounds are provided in Tables 1 and 2.
At SJCC, the zone of soil contamination extends from the
northwest corner of the abandoned manufacturing building to the
adjacent railroad bed. According to information obtained from
the NJDEP files, this is the same area where wastes were reported
to have been disposed. TCE was the predominant contaminant
identified at SJCC with a maximum detected concentration of
68,000 ppb. other VOCs were detected at lower concentrations in
the soil at SJCC (Table 1). Contaminants detected during the RI
at concentrations exceeding the soil cleanup level goals included
TCE, PCE and acetone.
At GSC, the zone of soil contamination is confined to a small
area adjacent to the north wall of.the GSC building. According
the NJDEP files, this is the same area where wastes were reported
to have been discharged. PCE was the predominant contaminant
identified in soil at GSC with a maximum detected concentration
of 1,300,000 ppb. Other VOCs, detected at lower concentrations,
are shown in Table 2. Contaminants detected during the RI at
concentrations exceeding the soil cleanup level goals at GSC also
included PCE, TCE and acetone.
Groundwater
During the RI, a zone of contaminated groundwater containing TCE,
PCE and other VOCs was identified (Figures 6 and 7). This zone
extends from the shallow wells located near SJCC and GSC to EPA's
intermediate wells 61 (EP-6I) and 121 (EP-12I). TCE and PCE were
detected in EP-8D, a deep well located downgradient from the
sites, at concentrations of 0.9 and 7 ppb, respectively. The
highest concentrations of VOCs were found within the shallow
aquifer between the sites and SJCC Well 8. Seven VOCs detected
in groundwater samples exceeded State and Federal maximum
contaminant levels (MCLs) for drinking water. MCLs are
enforceable standards which apply to specific contaminants which
EPA and the State of New Jersey have determined have an adverse
effect on human health. These compounds included TCE, PCE and
other VOCs as summarized in Table 3. This table also identifies     w
the MCLs for the compounds.                                         o
The contaminated soil located at the northwest corner of the        o
manufacturing building at SJCC has been identified as the most      S
probable source of contaminated groundwater emanating from SJCC.
                                                                    o
                                •7                                  *"
                                7                                   vo

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

This determination is based on the finding that SJCC Well 2,
located downgradient from the contaminated soil, has shown the
highest concentrations of TCE throughout the RI. In addition,
neither TCE nor PCE was detected in SJCC Well 9 located
upgradient from the area of contaminated soil. The location of
the likely source of PCE is the contaminated soil adjacent to the
north wall of the GSC building. Groundwater sampling results
show that the concentrations of PCE in SJCC Wells 6 and 8,
located adjacent and immediately downgradient from GSC, are
substantially higher than those detected in other SJCC wells.
Similar concentrations of PCE were identified in wells upgradient
from GSC.
A vertical profile of the VCC contamination detected during
Phase II is shown on Figure 8. When viewed in combination with
groundwater Figures 6 and 7, the TCE and PCE concentration
contour maps, it appears that the TCE and PCE contamination is
migrating deeper into the groundwater aquifer as it travels from
the sites. The contamination was detected in Well EP-6I and
further downgradient in EP-12I. Neither TCE nor PCE Were
detected in any other intermediate wells (including those down-
gradient from EP-12I).


The air emission rates measured at SJCC ranged from non-detect to
1,463 ug/m3-min (micrograms per cubic meter per minute) for TCE.
As the primary contaminant at SJCC, a contour map of TCE emission
rates from SJCC was generated to show an emission profile of the
site (See RI Report). Based on modeling, 24-hour emission values
were produced. The TCE  value for SJCC at a distance of 100
meters was 44.32 ug/m3.             .
At GSC, airs emission rates measured ranged from non-detect to
10,955 ug/m -min for PCE. The RI Report provides an air emission
profile for3 PCE at GSC. The PCE value for GSC at 100 meters was
0.0024 ug/m . Comparison of this value,6
                                          to a value of 1.1 ug/m3
(i.e., a value corresponding to a IxlO" (corresponding to a one
in a million) risk obtained from the 1989 Health Effects
Assessment Summary Table), indicates that air.emissions at GSC
are of no concern to off-site residents.

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS

EPA conducted a baseline Risk Assessment to evaluate the            Q
potential risks to human health and the environment associated      °
with the SJCC and GSC sites in their current states. The Risk
Assessment focused on contaminants in the ambient air, surface      M
                                                                        o
soil and downgradient groundwater which are likely to pose
significant risks to human health and the environment.
                                                                    <ji
                                                                    o
                                                                    o
                                8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Summaries of the contaminants of concern (COCs) in sampled
matrices are listed on Table 4.
EPA's Risk Assessment identified several potential exposure
pathways by which the public may be exposed to contaminant
releases at the sites under potential present and future land
use scenarios. Under each scenario, the pathways were evaluated
for exposure to the media of concern (i.e., ambient air, surface
soil and downgradient groundwater). These exposure pathways
included the following: ingestion, inhalation, and dermal
absorption. The receptor groups for which risks were evaluated
at the sites included the following: adult workers, residents,
trespassers and customers, adolescent residents and trespassers,
and finally, child residents. The receptor groups and relevant
exposure routes considered are shown on Table 5. Exposures were
based on reasonable maximum concentrations, calculated as the
95th percentile upper confidence limit (95% UCL) of the
arithmetic mean. This reasonable maximum exposure is defined as
the highest exposure that is reasonably expected to occur at the
sites for individual and combined pathways.
Under current EPA guidelines, the likelihood of carcinogenic
(cancer causing) and non-carcinogenic effects due to exposure to
site chemicals are considered separately. It was assumed that
the toxic effects of the site-related chemicals would be
additive. Thus, carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic risks
associated with exposures to .individual compounds of concern
were summed to indicate the potential risks associated with
mixtures of potential carcinogens and non-carcinogens,
respectively.
Non-carcinogenic risks were assessed using a hazard index (HI)
approach, based on a comparison of expected contaminant intakes
and safe levels of intake (Reference doses). Reference doses
(RfDs) have been developed by EPA for indicating the potential
for adverse health effects. RfDs, which are expressed in units
of mg/kg-day (milligrams per kilogram per day), are estimates of
daily exposure levels for humans which are thought to be safe
over a lifetime (including sensitive individuals). Estimated
intakes of chemicals from environmental media (e.g., the amount
of a chemical ingested from contaminated drinking water) are
compared with the RfD to derive the hazard quotient for the
contaminant in the particular medium. The HI is obtained by
adding the hazard quotients for all compounds across all media.
A HI greater than 1.0 indicates that the potential exists for
non-carcinogenic health effects to occur as a result of site-      co
related exposures. The HI provides a useful reference              ^
point for gauging the potential significance of multiple
contaminant exposures within a single medium or across media.      o
                                                                   o
                                                                   K>

                                                                   O
                                Q
                                y                                  f
                                                                   o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

For the SJCC and GSC sites, none of the estimated HI values from
current exposure to surface soil exceeded 1.0 for any potential
receptor. Table 6 presents the total estimated His for current
exposure to the various environmental media. Under the future
scenario, the HI was also below 1.0 for surface soil exposure for
an adult non-resident worker at SJCC. At GSC, however, the HI
exceeded 1.0 for on-site adolescent and child residents. The HI
values for these receptors were 1.5 and 3.6, respectively. In
addition, under the future scenario, the HI exceeded 1.0 for both
on- and off-site residents exposed to groundwater via ingestion.
When the estimated His were summed for each environmental media
to calculate the total His for potential receptors, the total His
exceeded 1.0 (ranging from 1.0 - 7.3) for all receptors except an
adult worker who is not a resident of the site area. Table 7
presents the total estimated His for exposure to various
environmental media under future scenarios.
Potential carcinogenic risks were evaluated using the cancer
slope factors (SFs) developed by EPA for the contaminants of
concern. SFs have been developed by EPA's Carcinogenic Risk
Assessment Verification Endeavor for estimating excess lifetime
cancer risks associated with exposure to potentially carcinogenic
chemicals. SFs, which are expressed in units of (mg/kg-day)'1,
are multiplied by the estimated intake of a potential carcinogen,
in mg/kg-day, to generate an upper-bound estimate of the excess
lifetime cancer risk associated with exposure to the compound at
that intake level. The term "upper bound" reflects the
conservative estimate of the risks calculated from the SF. Use
of this approach makes the underestimation of the risk highly
unlikely. The SFs for the contaminants of concern are presented
in Table 8.
For known or suspected carcinogens, SPA considers excess upper
bound individual lifetime cancer risks of between 10"* to 10"6 to
be acceptable. This level indicates that an individual has. not
greater than a one in ten thousand to one in a million chance of
developing cancer as a result of site-related exposure to a
carcinogen over a 70-year period under specific exposure
conditions at the sites.
The results of this portion of the assessment concluded that the
estimated lifetime excess cancer risk from current exposure to
surface soil at the GSC for adult workers and trespassers fell
within EPA's target risk range at total values of 9.8X10"6 (9.8 in
ten thousand) and 3.8x10"% respectively. The estimated excess
cancer risks from all other media for the various receptors were
below IxlO"6. Table 9 presents the total estimated lifetime
excess cancer risk from current exposure to the various
environmental media of concern. Under the future scenario, the
estimated lifetime excess cancer risks from exposure to
groundwater for an adult worker/off-site resident, adult off-site
resident/trespasser and adult on-site resident were at values of
                               10      -

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

l.lxicr3 (1.1 in a thousand), 9.7x10^, and 1.2X101*, respectively.
Also, under this scenario, the lifetime excess cancer risk from
exposure to surface soil at GSC for an adult on-site resident was
at a value of 1.4x10"*. These values exceed the EPA acceptable
risk range for carcinogens. Finally, at SJCC, the ambient air
exposure had an estimated lifetime excess cancer risk of 8.8xlCr*
for an on-site adult resident. The estimated lifetime excess
cancer risks from surface soil exposure at the   SJCC and ambient
air exposure at the .GSC site were below IxlO"6. Table 10 presents
the total estimated lifetime excess cancer risk resulting from
future exposure to the various environmental media.
For more detail on the risk assessment, including brief summaries
of the critical human health effects associated with Icng-term
exposure to each of the chemicals of concern, see chapter 6, the
Baseline Risk Assessment, of the RI Report.
A brief environmental evaluation was also conducted as part of
the baseline risk assessment. The evaluation concluded that the
threat to biological resources posed by the sites appears to be
minimal and limited to potential impacts to plants exposed to
contaminants in surface soils. These plants include, primarily
cultivated grasses and weeds. According to the RI Report, the
potential exists for bioaccumulation to occur in these plants
causing sublethal effects (stunted growth) or death in the more
sensitive species. These effects, however, have not been
observed in the vegetation at SJCC and GSC.
Effects of contamination on terrestrial animals were considered
insignificant. This conclusion was based on the likelihood that
the duration of exposure would be brief and frequency of exposure
low.
Finally, it was concluded that while the sites are located within
the range of several endangered or threatened animal species
including the Pine Barrens Treefrog, Pine Snake, Red-shouldered
Hawk, Barred Owl and Red-headed Woodpecker, conditions at the
sites do not conform to the habitats preferred by these species.
Thus, it is believed that these species are not likely to be
present within either site area.
The procedures and inputs used to assess risks in this
evaluation, as in all such assessments, are subject to a wide
variety of uncertainties. In general, the main sources of
uncertainty include environmental chemistry sampling and
analysis, exposure models and assumptions, and toxicological         j
                                                                         w
models and parameters.                                                   o
As a result, the Risk Assessment provides upper bound estimates          <=>
of the risks to populations near the sites, and is highly                S
unlikely to underestimate actual risks related to the sites.
                                                                         o
                                                                         Ul
                                                                         o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from these
sites, if not addressed by the preferred alternative or one of
the other active remedial alternatives considered, may present a
current or potential threat to the environment through the
groundwater and soil pathways.                           .

DESCRIPTION OF ALTERNATIVES

A Feasibility Study (FS) was conducted to develop and evaluate
remedial alternatives for soil and groundwater at the SJCC and
GSC sites. Remedial alternatives were assembled from applicable
remedial technology process options and were intially evaluated
for effectiveness, implementability, and cost. The alternatives
meeting these criteria were then evaluated and compared to nine
criteria required by the NCP.
The remedial alternatives described in this ROD are organized
according to the media which they address and are numbered to
correspond with the numbers in the FS. The alternative numbers
for soil are preceeded by the letter "S." Groundwater
alternative numbers are preceeded by the letters "GW."
Estimated capital and annual operation and maintenance (O&M)
costs are used- to calculate an estimated total present worth cost
for each alterative. In addition, for all described
alternatives, the implementation timeframe refers to the time
required to implement the alternative from the start of
construction and operation of the treatment system to its
completion. This timeframe does not include the time required to
perform remedial design activities.
More detailed descriptions of the various soil and groandwater
alternatives are presented within Chapter 3 of the FS Report,
Development and Analysis of Alternatives.
Soil
Five remedial alternatives for contaminated soil at SJCC and GSC
were considered for detailed evaluation and are described below.
The capital, operation and maintenance, and present worth costs
provided for these alternatives were totaled for the sites.
For total VOCs in soil, NJDEP established an Interim Soil Action
Level (ISAL) of 1 ppm (or 1,000 ppb).  EPA regards this action
level as a "to-be-considered" requirement. As such, it can be
used in determining the necessary level of cleanup for the
protection of human health and the environment. In the absence        w
of any existing chemical specific Federal or State ARARs for          <n
soil, EPA and the NJDEPE have agreed to establish cleanup goals
of 1 ppm for TCE and PCE, separately, given the predominance of      0
the two compounds at the sites.                                       o
                                                                     to
                               12
                                                                     ui
                                                                     o
                                                                     *>.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 81: NO ACTION
Estimated Capital Cost: $20,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $87,000
Estimated Total Present Worth (PW) Cost: $1,700,000
Estimated Implementation Timeframe: None
CERCLA requires that the "No Action" Alternative be evaluated at
every site to establish a baseline for comparison to the other
alternatives. Under this alternative, EPA would take no further
action at the sites to prevent exposure to the soil contamina-
tion. A long-term groundwater monitoring program would be
implemented to track the migration of soil contaminants from the
soil into the groundwater utilizing existing groundwater
monitoring wells to the maximum extent possible. For cost
estimation purposes, it was assumed that sampling would occur on
a quarterly basis. The groundwater samples would be analyzed for
VOCs including TCE, PCE, cis-1,2-dichloro ethene, 1,1-dichloro-
ethene, carbon tetrachloride, vinyl chloride, 1,1,1-trichloro-
ethane and benzene.
Because this alternative would result in contaminants remaining
on site, CERCLA requires that the sites be reviewed every five
years. If justified by the review, remedial actions would be
implemented at that time to remove or treat the wastes. The cost
estimates above include the cost to perform this review.
Alternative 62:   SOIL VAPOR EXTRACTION
Estimated Capital Cost: $461,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $188,000
Estimated Total PW Cost: $649,000
Estimated Implementation Timeframe: 6-9 months
Approximately 1,600 cubic yards of contaminated soil would be
treated by in situ vapor extraction. The extraction process
utilizes a vacuum generated by a pump or blower to induce air
flow through the contaminated soil, stripping and volatilizing
the VOCs from the soil into the air. Contaminated air and water
from the soil would flow to a water/vapor separator where the
contaminated water would be removed and pumped for treatment.
The contaminated air would flow through activated carbon
canisters arranged in series for treatment. Spent activated
carbon would be regenerated at an off-site location for reuse. A
surface liner would be used to prevent air leakage from the soil
surface. Additional study on soil vapor extraction would be      co
performed during the design phase.                               ^
                                                                 o
                                                                o
                                                                NJ
                                                                o
                                                               (fl
                                                               o
                                13                             °«

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        Alternative S3:   EXCAVATION, LOW TEMPERATURE THERMAL DESORPTION,
                          BACKFILL TREATED SOIL
        Estimated capital Cost: $1,160,000
        Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $38,000
        Estimated Total PW .Cost: $1,198,000
        Estimated Implementation Timeframe: 5-8 months
        Approximately 1,600 cubic yards of contaminated soil would be
        excavated and staged prior to treatment in an on-site, mobile
        thermal desorption unit. Thermal desorption is a mass transfer
        process in which soil is passed through a thermal rotary dryer
        where VOCs are transferred to the gas phase. Off-gases would be
        managed in a treatment unit and condensate treated in an on-site
        groundwater .treatment plant. The treated soil would be used to
        backfill the excavations. The unit would comply with the
        appropriate Federal and State air quality standards.
        Alternative 84:   SOIL FLUSHING
        Estimated Capital Cost: $133,000
        Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $34,000
        Estimated Total PW Cost: $167,000
        Estimated Implementation Timeframe:    10 - 14 months
        Under this alternative, water is applied at or near the soil
        surface. Infiltration of the water through the vadose zone
        causes contaminants to desorb from the soil and move to the
        groundwater. Using extraction wells, contaminated groundwater
        leachate would be extracted from the groundwater and pumped to a
        groundwater treatment system. The treated groundwater would then
        be reapplied to the soil resulting in a cyclic flow pattern.
        Given that this alternative requires treatment of the extracted
        groundwater, it would be considered only in conjuction with one
        of the active groundwater alternatives. Costs associated with
        treatment of the extracted groundwater are included under the
        groundwater alternatives. Temporary dikes would surround the
        soil areas to contain the flushing solution within the treatment
        area. Periodic subsurface soil sampling and analysis would be
        required to effectively monitor the progress of the soil
        flushing.
        Alternative S5:   EXCAVATION, OFF-SITE DISPOSAL, BACKFILL WITH
                          BORROW MATERIAL
        Estimated Capital Cost: $5,890,000
        Estimated Annual O&M Cost: 0                                        n
        Estimated Total PW Cost: $5,890,000                                 <">
        Estimated Implementation Timeframe: 4-5 months                      o
«?**^                           .                                           o
        Approximately 1,600 cubic yards of contaminated soil would be        *°
        excavated, loaded into trucks, and hauled to an approved off-site
                                                                            LH
                                          14                                 »

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

.Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) landfill for
treatment and disposal. To comply with the RCRA land disposal
restrictions requirements (LDRs), treatment of the contaminated
soil would be required prior to disposal. For cost estimation
purposes, it was assumed that the soil would undergo thermal
treatment. The excavations would be backfilled with clean fill
material from an off-site source.
Groundwater
Five remedial alternatives for contaminated groundwater at the
SJCC and GSC sites were considered for detailed evaluation and
are described below. The cost estimates for the active
groundwater alternatives are based on a treatment period of 70
years. For cost estimation purposes, it was assumed that the
treatment facility would be located on the SJCC property.
The estimates presented below differ from those presented in the
Proposed Plan. Because these alternatives must attempt to
achieve low levels of contaminants in the groundwater, there is
some uncertainty associated with the required timeframes for
cleanup under the alternatives. Thus, more conservative cost
estimates were developed to better reflect the time needed to
achieve these levels.
The active groundwater alternatives employ two types of
groundwater extraction systems. The limited extraction system,
proposed under groundwater Alternatives GW2(a) and GW3(a), would
attempt to remediate only the highly-contaminated groundwater
areas location in the immediate vicinity of the sites. The
remainder of the contaminated groundwater plume would not be
actively remediated under this system, but would be allowed to
naturally attenuate. Extraction of the total groundwater plume,
proposed under groundwater Alternatives GW2(b) and GW3(b), would
attempt to remediate all zones of groundwater contamination
exceeding the appropriate Federal and State drinking water
standards.
Conceptual layouts for the proposed system options are shown on
Figures 9 and 10.
Except for the No Action Alternative which includes long-term
groundwater monitoring only, each alternative includes the
following common elements:
Groundwater Extraction and Injection: The limited extraction           $
system would include an estimated seven extraction wells pumping       <">
an average of approximately 30 gpm. Twenty pore volumes are
associated with limited extraction (estimated to be 353 million        °
gallons). To the maximum extent possible, the existing                 N>
extraction and monitoring wells will be utilized to limit costs.
The wells would be connected by a header pipe leading to the on-       °
                                                                       o
                               15                                  '   "^

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

site treatment plant. This piping would be intalled below the
ground surface and would follow street rights-of-way where
possible.
The total extraction system would include an estimated twenty
extraction wells pumping an average of approximately 50 gpm each.
Approximately twenty-three pore volumes are associated with the
total extraction system (estimated to be 1.6 billion gallons).
This system would utilize the same wells proposed under the
limited extraction system option along with an additional
estimated 13 deep extraction wells located downgradient from the
sites. A line of extraction wells would be placed along the
downgradient edge of the contaminated groundwater plume and along
the centerline of the plume between the sites and the
downgradient edge of the plume.
Effluent from the treatment plant would be reinjected into the
groundwater via a network of injection wells. For cost
estimation purposes, five injection wells were proposed under the
limited extraction system, and ten under the total plume
extraction system option. These wells would be located
upgradient from the sites to enhance aquifer flushing and the
desorption of contaminants from soil. The actual number and
locations of the wells would be determined during design of the
system.
Long-Term Groundwater Monitoring: A groundwater monitoring
program would be implemented to monitor the performance of the
remedial action. Existing monitoring wells would be utilized to
the maximum extent possible. While the actual locations of the
wells would be determined during design, anticipated points
include locations upgradient and downgradient from, and within
the groundwater plume. Groundwater samples would be analyzed for
VOCs including TCE, PCE, cis-1,2-dichloroethene, 1,1-dichloro-
ethene, carbon tetrachloride, vinyl chloride, 1,1,1-trichloro-
ethane and benzene.
Temporary Institutional Controls: The need for providing home
treatment units for individual residents south of Louis Drive
will be evaluated during the remedial design phase. The
existence of groundwater contamination south of Louis has not
been determined. All residences located on Louis Drive, however,
receive public water.
                                                                     CO
                                                                     8
                                                                    o
                                                                    o

                                                                    O
                                                                    Ul
                                                                    o
                                                                    CO
                               16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Groundwater
Alternative 6W1: NO ACTION
 Estimated Capital Cost: $20,000
 Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $87,000
 Estimated Total PW Cost: $1,700,000
 Estimated Implementation Timeframe: None
As previously indicated, CERCLA requires that the "No Action"
Alternative be evaluated at every site to establish a baseline
for comparison to the other alternatives. Under this
alternative, EPA would take no further action at the site to
prevent exposure to the groundwater contamination and the
contamination would continue to migrate from the site and could
impact downgradient potable wells in the future. Using existing
monitoring wells to the extent possible, a long-term groundwater
monitoring program would be implemented to track the migration of
contaminants in the groundwater. For cost estimation purposes,
it was assumed that sampling would occur on a quarterly basis.
Because this alternative would result in contaminants remaining
on site, CERCLA requires that the site be reviewed every five
years. If justified by the review, remedial actions would be
implemented at that time to remove or treat the wastes. The
above cost estimates include the cost to perform this review.
Alternative GW2 (a) : LIMITED EXTRACTION, AIR STRIPPING, CARBON
ADSORPTION, REINJECTION OF TREATED WATER, LONG-TERM MONITORING

  Estimated Capital Cost: $1,024,000
  Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $187,000
: Estimated Total PW Cost: $4,640,000 .
  Estimated Implementation Timeframe: 70 years
Using a series of an estimated seven extraction wells,
groundwater would be extracted from the more highly-contaminated
portions of the water table aquifer at a flow rate of approxi-
mately 200 gpia. To treat the VOCs in the extracted groundwater,
an air stripping column and granular activated carbon adsorption
units would be constructed on site. In the air stripping
process, VOCs are transferred from the water to the air phases
and discharged to the atmosphere. Air emissions from the
stripper column would comply with the appropriate Federal and
State air quality standards and regulations. In the carbon
adsorption process, VOCs are adsorbed onto activated carbon,         w
thereby removing them from the groundwater. The spent carbon         o
would be regenerated for reuse when possible. The treated
groundwater would be reinjected upgradient from the sites.          o

                                                                    o
                                                                    Ul
                                                                    o
                                17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       Alternative GW2(b): TOTAL PLUME EXTRACTION, AIR STRIPPING,
       CARBON ADSORPTION, REINJECTION OF TREATED WATER, LONG-TERM
       MONITORING

       Estimated Capital Cost: $3,665,000
       Estimated Annual O&M Cost; $354,000
       Estimated Total PW Cost: $10,520,000
       Estimated Implementation Timeframe: 70 years
       This alternative is similar to Alternative GW2(a) except that
       groundwater would be extracted from throughout the aquifer at an
       approximate flow rate of 1,000 gpm. Extracted groundwater would
       be treated via air stripping and carbon adsorption and reinjected
       upgradient of the sites. Air emissions would comply with the
       appropriate air quality standards and regulations.
       Alternative GW3(a): LIMITED EXTRACTION, ULTRAVIOLET
       (UV)/OXIDATION, REINJECTION OF TREATED WATER, LONG-TERM
       MONITORING

       Estimated Capital Cost: $1,168,000
       Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $234,000
       Estimated Total PW Cost: $5,700,000
       Estimated Implementation Timeframe: 70-years
       As described for Alternative GW2(a), a series of an estimated
       seven extraction wells would be used to extract groundwater from
       the water table aquifer at a flow rate of approximately 200 gpm.
       Extracted groundwater would be pumped to a UV plant comprised of
       a UV radiation/oxidation reactor and ozone generator modules, a
       hydrogen peroxide feed system and catalytic ozone decomposer unit
       for treatment. In the UV oxidation process, UV light reacts with
       hydrogen peroxide and/or ozone molecules to form hydroxyl
       radicals. These very powerful chemical oxidants then react with
       the organic compounds in the water. The treated water from the
       reactor would be reinjected into the groundwater aquifer. No
       waste residuals would remain after treatment.
       Alternative GW3(b): TOTAL PLUME EXTRACTION, UV/OXIDATION,
       REINJECTION OF TREATED WATER, LONG-TERM MONITORING

       Estimated Capital Cost: $3,035,000
       Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $475,000
       Estimated Total PW Cost: $12,220,000
       Estimated Implementation Timeframe: 70 years
       This alternative is similar to Alternative GW3(a) except that
       groundwater would be extracted from the aquifer at a flow rate of
       approximately 1,000 gpm. Extracted groundwater would be pumped
/
       to an above-ground equalization tank before being pumped to the
**~v   UV oxidation plant for treatment. Given the high flow rate,
       contaminated groundwater would undergo oxidation in two oxidation
                                      18

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

reactors before entering the UV oxidation reactor. Reinjection
of the treated groundwater would follow.

SUMMARY OF COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES

The soil and groundwater remedial alternatives developed in the
FS were analyzed in detail using the nine evaluation criteria
described below. The resulting strengths and weaknesses of the
alternatives were then weighed to identify the soil and ground-
water alternatives which provide the best balance among the nine
criteria.
The critera are categorized into three groups — threshold,
primary balancing and modifying criteria. Briefly, threshold
criteria are the most important and must be satisfied by any
alternative to be eligible for selection. Primary balancing
criteria are used to make comparisons and identify the major
tradeoffs among the various alternatives. Finally, modifying
criteria are generally taken into account after the formal public
comment period on the RI/FS Reports and the Proposed Plan is
complete.
THRESHOLD CRITERIA

Criterion 1:   Protection of Human Health and the Environment
Overall protection of human health and the environment addresses
whether a remedy provides adequate protection of human health and
the environment and describes how risks posed through each
exposure pathway are eliminated, reduced, or controlled through
treatment, or engineering or institutional controls.
All of the soil alternatives would provide for protection of
human health and the environment, except for Alternative SI, the
No Action Alternative. Soil Alternatives S2 through S5 would
achieve protection by eliminating or reducing risk through
treatment and other controls. Under Alternative S5, the source
of contamination would be completely removed from the site for
off-site treatment and disposal. Alternatives S2 and S3 would
result in the reduction of risk to approximately the 1x10"* (one
in a hundred million) level. While Alternative S4 would achieve
the same reduction in risk, contaminants would be allowed to
spread into the groundwater. As the No Action Alternative (SI)
does not include treatment, it provides no reduction in risk and
will no longer be discussed with regard to soil contamination.
                                                                        to
All of the treatment technologies employed by the active                o
groundwater alternatives are protective of human health and the
environment by eliminating or reducing risk through treatment of    0
contaminants in groundwater. In addition, the temporary             ®
institutional controls and the available existing municipal water

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

           supply would minimize further use of groundwater, and therefore
           reduce exposure to contaminants. As Groundwater Alternative GW1
           does not include treatment, it provides no reduction in risk and
           will no longer be considered.
           Criterion 2: Compliance with Applicable Relevant and Appropriate
           Requirements (ARARs)
           Compliance with ARARs addresses whether a remedy will meet all
           Federal and State environmental laws and/or provide basis for a
           waiver from any of these laws. These ARARs are divided into the
           following three groups: chemical specific, action specific and
           location specific.
           The technologies and methods proposed for use under the soil and
           groundwater alternatives would be designed and implemented to
           satisfy all corresponding ARARs.
           To comply with the RCRA LDRs, treatment of the contaminated soil
           under Soil Alternative S5 would be required prior to disposal.
           Federal and State regulations dealing with the handling and
           transportion of hazardous wastes to an approved off-site RCRA
           landfill for treatment and disposal would be followed. Under the
           remaining alternatives, contaminated soil at the sites would be
           treated in accordance with the EPA/NJDEPE soil cleanup level
           goals. Tables 1 and 2 identify the soil cleanup level goals for
           the compounds detected. Atmospheric emissions under Alternatives
           S2 and S3 would meet the appropriate air standards and
           regulations. Alternative S4 would meet the permit requirements
           for the off -site discharge of treated groundwater.
           Air emissions from all groundwater alternatives would meet the
           appropriate air quality standards and regulations. The treatment
           technologies employed under the groundwater alternatives would
           attempt to meet the Federal and State MCLs for drinking water
           (Table 3) , except in the downgradient groundwater under
           Groundwater Alternatives GW2 (a) and GW3 (a) , where the
           contaminated groundwater would be allowed to naturally attenuate.
           See STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS for more details on ARARs for the
           soil and groundwater alternatives.
           PRIMARY BALANCING CRITERIA

           Criterion 3:   Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence
           Long-term effectiveness and permanence refers to the ability of a
           remedy to maintain reliable protection of human health and the
           environment over time. This criterion includes the consideration
           of residual risk and the adequacy and reliability of controls.
/*"""-,,



                                           20

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

All of the soil alternatives would result in minimal residual
risk. Under Soil Alternative S5, risks would be eliminated
because of the excavation, treatment and off -site disposal of the
contaminated soil. Soil Alternatives S2 through S4 are expected
to attain the EPA/NJDEPE soil cleanup level goals. Under Soil
Alternative S4, however, contaminants would be flushed into the
groundwater which would then be extracted and treated as part of
the groundwater remedial action. Residuals (i.e., spent carbon)
under Soil Alternative S3 would undergo regeneration for reuse
when possible.
All of the groundwater alternatives are expected to attain
Federal and State MCLs for drinking water (Table 3) , thereby
resulting in minimal risk from contaminant residuals in
groundwater. However, as Groundwater Alternatives 2 (a) and 3 (a)
would address only the highly-contaminated portion of the
groundwater plume, allowing the downgradient portion to naturally
attenuate, the resulting risks under these alternatives would be
greater. Temporary institutional controls and the existing
municipal water supply additionally mitigate residual risks by
minimizing the use of groundwater.
Under Groundwater Alternatives GW2(a) and GW2 (b) , residual wastes
(i.e., the carbon beds) would be regenerated for reuse.
Alternatives GW3(a) and GW3 (b) would reguire replacement of UV
lamps when necessary, and constant regulation of proper dosages
of hydrogen peroxide and ozone.
Criterion 4 : Reduction of Toxicity , Mobility, or Volume Through
Treatment
Reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment
refers to the preference for a remedy that uses treatment to
reduce health hazards/ contaminant migration, or the quantity of
contaminants at the site.
Soil Alternatives S2 through S5 would result in treatment of the
same volume of contaminated soil to the same levels. Soil
Alternatives S2 and S3 employ processes that are irreversible
(i.e., the effects of treatment). While Alternative S4 would
provide for reduction in toxicity and volume, mobility of the
contaminants would be increased with the flushing action.
All of the groundwater alternatives employ an irreversible
treatment, with proper system operation and maintenance, as an
element to address one the threats posed by the sites. However,
Groundwater Alternatives GW2(a) and GW3(a) would accomodate
smaller volumes of contaminated groundwater than the remaining
groundwater alternatives (i.e., GW2 (b) and GW3 (b) ) .
                                                                      o
                                                                      o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Criterion 5t Short-Term Effectiveness
Short-term effectiveness refers to the period of time needed to
complete the remedy and any adverse impacts on human health and
the environment that xaay ba posed during the construction and
implementation of the remedy.
Provided that system equipment is properly maintained and the
appropriate protective measures are followed during construction
and operation of the system, Alternative S2 is not expected to
pose any appreciable short-term risks to the community and
workers during construction and implementation. Soil Alternative
S3 and S5 would require excavation of the contaminated soil which
could potentially result in the generation of dust and vapors.
Proper health and safety precautions would be undertaken to
reduce potential risks to the community and workers. Alternative
S5 would also involve the use of trucks to transport the
excavated soil off site. Alternative S4, as discussed, would
provide for potential short-term risks to the environment by
temporarily increasing the mobility of contaminants from the soil
to groundwater. The implementation timeframes are as follows:
Alternative S2 - 6 to 9 months? Alternative S3 - 5 to 8 months;
Alternative S4 - 10 to 14 months; and Alternative S5 - 4 to 5
months.
As the more limited groundwater extraction system alternatives,
however, GW2(a) and GW3(a) would require less clearance of
underbrush, excavation of trenches along roadsides, and the
installation of fewer wells. Less noise and dust would result
from the frequent movement of heavy vehicles carrying
construction materials. Also, fewer roads would require closing.
All of the groundwater alternatives would require an estimated 70
years for completion.
Criterion 6: Implementability
Implementability refers to the technical and administrative
feasibility of a remedy, including the availability of materials
and services needed to implement the chosen solution. It also
includes coordination of Federal, State, .and local governments to
cleanup the site.
Some of the soil alternatives are more easily implemented than
others. Soil Alternatives S2 and S4 involve easily constructed
and operated technologies and require only routine site prepara-
tion. Alternatives S2 through S4 all require specialists to
operate the systems and can easily be modified in response to a
change in action. Monitoring of S4, however, may present some
difficulties. Soil Alternatives S3 and S5 would require signifi-
cant preparation, mainly with regard to the required excavation
of soil; Alternative S3 would also require numerous Federal and
State approvals to construct and operate the mobile thermal unit.
                                22

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Groundwater Alternatives GW2(a) and GW3(a) are the most easily
 technically implemented given that these alternatives require
 less construction, as described, than the remaining groundwater
 alternatives. Also as described briefly under the previous
 criterion, Groundwater Alternatives GW2(b) and GW3 (b) would
 require extensive clearance of underbrush, excavation of
 roadsides for system piping and the installation of approximately
 20 extraction wells. Roads would require temporary closing.
.Acquiring access to the affected properties may be difficult and
 time consuming. Groundwater Alternatives GW2(a) and GW2(b)
 employ treatment components that are proven effective for the
 contaminants of concern, well understood, and readily available
 commercially. As an innovative technology, the technology
 employed under Alternatives GW3(a) and GW3(b) would require
treatability studies to determine the level of effectiveness the
 technology would achieve.
Criterion 7; cost
This criterion examines the estimated costs for each remedial
alternative. These include estimated capital and annual
operation and maintenance costs/ also expressed as estimated
total present worth cost.
Cost estimates' for the five soil alternatives are as follows:
Alt.      Capital Cost        O&M            Total PW Cost
51        $   20,000          $ 87,000       $1,700,000
52        $ 461,000           $188,000       $ 649,000
53        $1,160,000          $ 38,000       $1,198,000
54        $ 133,000           $ 34,000       $ 167,000
55        $5,890,000          $ 0            $5,890,000
Cost estimates for groundwater treatment are based on a 70-year
period which is the estimated time required to achieve the
Federal and State MCLs. The five groundwater alternatives and
their costs are as follows:
          Capital Cost        O&M            Total-PW Cost

GWl       $   20,000          $ 87,000       $ 1,700,000
GW2(a)    $1,024,000          $187,000       $ 4,640,000
GW2(b)    $3,665,000          $354,000       $10,520,000
GW3(a)    $1,168,000          $234,000       $ 5,700,000               CO
GW3 (b)   $3,035,000          $475,000       $12,220,000

                                                                      o
                                                                      o
                                                                      to
                                                                      o
                                                                      <J1
                                                                     I-J
                                                                     (Jl
                                23

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

MODIFYING CRITERIA
          /
Criterion 8:   State Acceptance
State acceptance reflects aspects of the preferred alternative
and other alternatives that the support agency favors, objects
to, and any specific comments regarding State ARARs or the
proposed use of waivers.
EPA has involved the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection and Energy (NJDEPE) in the RI/FS and remedy selection
process. The NJDEPE was provided the opportunity to comment on
the draft RI/FS documents and the Proposed Plan, and was present
at the public meeting held on August 8 to inform the public of
the results of the RI/FS and the Proposed Plan. The State of New
Jersey concurs with the selected remedy (Appendix C — State
Letter of Concurrence).
Criterion 9:   Community Acceptance
This criterion summarizes the public's general response to the
alternatives described in the Proposed Plan and in the RI/FS,
based on public comments received.
EPA solicited input from the community on the remedial
alternatives proposed for soil and groundwater contamination at
the SJCC and GSC sites. Written comments were received on August
19, 1991, from Franklin J. Riesenburger of Riesenburger & Kizner,
P.C., Attorneys at Law, on behalf of the SJCC. No written
comments were received from GSC. Although public comments
indicate no specific opposition to the preferred combination of
alternatives, residents and their representatives did raise some
concerns regarding responsible party liabilities, the results of
EPA's investigation of the sites, remediation costs and potential
health effects associated with contamination at the sites. These
issues, and others, are addressed in the attached Responsiveness
Summary (Appendix D) which addresses all comments received during
the public comment period and the August 8 public meeting.

SELECTED REMEDY

EPA has selected the combination of Soil Alternative S2 and
Groundwater Alternative'GW2(b) as the remedy for the SJCC and GSC
sites. This remedy is comprised of the following components:
Alternative S2:   Soil Vapor Extraction
     - In situ treatment of contaminated soil via vapor             o
       extraction process.                                          to
                                                                    o
                                                                    U1

                                  24

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative GW2(bV; Total Plume Extraction. Air Stripping and
Carbon Adsorption. Reinfection of Treated Water and Long-Term
Groundwater Monitoring
     - Extraction of groundwater with concentrations of VOCs
       above MCLs ?
     - Treatment of contaminated groundwater with an on-site air
       stripping column and carbon adsorption units;
     - Reinjection of the treated water into the aquifer? and
     - Long-term monitoring of groundwater.
The selection of this remedy is based upon the comparative
analysis of the soil and groundwater alternatives above, and
provides the best balance of tradeoffs with respect to the nine
evaluation criteria. ARARs for the selected remedy are provided
in the discussion Attainment of Applicable or Relevant and
Appropriate Requirements of Environmental Laws in the following
section. As described in the comparative analysis, the selected
alternative for cleanup of contaminated soil employs an
effective, readily-implementable technology for treatment of
volatile organic compounds. The only residual, spent carbon,
would be regenerated for reuse.
Air emissions would meet the appropriate Federal and State air
quality standards and regulations. Also, as an in situ
technology, the alternative meets the statutory preference for
treatment of a principal threat. In addition, as pointed out in
the comparative analysis, the selected groundwater remedy would
address the entire contaminated groundwater plume via air
stripping and carbon adsorption. This alternative was chosen
over the remaining alternative which would have provided for
natural attenuation of the downgradient portion of the
groundwater plume. EPA recognizes, however, that the cooperation
of the affected community, particularly in regard to the
placement of extraction wells, is essential to the successful
implementation of the selected alternative. Without this
cooperation, the extent of the groundwater cleanup may need to be
modified.
The combination of air stripping and carbon adsorption
technologies have been proven highly effective on the type of
contaminants present at the sites.
EPA and NJDEPE have determined that, given the predominance of      Q
TCE and PCE at the sites, the levels of 1 ppm for each of these
compounds would be used as the goal for cleanup of contaminated     o
soil at the SJCC and GSC sites. These levels also formed the        °
basis for defining the extent of soil contamination at the sites.
                                                                    o
                                                                    M
                               25                                   -i

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The goal of the groundwater remedy is to restore the contaminated
groundwater plume to levels below Federal and State MCLs (Table
3). A further objective of the groundwater remedy is to restore
the groundwater to its beneficial use, which is, at these sites,
a drinking water aquifer. Based on information obtained during
the HI, and on careful analysis of all remedial alternatives, EPA
and the State of New Jersey believe that the selected groundwater
remedy will achieve this goal. It may become apparent, however,
during implementation or operation of the groundwater extraction
system and its modifications, that contaminant levels have ceased
to decline and are remaining constant at levels higher than the
remediation goal over some portion of the contaminated
groundwater plume. In such a case, the system performance
standards and/or the remedy may be reevaluated.
The remedy would include groundwater extraction for an estimated
period of 70 years, during which time the system's performance
would be carefully monitored on a regular basis and adjusted as
warranted by the performance data collected during operation.
Modifications may include any or all of the following:
-    Discontinuing pumping at individual wells where cleanup
     goals have beeri attained;
     Alternating pumping at wells to eliminate stagnation points;
     Pulse pumping to allow aquifer equilibration and to allow
     adsorbed contaminants to partition into groundwater; and/or
     Installing additional extraction wells to facilitate or
     accelerate cleanup of the contaminant plume.
To ensure that cleanup levels are maintained, the aquifer will be
monitored at those wells where pumping has ceased following
discontinuation of groundwater extraction.' These wells would be
sampled on a regular basis (e.g., quarterly) for several years,
followed by annual sampling thereafter for 5 - 1 0 years.
The total estimated cost for the selected soil remedy is
$649,000. Details of the costs for this remedy, on a site-
specific basis, is shown in the Appendicies to the FS Report
(Volume II).
The total estimated cost for the selected groundwater remedy is
$10,520,000. Details of the costs for this remedy is shown in
the Appendicies to the FS Report (Volume II).

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS                                             "

EPA's primary responsibility at Superfund sites is to select
remedial actions that are protective of human health and the         g
                                                                    to
                               26
                                                                    o
                                                                    en
                                                                    M
                                                                    CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

environment. CERCLA also requires that the selected remedial
action for the site comply with applicable or relevant and
appropriate environmental standards established under Federal and
State environmental laws, unless a waiver is granted. The
selected remedy must also be cost-effective and utilize permanent
treatment technologies or resource recovery technologies to the
maximum extent practicable. The statute also contains a
preference for remedies that include treatment as a principal
element. The following sections discuss how the selected remedy
for contaminated soil and groundwater at the SJCC and GSC sites
meets these statutory requirements.
Protection of Human Health and the Environment
The selected soil remedy protects human health and the
environment by reducing the levels of contaminants in soil
through treatment, and eliminating the source of groundwater
contamination. Treatment of the soil will continue until levels
consistent with the EPA/NJDEPE soil cleanup level goals are
achieved (an estimated 6 to 9 months). No unacceptable short-
term risks or cross-media impacts would be caused by implementing
this alternative.
In addition, the groundwater remedy will attempt to remediate
contaminated groundwater at and downgradient from the sites to
the appropriate drinking water standards. These standards are
intended to protect human health and the environment by assuring
the quality of potable water supplies. EPA expects this remedy
to take an estimated 70 years or longer to implement. Together
with the temporary institutional controls and the available
existing municipal water supply, the threat of exposure currently
posed to residents from contaminated groundwater would be
significantly reduced if not eliminated.
Attainment of Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements
of Environmental Laws
All ARARs would be met by the selected remedy.
Chemical Specific ARARs.
The selected groundwater remedy would attempt to achieve
compliance with chemical specific ARARs related to the
contaminated groundwater at and downgradient from the sites. The
relevant and appropriate requirements include the Federal and
State of New Jersey MCLs established by the Safe Drinking Water
Act. Table 3 provides these levels for those compounds detected     Q
in groundwater. The more restrictive of these levels will be        °
used as the cleanup levels for groundwater. Concentrations of
these compounds throughout the entire contaminated groundwater      o
plume would be reduced to these levels.                             *°
                                                                     o
                                                                     en
                               27
                               *'                                    *-*

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Emissions from the air stripper system will be monitored and if
required, controls would be implemented to ensure compliance with
the National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
and N.J.A.C. 7:27-8 of the State of New Jersey Air Pollution
Control standards and regulations.
    on Secific ARARs.
The selected remedy would address and comply with action specific
ARARs for injection of treated water back into the groundwater
according to 40 CFR Parts 144 and 146, Underground Injection and
Underground Injection Control (UIC) - Standards and Criteria, of
the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act and N.J.A.C. 7: 14A-1 et seq.
and 7:26-9 et seq., UIC and Groundwater Monitoring Systems, of
the State of New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
and Requirements for Groundwater Monitoring.
Residuals from the treatment processes (i.e., spent carbon)
would be regenerated for reuse when. possible. If the carbon
would require treatment and disposal, treatment and disposal of
the carbon would comply with CFR Part 268 of the Federal Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act, LDRs.
The selected remedy would comply with all requirements regulating
worker health and safety under the Federal Occupational Safety
and Health Act.
Location Specific ARARs.
There are none. The sites do not lie within the vicinity of
floodplains, wetlands, or coastal barriers or the coastal zone as
designated by the State of New Jersey. In addition, there are no
endangered/threatened species, or federally-designated wild or
scenic rivers in the vicinity of the sites. Therefore, Executive
Orders 11988 and 11990, the Coastal Barrier Resource Act, the
Wild and Scenic Rivers Act, and the Coastal Zone Management Act
are not ARARs for this project. Finally, based on an evaluation
of the project area for the potential for discovery of and impact
to cultural resources, it was determined that a cultural
resources survey was not required.
To Be Considered
The selected soil remedy would attempt to achieve compliance with
the EPA/NJDEPE soil cleanup level goals. Summaries of the
compounds detected at SJCC and GSC during both phases of the RI     %
and the cleanup goals for those compounds are provided in Tables    <~>
1 and 2 . Concentrations of these compounds throughout the soil
would be reduced to these levels.                                   g
                                                                    to
                                                                    o
                                                                    01
                                                                    to
                               28

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Cost Effectiveness
EPA believes the selected remedy is cost-effective in mitigating
risks posed by the contaminated soil and groundwater within a
reasonable period of time. Section 300.430(f)(ii)(D) of the NCP
requires EPA to evaluate cost-effectiveness by comparing all the
alternatives which meet the threshold criteria presented earlier.
The selected remedy meets these criteria and provides for overall
effectivness in proportion to its cost. The estimated total cost
for the selected soil and groundwater remedy is $11,169,000.
Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternate Treatment
Technologies or Resource Recovery Technologies to the Maximum
Extent Practicable                                .
EPA believes the selected soil and groundwater remedy represents
the maximum extent to which permanent solutions and treatment
technologies can be utilized in a cost-effective manner for the
SJCC and GSC sites. Of those alternatives that are protective of
human health and the environment and comply with ARARs, EPA has
determined that the selected remedy for soil and groundwater
provides the best balance of trade-offs in terms of long-term
effectiveness and permanence, reduction in toxicity, mobility, or
volume achieved through treatment; short-term effectiveness;
implementability; and cost, and also considering the statutory
preference for treatment as a principal element and considering
State and community acceptance.
Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element
The selected remedy satisfies the statutory preference for
treatment as a principal element. The principal threat to human
health is from exposure to contaminated soil at the sites. This
soil also represents the source of groundwater contamination.
The selected remedy reduces levels of contaminants in soil
through treatment via vapor phase extraction. In addition, the
selected groundwater remedy would reduce the levels of
contaminants in groundwater, another threat posed by the sites,
through treatment via air stripping combined with carbon
adsorption.
DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES

The Proposed Plan for the sites was released to the public in
July 1991. This Plan identified the combination of Soil and
Groundwater Alternatives S2 (Soil Vapor Extraction) and GW2(b)
(Total Plume Extraction) as the preferred alternatives to
remediate the soil and groundwater contamination at the SJCC and
GSC sites. EPA reviewed all comments submitted during the public
comment period. Upon review of these comments, it was determined
that no significant changes to the selected remedy, as it was
originally identified in the Proposed Plan, were necessary.
                               29

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX A

 FIGURES




              CO
              cv
              o
             o
             o
             ro
             o
             07

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 ***
            NOTE'
            EXTRACTION WELLS'
               3A-IOGPM
              .11-10 6PM (ESTIMATED)
               I2-I5GPM
            INJECTION WELL
               4A-25 6PM

                        SOUTH JERSEY'
                        CLOTHING »o
                        CO.


                                                   ATLANTIC AVENUE


                                GARDEN STATE
                                CLEANERS
                                            6
                                            ^_     o           SUMMER               AVENUE

                                                       II

                                                                             1
                                                                             Wt


        PACIFIC                AVENUE              of



        ARCTIC                 AVCNUC                         10
                                                             -e-
                                                                      BABES VILLAGE
                                                                     •INN WELL
                                                   NJ2
        JONAS                  AVENUE"                                            , • NJI

                                                                                     MARTINELLt   AVE.


        WILLIAMS               AVENUE

                                                              NJ3 _
                                                                • ® CLEARY SCHOOL WELL

                                COARI    AVENUE
      LEGEND
                                                                                       ^IRRIGATION WELL
O7-SJCC MONITORING WELL                                     CLEARY SCHOOL
 NJl-NJDEP MONITORING WELL      SOUTH    AVENUE                    °,NJ4
 © -PRIVATE WELL
                                                                     -•NJ5



                                                             WHEAT           ROAD


                                                  11
  SCALE             ARCS n                                                                        FIGURE
 l"- 5001           SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING CO./GARDEN STATE
  DATE              CLEANERS SITES
JUNE 1991           LOCATION OF SITES AND SELECTED WELLS

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        ^•> WELL 4
                                                                     __L4A
                                                                INJECTION 25 GPM)




                                            •TCE STORAGE
                            -••              TANK
                          WELL 3A
               (EXTRACTION 10 GPM)
                                          DRY
             FORMER ——                    CLEANING     REMNANTS .
             DISCHARGE                    STILL UNIT   OF MASONRY
             PIPE                                      BUILDING
             FORMER -
             CONCRETE
             PAD DRUM
             STORAGE
                            FORMER
                            TCE TANK
                                                       l_
             AREA                                 ONE STORY
                               DD                 MASONRY
                            FORMER                BUILDING
                            DUMPSTERS             CLOTHING                           u
                                                                                     3
                                                  PRODUCTION
             STORAGE———                           AREA                               fl
             SHED-DRUM
             STORAGE AREA

                                                                                     e
                                       • WELL 2                                      tu
                                                                                     0
    LEGEND
                                              DENJON ASSOCIATES
             FACILITY                              PROPERTY
             BOUNDARY
     000 DRUMS.
        • SJCC
          MONITORING                                                                          CO
          WELL                                                                                O
                                                                                              o


                                                                           I
       (~1 TANK
                                                                                              o
            GROUNDWATER                                                                       o
            TREATMENT                                                                         NJ
            PLANT
                              WELL 5,                                                        O
                                                                                             Ul
                                                                                             to
                                              ATLANTIC AVENUE

                                                                • WELL 12
                                                               (EXTRACTION 15 GPM)

 SCALE             ARCS H                                                                 FIGURE
  I" • 60'         SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING CO ./GARDEN STATE
  DATE             CLEANERS SITES
JUNE 1991          FACILITY MAP- SJCC

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       SUMMER AVENUE




                                                    •ENTRANCE




                                       GARDEN STATE
                                         CLEANERS




                                                O         D

                               L            PCE RECYCLE TANK




                                                                       CO
                                                                       O
                                                                      n
                                                                      o
                                                                      o

            LEGEND
                                                                      o
                                                                      Ol
       — FACILITY BOUNDARY                                            to
                                                                      Ul
  O    — STEAM CONDENSATE PIPE
  D    — BOILER BLOW DOWN PIPE




 SCALE               ARCS II                                    FIGURE
 I" » 15'
                     SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING CO./GARDEN STATE
 DATE                CLEANERS SITES                              -3        '•

JUNE 1991            GARDEN STATE C L E A N E R S SITE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          SOUTH JERSEY
                                                            CLOTHING
                                                            COMPANY




            LEGEND
     AREA WHERE VOCS EXCEED                                   MONITORING
     PROPOSED SOIL CLEAN UP                                   WELL 3A
     LEVELS
     BOUNDARY OF AREA
     RECOMMEDED FOR
     REMEDIATION



SCALE           ARCS H                                                     FIGURE
 l" - 20'
                SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING CO./GAROEN STATE CLEANERS
 DATE           AREA OF SOIL EXCEEDING VOC CLEAN UP LEVELS AND AREA
JUNE 1991       RECOMMENDED FOR REMEDIATION                       .
                     200

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 GARDEN STATE
                                   CLEANERS




        LEGEND
            A R E A WHERE VOCS
            EXCEED PROPOSED
            CLEANUP LEVELS
                                                             o
      _     BOUNDARY OF AREA
            RECOMMENDED FOR                                  o
                                                             o
            REMEDIATION
                                                             O
                                                             01




 SCALE         ARCS H                                      FIGURE
I'   15'       SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING CO./GARDEN STATE
               CLEANERS SITES                              1 5 -
 DATE
              AREA OF SOIL EXCEEDING VOC CLEAN UP LEVELS
JULY 199!
              AND AREA RECOMMENDED FOR REMEDIATION

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                           BABES VILLAGE
                                                                           INN WELL




 PLUME MIGRATES FROM                                           3 ^CLEARY SCHOOL WELL
 SHALLOW AQUIFER TO
                                                                 lV«J         EP-7SPEP-
                                                                                          HI
 INTERMEDIATE AOUIFER
 SOUTH OF MARTfNELLI
 AVENUE ———————————               COAR1     AVENUE                        J • IRRIGATION WELL
                                                        CLEARY SCHOOCf

                                                                      OEPM2I
 NOTE:PHASE 2      ~~~              SOUTH    AVENUE
 SAMPLING CONDUCTED IN
 M A R C H , 1991
                                                       WHEAT      ROAD




                     LEGEND
       A-EPA PHASE I MONITOR WELLS
       O-EPA PHASE 2 MONITOR WELLS                                                                 CO
                                                                                                   Q
      O 7-SJCC MONITORING WELL                                                                     O
  • NJI-NJDEP MONITORING WELL
                                                                     AVENUE     QEP-13I            o
-ico — SHALLOW AQUIFER CONCENTRATION                   LOUIS                                       O
          CONTOUR   iNYERVAL~r«i?L )                                                               to
 w      ~ INTERMEDIATE AQUIFER CONCENTRATION
"*"     *~CONTOUR I N T E R V A L U l / L )                                                        o
                                                                                                   en
          C O N T O U R S D A S H E D WHERE INFERRED
                                                                                                   00


                                                                                   OEP-OO
       SCALE           ARCS n                                                              FIGURE
                       SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING CO. /GARDEN STATE
                       CLEANERS SITES                                                          6
        DATE
      JUNE t99t        TCE CONCENTRATION CON TOURS-PHASE 2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   9
                                                        •3A/3
                                                                   j^EP-IS
                                                                  FLANTIC AVENUE

        N
                                                                        SUMMER                 AVENUE


                                                                 iP-S

                        PACIFIC                AVENUE1




                        ARCTIC                 AVENUE                    .EP-

                                                   AEP-3S                                  -BABES VILLAGE
                                                                                            INN WELL

                        JONAS                  AVENUE
                                                                                               MARTINELLI AVE.
                                                                           ^K           \\
                                                                                    \




 PLUME MIGRATES FROM
                    WILLIAMS                   AVENUE
                                                                                        \u
                                                                         •5 tCLEARYlsCHOOL WELL
 SHALLOW AQUIFER TO
 INTERMEDIATE AQUIFER                          QEP-I4I                                    WVs9Ep-|fI
 SOUTH OF MARTINELLI
 AVENUE                                    COARI       AVENUE
                                                                                        4 t \•.IRRIGATION WELL
                                                                  VCLEARY SCHOOL
                                                                           • NJ4
                                                                            • NJ5       OEP-I2I
 NOTE:PHASE 2                                SOUTH      AVENUE
 SAMPLING CONDUCTED IN
 MARCH.199I
                                                                  WHEAT         ROAD



                                  LEGEND
        A-EPA PHASE 1 MONITOR WELLS AND SOIL
           BORINGS
        O-EPA PHASE 2 MONITOR WELLS
      O 7-SJCC MONITORING WELL
     • NJI-NJDEP MONITORING WELL
     ....     -SHALLOW AOUIFER CONCENTRATION                                        AVENUE    QEP-I3I_
-'oo~ CONTOUR INTERVAL ( U Q / L )                               LOUIS      ^

^           _v I N T E R M E D I A T E AQUIFER CONCENTRATION
"*          *"CONTOUR I N T E R V A L ( u g / L )
               CONtOURS DASHED WHERE INFERRED

                                                                                                  OEP-OD
             SCALE                ARCS U                                                                 FIGURE
            I" « 5O01             SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING CO./GARDEN STATE
       DATE                       CLEANERS SITES
     JUNE 1991                    PCE CONCENTRATION CONTOURS-PHASE 2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

             -ARTIC AVE.




                                                                                 X-SECTION LEGEND

                                                                  HYOROGEOUOGIC UNITS

                                                                        COARSE SANO AM> POORLY SORTED FINE TO COARSE
                                                                        SANO WITH LITTLE TO SOUC SILT AMD CLAY. *ftO
                                                                        DISCONTINUOUS LAYERS AND LENSES OF CLAY OR CRAVtL

                                                                        FINE TO MCOIUM SANO *IIM LITTLE TO SOMC SILT.




                                                                        CLAY AND ALTERNATING LAYERS Of FINE TO MEDIUM
                                                                        SANO AND CLAY.


                                                                        FINE TO MEDIUM SANO WITH LITTLE TO SOME SILT,
                                                                        INCREASING PROPORTION or SILT WITH DEPTH.


                                                                        TOTAL DCPTH OT IOREHOLE
                                                                        WATER TABLE
                                                                        SJCC MONITORING WELL
                                                                        NJOEP MONITORINO WELL
                                                                        TRICHLOROE THEME
                                                                        TCTRACHLOROETHENE
                                                                        TOTAL VOLATILE ORCANICS
                                                                        SCREENED INTERVAL or WELL
                                                                        ALL UNIT IN UC/L
                                                                        EXTRACTION WELLS

                                                                        ICE.   IU6/L
                                                                        PCE.IUO/L




                                                     SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING CO./GAROEN STATE                     FIGURE
                           NOTE: SEE FIG. 4-19 FOR
                                                     CLEANERS SITES
                                 LOCATION or         VOC GROUNDWATER CONTAMINATION                                8
                                 CROSS SECTION
                                                     CROSS SECTION A-A, PHASE 2



0£90   200

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         GROUNDWATEft
                        FLOW DIRECTION               OROUWDWATC* T«ATMCXT PLAKT

                                                       SOUTH JERSEY
                                                       CLOTHING CO.
 N
                                                                              AVE HUE




                                                                         AEP-3S
           PACIFIC




           ARCTIC                  AVENUE

                                        AEP-5S                            BABES VILLAGE
                                                                          INN WELL

              JONAS                 AVENUE
                                                                              MARTINELLI AVE



          WILLIAMS                  AVENUE

                                                       NJ
NOTE:                                                       J tCLEARY SCHOOL WELL
LOCATIONS OF EXTRACTION
AND INJECTION WELLS ARE             CEP-I4I
APPROXIMATE                                                                   • IRRIGATION
                                COARI     AVENUE
                                                     CLEARY SCHOOL

                                                               NJ5             '21
                                  SOUTH    AVENUE


                                                                ROAD



                 LEGEND
                                                                                               CO
  O - EPA PHASE 2 MONITOR WELLS
  ±. -EPA PHASE 1 MONITOR WELLS AND SOIL
       BORINGS
    0 7 -SJCC MONITORING WELL
  • NJI-NJDEP MONITORING WELL
    '— -CROUNOWATER RECOVERY AREA                                    AVENUE   OEP-I3I
                                                    LOUIS
• ——* -EXTRACTION WELLS AND HEADER PIPE
O ——O -INJECTION WELLS AND HEADER PIPE
     ~ APPROXIMATE NEW MONITORING WELL
          LOCATION
   SCALE .            ARCS II                                                        FIGUFZE
   l" « 5001          SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING CO./GARDEN STATE
                      CLEANERS SITES
    DATE
                      LIMITED EXTRACTION AND TREATMENT
  JULY 1991           FOR ALTERNATIVES 2A & 3A (200 GPM)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  GROUNDWATER                                        OHOUWDH*TER TUCATHENT PLANT
                FLOW D I R E C T I O N
                                                                       SOUTH JERSEY
  N                                                                    CLOTHING CO.




                                                                                                    AVENUE




                                                                                            4EP-3S
               PACIFIC


               ARCTIC                     AVENUE                      L9-EP 91

                                             AEP-5S                                             BABES VILLAGE
                                                                                                INN WELL

               JONAS                      AVENUE

                                                                                            \       MARTINELLI AVE




NOTE;
            WILLIAMS



LOCATIONS OF EXTRACTION
AND INJECTION WELLS ARE
                                          AVENUE




                                          OEP-UX
                                                       1
                                                      .\
                                                        \
                                                                       NJ
                                                                            2
                                                                                       6l
                                                                                                v
                                                                                XcLEARY SCHOOL WELL
                                                                                                ,pJTfOEP-«l
                                                                                                EP-7S
APPROXIMATE                 —
                                     COARI       AVENUE {                                           V IRRIGATION

                                                            \        CLEARY SCHOOL                  \
                                                                                .N>                     \
                                                                                tNJ5            QEP-I2I .
                                         SOUTH    AVENUE \


                                                                    WHEAT         ROA



                   LEGEND

  O-EPA PHASE 2 MONITOR WELLS
  A -EPA PHASE I MONITOR WELLS AND SOIL
        BORINGS
   07-SJCC MONITORING WELL
 • NJI-NJDEP MONITORING WELL
—— - -GROUNDWATER RECOVERY AREA                                                        AVENUE
                                                                   LOUIS
•——• -EXTRACTION WELLS AND HEADER PIPE
O——O-INJECTION WELLS AND HEADER PIPE
   A-APPROXIMATE          NEW MONITORING     WELL
        LOCATION

   SCALE                 ARCS II
                                                                                                            FIGURE
   l" » 5001             SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING CO./GARDEN STATE
                         CLEANERS SITES
    DATE                                                                                                      10
  JULY 1991
                         TOTAL PLUME EXTRACTION a TREATMENT
                         FOR ALTERNATIVES                       2B a 3B (1000 GPM)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX B

  TABLES




             en
             O
             o
             o
             o
             to

             o
             U1
             UJ

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               TABLET
         SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY SITE

                   SOIL CLP DATA SUMMARY




I COMPOUNDS                       ) Bang* Of
                                                 EPAAUDEP
1                                 j   Values
                                                cleanup leve
1                         I
                                                    goals
1                         I
1 — — —————————— — '• — ...............
I                                 I
|H*thyl*rw Chloride               (11-520              1,000
| Ac* ton*                        1210-2,000           1,000
|1,2-Dichloro»ther>e (total)      |1-WO                1,000
jChlorofora                       I*                   1,000
|2-Butane>r>e                     | 18- 860            1,000
|l,1,1-Trichloroethene            i«                   1,000
(Tr iehloroethene                 (3-68,000 •          1,000
11,1,2-Trichloroethane            12                   1,000
j Benzene                         |1                   1,000
[Tetrachloroethene                13-5,800             1,000
|1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane        1 17                 1,000
|Toluene                          JV23                 1,000
|ChloPo6*nzer>»                   |V2                  1,000




    Notes:
         1) All concentrations are in ug/kg.
         2) Data qualifers are not included.




                                                               cn
                                                               O
                                                               o
                                                               o
                                                               o
                                                               to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         TABLE 2
              GARDEN STATE CLEANERS SITE

                SOIL CLP DATA SUMMARY




| COMPOUNDS                    | Ranga Of
1                              |       Vtluas   EPA/NJDEP
1                             •'I             cleanup level
1                               I                   goals
                                              ................ I
|. .......................... . .|. ...........
|Hethylan« Chloride            1 180                   1,000 |
| Ac* ton*                     |80-4,700               1,000 |.
|7richloro«th»n«               (3-100                  1,000 |
|T«tr«chloroeth*r>*            (2-1,100,000            1,000 |
|1,1,2,2-Tetracholroethan«     (11-12                  1,000 |
|Toluene                       (2-3                    1,000 |




Notes:
     1) All concentr*tions ar* in ug/kg.
     2) Data qualifcrs are net included.




                                                                   CO
                                                                   8
                                                                   o
                                                                   o

                                                                    O
                                                                    Ul
                                                                    UJ
                                                                    (Jl

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                     TABLES

SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY/GARDEN STATE CLEANERS SITES

               PHASE 2 GROUNDWATER CLP DATA SUMMARY




    1| COMPOUNDS                         Of
                                                   US MCL
                                                    "
                                                                NJ MCL

    1                                  Values
    1

    (Acetone                                4.0
    [Carbon Disulf ide                  0.3-0.5
    [1,1-Dichloroethene                 0.2-2.0             7             2
    |1,1-Dichloroethane                 0.2-0.8
    |Cis-1,2-Dichloroethene (5)        0.2-51.0          70              10
    [Chloroform (4)                     0.8-8.0         100             100
    |2-Butanone                            11.0
    |1,1,1-Trichlbroethane              4. -27.0        200              26
    [Carbon Tetraehloride               0.6-3.0           5               2
    (Bromodichlorottethane (4)               0.6        100             100
    |1 ,2-Dichloropropane                    0.6          5
    | Tr ichoroethene                  0.9-4500           5               1
    I
    1 1,1,2-Trichlorothane              1.0-6.0
    [Benzene                           0.6-12.0             5             1
    [Tetrachloroethene               6.0-1700.0             5             1
    I
    [Toluene                           0.6-1.0        1,000
    [Ethylbenzene                      0.4-0.1          700
    [Styrene                               1.0          100
    [KiP Xylene (6)                    0.9-1.0       10,000              44
    (1,3-Dichlorobenzene                    3.0                         60
    1 1,4-Dichlorobenzene              0.4-2.0                          75
    |4-Chlorotoluene                       0.5
    [Trans-1,2-Dichloroethene (5)      0.2-1.0          100              10
    [Kexachlorobutadiene                   2.0
    (Naphthalene                           1.0
    |N-Propylbenzene                   0.4-0.3
    | 1 ,1 ,1 ,2-Tetraehloroethane         1.0
    1 1, 2, 3-Tr iehlorobenzene            1.0                           8
    [1 ,2,4-Tr iehlorobenzene              1.0                           8
                                                                              Ul
    |1,3,5-Tri»ethylbenzene            0.9-0.6
    (0-Xylene (6)                      0.7-2.0       10,000             44


    Notes:
         1) All concentrations are in ug/l.
         2) US KCL = US Safe Drinking Water Act MCL.
         3) NJ MCL = US Safe Drinking Water Act MCL.
         4) NJDEP and Federal KCL» are for Total Trihalonethanes.
         5) NJDEP and Federal MCL* are for Total 1,2-Dichloroethene.
         6} NJDEP and Federal MCLs are for Total Xylenes (0,M and P).
         7) Data qualifers are not included.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               Table 4
              Contaminants of Concern (COCsl by Media
                                     .ng company/
                                     ners Sites

                           Frequency off    Range          95% DCL
                            Detection
Dovngradient Groundwater                   (in ug/L)
Trichloroethylene (TCE)        14/23 .8 - 13,000          2,497.4
Tetrachloroethylene (PCE)      12/23 .9 - 1,900             328.0
cis-1,2-Dichloroethene          8/232 - 77                   17.2
1,1,1-Trichloroethane           5/2  .73- 13                  5.2
Chloromethane                   2/2  .73- 8                   4.2
Chloroform                      5/2   13-3                    3.0*
Carbon tetrachloride            2/2   13-2                    2.0*
1,1,1,2-Tetrachloroethane       2/23.6 - 2                    2.0*

Surface Soil at SJCC                       (in ug/kg)
Trichloroethylene (TCE)        16/24 6 - 3,900              779.0
Acetone                         3/2 162- 1,500              319.9
Tetrachloroethylene (PCE)      14/24 1 - 820                152.7
Methylene chloride              6/2 114- 520                105.5
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane       1/18     17                  10.0
1,2-Dichloroethene              4/2  30- 16                   9.9
1.1.1-Trichloroethane           1/1815                        9.8
Toluene                         2/2  60-7                     7,0*
Chlorobenzene                   2/1  28- 2                    2.0*
1.1.2-Trichloroethane           1/182                         2.0*
Benzene                         1/181                         1.0*

Surface Soil at GSC
Tetrachloroethylene (PCE)      .6/7 2 - 1,300,000       886,815.8
Acetone                        1/7      8,100             4,888.3
Trichloroethylene (TCE)        2/7 84 - 6,100             3,017.3
Methylene chloride             1/7      180                 109.6
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane      1/7      11                   11.0*
Ambient Air at SJCC and GSC
Trichloroethylene (TCE)        NA                          44.32
Tetrachloroethylene (PCE)      NA                            .06      CO

Note:   These contaminants are listed in descending order of the
        representative concentrations for the contaminants.          o
                                                                     o
                                                                     to
95% UCL - 95th Percentile Upper Confidence Limit
*       - Maximum detected value used                                o
NA      - Not applicable                                             in
                                                                     u>

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      Table 5
                    Receptor Groups and Relevant Exposure Routes
                           South Jersey Clothing Company/
                             Garden state Cleaners Sites

       Receptor Group        Relevant Exposure Routes
       Adult Workers         Potential future use (ingestion, inhalation
                             vhile showering, and dermal absorption) of
                             groundwater (for woi.cers who are residents of
                             the site area).
                             Dermal contact and incidental ingestion of
                             surface soil (current and future).
                             Inhalation of ambient air (current and
                             future).
       Adult Residents       Potential future use (ingestion, inhalation
                             while showering, and dermal absorption) of
                             groundwater.
                             Dermal contact and incidental ingestion of
                             surface soil (future).
                             Inhalation of ambient air (future).
       Adult Trespassers     Dermal contact and incidental ingestion of
                             surface soil (current and future).
                             Inhalation of ambient air (current and
                             future).
       Adult Customers       Inhalation of ambient air (current and
                             future).
       Adolescent            Potential future use (ingestion, inhalation
        Residents            while showering, and dermal absorption) of
                             groundwater.
                             Dermal contact and incidental ingestion of
                             surface soil (future).
                             Inhalation of ambient air (future).
       Adolescent            Dermal contact and incidental ingestion of
        Trespassers          surface soil (current and future).
/•—^                         Inhalation of ambient air (current and
                             future).
                                                                              U)
                                                                              CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       Table 5 (continued)
          Receptor Groups and Relevant Exposure Routes
                  South Jersey clothing Company/
                   Garden state Cleaners sites

Receptor Group      Relevant Exposure Routes
Child Residents     Potential future use (ingestion, inhalation
                    while showering, and dermal absorption) of
                    groundwater.
                    Dermal contact and incidental ingestion of
                    surface soil (future).
                    Inhalation of ambient air (future).




                                                                       I
                                                                  O
                                                                  Or

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       Table 6
TOTAL ESTIMATED HAZARD INDICES FOR CURRENT EXPOSURE MEDIA


                      Adult           Adult       Adolescent
Exposure Medium       Worker       Trespasser     Trespasser
Surface Soil-
South Jersey            --           5.3E-06"     2.1E-05

Surface Soil-
Garden State         5.4E-01         2.2E-02      8.3E-02

Air -
South Jersey            NC             NC              NC

Air -
Garden State            NC             NC              NC



Total                5.4E-01         2.2E-02      8.3E-02


-- = Represents non-applicable exposure medium.
NC = Not calculated (toxicity values not available).




                                                                CO
                                                                0
                                                                o
                                                                o
                                                                o
                                                               10

                                                               o
                                                               en
                                                               *fc
                                                               o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               Table 7
                                       TOTAL ESTIMATED HAZARD INDICES FOR FUTURE EXPOSURE MEDIA

                                                                   Adolescent
                                Adult Worker/ Adult Off-Site       Off-Site       Child                      On-Site Resident
                  Adult Worker/   Off-Site      Resident/          Resident/     Off-Site
  Exposure Medium Non* Resident   Resident      Trespasser         Trespasser    Resident         Adult         Adolescent      Child

  Groundwater •         *•          1. OE+00        1.0E+00         1 .6E+00     3.7E+00          1. OE+00       1.6E+00        3.7E+00

  Surface Soil-
  South Jersey          --             --           5.3E-06         2.1E-05         --            2.0E-04        3.6E-OA        9.0E-04

  Surface Soil-
  Garden State       5.4E-01       5.4E-01          2.2E-02         B.3E-02         --            8.1E-01        1.5E+00        3.6E+00

  Air -
  South Jersey         NC              NC              NC                NC         NC               NC             NC            NC

  Air •
  Garden State         NC             NC               NC              NC           NC               NC             NC            NC


  Total             5.4E-01         1.5E+00         1 .OE+00        1.7E+00      3.7E+00          1.BE+00        3.1E+00        7.3E»00



  -- = Represents non-applicable exposure medium.
  NC = Not calculated (toxicity values not available).




TfrSO     200

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                  Table 8
                                               CHROMIC TOXICITY VALUES FOR SELECTED CHEMICALS OF CONCERN

             CHEMICAL            '                     Qt AL                                        1NHAL AT ION                    SOURCE

                                                                                  -1                                          -1
                                     RfD <»g/kg/day>           SF (we/kg/day)          RfC (mg/kg/day)      SF (me/kg/day)


Acetone                                    1E-1                         ••    .              ND                      -•               IRIS

Benzene                                     --                       2.9E-2/A                "                  2.9E-2/A              IRIS
                                                                 .                                               '
Carbon tetrachloride                       7E-4                      1.3E-1/B2               ND                1.3E-1/B2           IRIS, HEAST
                                                                                                                      '
jchlorobenzene                             2E-2                                             5E-3                                   IRIS, HEAST
                                                             '
(Chloroform                                1E-2                      6.1E-3/B2               ND               8.1E-2/B2            IRIS, HEAST

jchlorotnethane                                                       1.3E-2/C                --                   6.3E-3/C           HEAST

|1,2-Dichloroethene                        IE-2                          --                  ND                       -"              HEAST

JKethylene chloride                        6E-2                      7.5E-3/62              9E-1               1.6E-3/B2           IRIS, HEAST

] 1 , 1 ,1 ,2-Tetrachloroethane             -- •                      2.6E-2/C                                     2.6E-2/C        IRIS,. HEAST

| 1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane                 ...                       2.0E-1/C                                     2.0E-1/C        IRIS, HEAST

Tetrachloroethene                          1E-2                      5.1E-2/B2 .              ND               1. BE -3/62            IRIS

(Toluene                                   2E-1                          --                  6E-1                                  IRIS, HEAST
                                                                                                               '
1 1, 1, 1 -T rich I oroe thane             9E-2                          •-                 3E-1                                      HEAST

|1,1,2-Trichloroethane                    A E-3                       5.7E-2/C                ND                   5.7E-2/C        IRIS, HEAST
                                                                                                                         .
JTrichloroethene                            --                       1.1E-2/B2                                 1.7E-2/62              HEAST


Rfd = Reference Dose                       •             .
RfC = Reference Concentration
SF = Slope Factor
 ND  = Not determined
     * Not avai table
Source = Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS) data base; Health
          Effects Assessment Summary Tables (HEAST), U.S. EPA, January 1991.
A * Human Carcinogen
B1 or 62 = Probable human carcinogen (61 indicates limited human evidence and
            62 indicates sufficient evidence in animals and inadequate or no evidence in humans}.
C    * Possible human carcinogen



                                                                                                                                              CO


                                                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                                                  to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          Table 9
TOTAL LIFETIME-EXCESS CANCER RISK FOB CURRENT EXPOSURE MEDIA


                      Adult          Adult         Adult
Exposure Route        Worker       Trespasser     Customer

Surface Soil-
South Jersey            .-•          1.6E-09          -•


Surface Soil-
Garden State         9.8E-05        3.8E-06           --


Air •
South Jersey*            --         5.0E-07           --


Air -
Garden State*        7.6E-09        7.2E-11       2.0E-11



Total                9.8E-05        4.3E-06       2.0E-11


-- = Represents non-applicable exposure medium.
* = Receptor at a distance of 100 in.'




                                                               CO
                                                               O
                                                               O

                                                               o
                                                               o
                                                               to
                                                               o
                                                               (Jl
                                                               *»
                                                               u>

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                     Table 10
                 TOTAL LIFETIME EXCESS CANCER RISK FOR FUTURE EXPOSURE MEDIA


                                   Adult Worker/               Adult Off-Site
Exposure Route     Adult Worker/     Off -Site      Adult        Resident/      Adult On-Site
                    Non-Resident     Resident      Customer      Trespasser        Resident

Grounduater              ""         9.7E-04            **         9.7E-04         9.7E-04




Surface Soil-
South Jersey             —              --             --             1.6E-09      6.1E-OS



Surface Soil-
Garden State          9.8E-05        9.8E-05           --             3.8E-06      1.4E-OA



Air -
South Jersey*            --             -•             --             5.0E-07      8.8E-OS



Air -.
Garden State*         7.6E-09        7.6E-09       2.0E-11            7.2E-11      1.3E-08



Total                 9.8E-05        1.1E-03       2.0E-11            9.7E-04      1.2E-03



-- K Represents non-applicable exposure medium.
* = Receptor at a distance of 100 m.
The incremental cancer risk calculations are presented in Appendix.
                                                                                                03
                                                                                                <n
                                                                                                o
                                                                                                o
                                                                                                o
                                                                                                to
                                                                                                o
                                                                                                en

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        APPENDIX C
NJDEP LETTER OF CONCURRENCE




                              CO


                              o
                              o
                              to
                              o
                              Ln
                              •u
                              01

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     APPENDIX D
RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY




                         en
                         O
                         O
                         o
                         o
                         to
                         o
                         en

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

                   SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY/
                     GARDEN STATE CLEANERS SITES

                    ATLANTIC COUNTY, NEW JERSEY
I.    Responsiveness Summary Overview
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) held a public
comment period from Friday, July 19 through Monday, August 19,
1991, for interested parties to comment on the Remedial
Investigation and Feasibility Study (RI/FS) Reports and the
Proposed Plan prepared for the South Jersey Clothing Company
(SJCC) and Garden State Cleaners (GSC) Sites in Buena Borough,
Atlantic County, New Jersey.
The Proposed Plan, which has been provided as Appendix AA of this
portion of the Record of Decision- (ROD) for the sites, provides a
description of the background of the sites and summarizes the
proposed and selected remedial alternatives.
EPA held a public meeting at 7:00 p.m. on Thursday, August 8,
1991 at the Buena Borough Municipal Building. At the meeting,
EPA officials described the remedial alternatives presented in
the RI/FS as well as discussed in detail the proposed alterna-
tives for controlling soil and groundwater contamination at the
sites. Finally, the public was provided an opportunity to raise
any issues and concerns to EPA.
This Responsiveness Summary provides a summary of citizens'
comments and concerns raised during the public comment period,
and EPA's responses to those comments and concerns. All comments
received by EPA during the public comment period were considered
in EPA's final decision for selecting the remedial alternatives
for cleanup of the SJCC and GSC sites.
This Responsiveness Summary is organized into sections and
appendicies as described below.
I.    RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY OVERVIEW. This section outlines the
      purpose of the public comment period and Responsiveness
      Summary. In addition, the Proposed Plan is referenced as a
      source of background information on the sites.
II.   BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS.   This       to
      section provides a brief history of community concerns and     o
      interests regarding the SJCC and GSC sites.
                                                                     o
III. SUMMARY OF MAJOR ISSUES AND CONCERNS RAISED BY THE LOCAL        £
     COMMUNITY AND EPA RESPONSES TO THESE ISSUES AND CONCERNS.
      This section summarizes the verbal comments received by EPA     o
      during the August 8, 1991 public meeting, and provides EPA's    £1
      responses to these comments.                                    -

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

IV.   WRITTEN COMMENTS RECEIVED DURING THE PUBLIC COMMENT
      PERIOD AND EPA RESPONSES TO THESE COMMENTS.   This section
      contains the one letter received by EPA containing written
      comments, as well as EPA's written response to that letter.
      Appendix AA: The Proposed Plan, which was distributed to
      the public on Thursday, July 18, 1991 and during the public
      meeting on August 8, 1991.
      Appendix BB: The public notice published in The Press of
      Atlantic City and The Daily Journal newspapers on Friday,
      July 19, 1991.
      Appendix CC: Sign-in sheet, agenda and glossary of terms
      from the public meeting held on August 8, 1991 at the Buena
      Borough Municipal Building.
      Appendix DD: Names, addresses and phone numbers of the
      information repositories designated for the SJCC and GSC
      sites.

II . Background on Community Involvement and concerns
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy
(NJDEPE) records show that community concern regarding the SJCC
site existed as early as 1981 when a resident living adjacent to
the site complained of odors emanating from her drinking water.
She believed her well was polluted and was concerned "because a
nearby clothing factory dumps a black waste onto the ground."
In May of 1989, residents, and state and local officials were
interviewed during the development of the Community Relations
Plan for the sites. Their concerns are summarized below:
    Residents were concerned about the quality of groundwater in
    the area of Minotola not served by the public water supply
    system ;
-   Residents were concerned about the financial impacts of the
    sites on the community;
    Residents felt that the owners of SJCC and GSC should be held
    accountable for past waste disposal practices at their
    businesses;
- Residents were concerned that the local property values would          o
  be adversely affected with the advent of new activity at the           °
  sites; and          '



                                                                    CD

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

-   Local officials and residents requested that they be kept
    better informed of the status of EPA activities and schedule
    for cleanup at the sites.
As part of EPA's responsbility and commitment to the Superfund
program, the community has been kept informed of ongoing
activities conducted at the SJCC and GSC sites. EPA has
established information repositories where relevant site
documents may be reviewed. Documents stored at the repositories
include —
      - The RI/FS Report.
      - The Proposed Plan.
      - Fact sheets summarizing the activities conducted at the
         sites as part of the RI/FS.
      - The August 8 Public Meeting Transcript.
EPA's selection of a remedial alternative to control soil and
groundwater contamination at the SJCC and GSC sites is presented
in the Decision Summary portion of this ROD. The ROD (including
this Responsiveness Summary), and other documents used by EPA to
form the basis of its decision for the sites, will be placed in
the information repositories.

III. Summary of Major Issues and Concerns Raised by the Local
     Community and EPA Responses to these Issues and Concerns
Verbal comments raised by the local community during the
August 8, 1991 public meeting for the SJCC and GSC sites havu
been summarized below (in bold), together with EPA's responses to
these comments. For the purpose of this summary, the "local
community" means those individuals who have identified themselves
as living in the immediate vicinity of a Superfund site and are
threatened from a health or environmental standpoint. These
individuals may include local horoeowners, businesses, and the
municipal officials.
One resident wanted to know how many roads would require
temporary closing during construction of the groundwater pump and
treatment system.
At present, EPA can provide only a conceptual design of the total
plume extraction and treatment system showing approximate           u>
locations of extraction and injection wells. The actual details     o
of the system will be developed during the design phase of the
project. Until the design is complete, it cannot be known for       °
certain how many roads would require temporary closing. EPA does    to
plan, however, to take every possible measure to limit any
                                                                     o
                                                                     (j\
                                3                               •     *»

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

disturbance to the community caused by construction of the
system. These measures would include among others locating the
system piping and wells within roadway rights-of-way where
possible.
One resident questioned who would pay for the cleanup of the
sites.
.Section 107(a) of the Superfund statute identifies parties who
 may be liable for remediation of Superfund sites such as this
 site. Under that section, the present owners of the site and the
 owner and/or operator during the disposal of hazardous substances
 at the site are potentially liable for all "cleanup" costs. EPA
 has identified the SJCC and GSC as responsible parties (or PRPs)
 pursuant to Section 107(a) for the sites.
A resident asked how long it will take to clean up the sites.
The,estimated timeframe for cleanup of the soil contamination at
the sites is six to nine months from the start of construction
and operation of the treatment system to its completion.
Extraction and treatment of the entire contamination groundwater
plume is expected to take an estimated 70 years. This estimate
is based on a groundwater volume of 1.6 billion gallons and
assumes that the Federal and State standards for drinking water
would be met. Removal of the source of groundwater contamination
(i.e., the contaminated soil) prior to full implementation of the
extraction and treatment system, however, may reduce the
estimated timeframe for cleanup of the groundwater. Modifica-
tions to the timeframe for groundwater cleanup would be made
based on continuous monitoring of the system.
A representative of a PRP asked where the Superfund money comes
from.
The Superfund Trust Fund was authorized in 1980 at $1.6 billion.
The Superfund amendments in 1986 authorized the Trust Fund at
$8.6 billion. In November of 1990, a third authorization added
$5.1 billion.
The Fund receives money from the following three major sources
annually:
- $553 million from petroleum excise taxes;
- $273 million from chemical feedstock excise taxes; and
- $504 million from environmental income taxes.                       w
                                                                     o
Numerous smaller sources—primarily cost recovery, penalties,
income taxes, and interest incomes-add another approximately \       o
$400 million annually.                             .        .        5
                                                                     o
                                                                     O7
                                                                     Ol
                                A                                    O

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

One resident expressed concern over the borough residents'
continued use of private veil water.
EPA's aquifer use survey indicated that water from private wells
located in the borough is used on a very limited basis (i.e., for
non-consumptive purposes such as lawn watering and car washing
only). In addition, based on the risk assessment for the sites,
no non-carcinogenic health effects were identified from the
groundwater inhalation and dermal absorption exposure routes.
Carcinogenic risks identified from the same exposure routes were
within EPA's acceptable risk range. However, since concentra-
tions of contaminants in the groundwater exceed the drinking
water standards, and significant risks were identified from
ingestion of groundwater, EPA cautions against the continued use
of private wells located within the borough.
A Borough Councilman questioned how EPA planned to implement
construction of the groundwater extraction and treatment system
with regard to the borough and its organization.
EPA intends to coordinate its plans for construction with all of
the appropriate entities within the borough including the Borough
Council, the school district system, the borough Municipal
Utilities Authority (MUA) and the Roads Committee. One area in
particular that will require close coordination is the actual
path of the groundwater extraction and treatment system piping.
EPA intends to minimize disturbance to the community wherever-
possible . The Agency recognizes, however, that the cooperation
of the affected community, particularly with regard to the
placement of the extraction wells, is essential to the successful
implementation of the ground water cleanup system. Without this
cooperation, the extent of the groundwater cleanup may need to be
modified.
A representative of a PRP remarked that the proposed alternative
for soil—Soil Vapor Extraction—is a very new technology. He
went on to ask whether the technology is tested and proven.
Soil Vapor Extraction is a developed technology that has been
used in commercial operations for several years. In fact, it was
the selected remedy for the first ROD signed under the Superfund
Amendments and Reauthorization Act (for the Verona Well Field
Superfund site located in Battle Creek, MI). The technology has
been chosen as a component of RODs for more than 30 Superfund
sites. At the Tinkhmans Garage site in New Hampshire, a pilot
study indicated that soil vapor extraction, when used in
conjunction with groundwater pumping, was capable of treating
soil to the 1 part per million (ppm) cleanup goal. Another site,
the Upjohn facility located in Barceloneta, PR, has been fully
remediated by this technology. .At this facility, the technology
met the EPA-required cleanup criteria of non-detectable levels of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

the compound carbon tetrachloride.over a period of three
consecutive months.
One resident questioned whether the carbon canisters from the
soil vapor extraction system would be regenerated or disposed of
off site.
EPA currently plans to transport the spent carbon from the
groundwater treatment system to an off-site location for
regeneration.
One resident asked whether any metals were found during EFA's
investigation of the sites.
Metals were never detected during any previous investigations of
the sites by the NJDEP and the Atlantic County Department of
Health. In addition, the processes employed by the facilities
did not utilize metals, but rather volatile organic compounds
(VOCs). Therefore, metals were not analyzed for during EPA's
investigation of the sites. EPA plans, however, to subject the
additional soil samples obtained during design to metal analysis
to confirm that metals contamination is not of concern.
A representative of a PRP questioned the basis for EPA's
determination that wastes were dumped onto the GSC facility
grounds.
The elevated levels of tetrachloroethylene (PCE) and other
hazardous substances in the soil at the GSC facility clearly
demonstrate that hazardous substances have been disposed of at
this site. Furthermore, groundwater beneath and downgradient
from the GSC facility contains PCE and many other hazardous
substances which were detected in soil at GSC.
According to an Administrative Order and Notice of Civil
Administrative Penalty Assessment, dated July 8, 1987, and issued
by NJDEP, the owners of GSC, during a New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP) inspection that occured on May
2, 1984, stated that discharges from the two steam condensation
pipes and one boiler blow down pipe, which are connected to the
process equipment, normally occured at times as a part of the
operation. In addition, the owners stated that PCE, stored in a
recycle tank outside the GSC building, was used a dry cleaning
chemical in their process.
A representative of a PRP questioned the depth to which soil was
investigated at the sites.
                                                                    m
                                                                    Gi
At each of the sites, soils located in the suspected area of        o
contamination were sampled to a depth of 10 feet. Based on the
magnitude of contaminant concentrations detected in soils to this
depth, and downgradient groundwater monitoring wells located         *
                                ,•               '
                                O ,                                      {

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

adjacent to the sites, it is believed that soil contamination at
the sites extends to the depth of the water table beneath the
sites (i.e., approximately 25 feet). Confirmatory sampling of
soils to the water table will be performed during design of the
treatment system. It should also be noted that the depth of the
contamination within the soil will have little impact on costs
associated with implementing the selected remedy.
A representative of a PRP questioned whether EPA believed the
existing groundwater pump and treatment system operated by the
SJCC has been effective.
As part of EPA's investigation of the sites, an evaluation of the
existing pump and treatment system was conducted. The results of
this evaluation concluded that the current pump and treatment
system is aiding in the overall reduction of the contaminant mass
in groundwater. In addition, the system is preventing migration
of a portion of the contaminated groundwater plume. However, it
was also determined that the existing system, pumping at a rate
of approximately 25 gallons per minute, does not appear to be
capable of capturing or reversing the entire groundwater plume
emanating from, and extending beyond the SJCC and GSC sites.
A representative of a PRP questioned the basis for selection of a
total groundwater extraction system vis-a-vis one of the limited
groundwater extraction systems.
The selected groundwater alternative would attempt to remediate
the entire contaminated groundwater plume including the highly-
contaminated portion located in the immediate vicinity of the
sources of contamination and the remaining, less-contaminated
portion located downgradient from the sites. The less
comprehensive groundwater alternatives would attempt to address
only the highly-contaminated portion of the plume. Thus, the
contaminated groundwater downgradient from the sites would be
allowed to naturally attenuate. Private wells located further
downgradient from the sites would likely be impacted. EPA's
groundwater policy is to attempt to bring groundwater to its
intended purpose. The selection of treating the entire plume is
in keeping with this policy.
A Borough Councilman questioned where EPA intends to locate the
air stripping tower and carbon adsorption unit system and whether
measures would be taken to reduce the noise generated by the
system.                                                             w
                                                                    o
                                                                    o
The conceptual layout for the groundwater treatment plant in the
Feasibility Study shows the air stripper and carbon adsorption      o
units located on the northeast corner of the SJCC property          °
(between the railroad tracks and abandoned SJCC manufacturing
building). The actual placement and layout of the system will be    o
determined during design. The need for noise reduction and the      $
                                                                    00

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

measures needed to mitigate against noise will also be developed
during the /design phase of the project.
A representative of a PRP asked if the minutes of the public
meeting and the attendance sheet would be available.
A copy of the transcript of the August 8 public meeting, as well
as copies of the sign-in sheet, meeting agenda and a glossary of
terms, can be obtained by visiting one of the information
repository locations (Appendix DD).
One resident questioned the rate of movement of the contaminated
groundwater plume and whether any irrigation veils have been
affscted.
Based on the findings of EPA's investigation, the groundwater
plume has migrated approximately 3,000 feet downgradient from the
sites. Currently, it has been determined that the plume is
moving at an estimated rate of 25 to 50 feet per year. Prior to
closure of individual wells, it is believed that the groundwater
plume moved at a faster pace.
In March of 1989, an irrigation well located approximately 500
feet east of the Cleary School was sampled. The purpose of this
sampling effort was to obtain groundwater quality data at a
significant distance downgradient from the source areas and from
a deeper portion of the groundwater aquifer. This irrigation
well was approximately 200 feet deep and screened at two
intervals. Neither trichloroethylene (TCE) nor PCE (the primary
contaminants from the sites) was detected in this well.
One resident questioned the meaning of EPA's acceptable risk
range.
For known or suspected carcinogens, EPA considers excess upper
bound individual lifetime cancer risks of between 10"4 to 10* to
be acceptable. This level indicates that an individual has not
greater than a one in ten thousand to one in a million chance of
developing cancer as a result of site-related exposure to a
carcinogen over a 70-year period under specific .exposure
conditions at the sites.
One resident questioned whether the groundwater plume, if
unaddressed, would dilute. Another resident asked whether EPA
considered the rate at which the groundwater plume would
naturally attenuate.
The plume would likely continue to spread and further dilute if
no action was taken to address the situation. However, based on     ^
the baseline risk assessment for the sites, EPA is required to
address the contaminated groundwater plume as the risks identi-     °
fied are beyond EPA's acceptable risk range. In addition,           ^
                               8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

private wells located further downgradient from the sites would
likely be impacted. Those residences south of Louis Drive are
not connected to the borough public water supply system.
At the present time, the rate at which the groundwater plume
would naturally attenuate.is unknown. Natural attenuation at
Superfund sites, however, is not generally recommended except
when active restoration is not practicable, cost-effective, or
warranted because of site specific conditions.
A representative of a PRP asked whether the GSC was still in
operation and if they have altered their processes to prevent
continued discharges.
GSC still operates on Summer Road as a dry cleaning facility.
The current owner/operators of the facility have stated that the
facility has operated in compliance with the appropriate
environmental laws and regulations since 1985. In 1986, the
NJDEP issued the facility an air permit to construct, install or
alter, and operate air pollution control apparatus or equipment.
In addition, waste waters of a particular concentration are
accepted by the borough municipal utilities authority.
A resident asked, where the sites rank among the other approxi-
mately 1,200 hazardous waste sites on the NPL.
At this time, EPA no longer lists hazardous waste sites
numberically on the NPL. However, the SJCC and GSC sites were
ranked 410 and 1,044, respectively, out of 1,189 final sites in
February of 1991 (i.e., during the last NPL update).

IV.   Written Comments Received during the Public Comment
      Period and EPA Responses to these Comments
Written comments regarding the sites were received on August 19,
1991 from Franklin J. Riesenburger of Riesenburger & Kizner,
P.C., Attorneys at Law, on behalf of the South Jersey Clothing
Company, and are summarized below (in bold), together with EPA's
responses to these comments.
The commenter identifed EPA's "applicable clean up standard" for
soil for the compound TCE, and the NJDEP "soil action guideline"
under the New Jersey Environmental Cleanup Responsibility Act
program for total VOCs as 1,000 ppm. In addition, the commenter
challenged EPA's use of the EPA/NJDEPE cleanup level goals for
soil given these standards have not officially been promulgated.   w

First, it should be noted that the commenter incorrectly           °
identified the soil standards above. The EPA/NJDEPE soil cleanup   0
level goal for TCE and Interim Soil Action Level (ISAL) for VOCs   ®
is l ppm (or 1,000 parts per billion (ppb)).
                                                                   o
                                Q                                  Ol
                                '                                    01
                                                                   01

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The ISAL level of 1 ppm for total VOCs has been used extensively
at other sites under the Federal Superfund Program. EPA regards
this action level as a "to-be-considered" (TBC) requirement.
TBCs are non-promulgated advisories or guidance issued by the
Faderal or State government. As such, it can be used in
determining the necessary level of cleanup for the protection of
human health and the environment. In the absence of any existing
chemical specific Federal or State applicable or relevant and
appropriate requirements (ARARs) for soil, EPA and the NJDEPE
have agreed to establish cleanup goals of 1 ppm for TCE and PCE,
separately, given the predominance of the two compounds at the
sites. These levels also formed the basis for defining the
extent of contamination at the sites.
The commenter questioned EPA*s basis for remediating the
contaminated soil at 8JCC given the degree of risk posed by these
soils.
EPA's investigation of the sites concluded that the contaminated
soil at SJCC represents a source of groundwater contamination
occuring in the immediate vicinity of, and downgradient from, the.
sites. While risks associated with exposure to soil at SJCC were
not identified, significant risks were identified from exposure
(via ingestion) to contaminated groundwater. Consideration of
risks associated with environmental media under the future
scenario, is required by the National Oil and Hazardous
Substances Pollution Contingency Plan and can justify EPA's
decision to take action at a Superfund site. In addition,
concentrations of contaminants in the groundwater exceeded the
appropriate drinking water standards. Therefore, it was
determined that cleanup of the soil is a necessary part of the
overall plan for remediating the sites. Cleanup of the sources
would serve to eliminate the potential for further releases of
contaminants into the underlying groundwater aquifer.
The commenter proposed the use of deed restrictions on the SJCC
property in place of active treatment of the soil.
The use of restrictions alone would not eliminate the
contaminated soils, or the source of groundwater contamination.
In this instance, EPA believes a more active response measure is
appropriate.
The commenter questioned the adequacy of EPA's soil sampling
efforts at SJCC.
                                                                          CO
As discussed in the previous section, EPA acknowledges that               Q
confirmatory sampling of soil to the depth of the water table
(i.e., approximately 25 feet) will be required during design.         o
EPA believes, however, that the areal extent of soil contami-         ®
nation at SJCC has been sufficiently delineated. During the
Remedial Investigation (RI), two rounds of soil samples were          o
                                                                     ui
                                                                     07
                               10                                    °>

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

collected from various depth intervals over a widespread area
near the abandoned manufacturing building. A total of 132
samples were subjected to field screening. Laboratory analyses
were performed on 70 soil samples obtained from the site. It
should also be noted that regardless of the actual depth of soil
contamination, given conditions at the site, EPA has determined
that the selected soil remedy is an appropriate response action.
The commenter contended that the ARAB for cleanup of contaminated
groundwater in the vicinity of SJCC is the value of 10 ppb for
total VOCs identified by the state of New Jersey in the
Administrative Consent order of January 1984 between the state
and SJCC.
EPA has identified the Maximum Contaminant Levels established
under the Federal and State Safe Drinking Water Act as the
relevant and appropriate requirements for cleanup of contaminated
groundwater at the SJCC and GSC sites. These levels are
identified as such in cases where groundwater is or may be used
for drinking water. In addition, these contaminant levels should
be met in the groundwater itself.
EPA acknowledges that these levels are slightly more stringent
that those set forth in the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit administered by the State of New
Jersey.
The commenter claimed that SJCC should be held responsible only
for the TCE contamination located at or emanating from the SJCC
site.
This observation by the responsible party is erroneous. The SJCC
is jointly and severally liable with other responsible parties
for the rehabilitation of groundwater beneath and downgradient
from the site.
Soils at the SJCC facility contain extremely high levels of TCE
and a number of other hazardous substances including acetone
which were detected also in the vicinity of the SJCC facility.
PCE was also detected in soils at the SJCC facility in 20 of the
41 soil samples collected.
Given the commonality of the hazardous substances found in the
soil at the SJCC facility and those which exist in the
groundwater plume beneath the site, SJCC would clearly be jointly
and severally liable with other responsible parties for           n
                                                                   ™
remediation of groundwater as required by this ROD.
The commenter challenged EPA's determination regarding the          o
horizontal extent of TCE contamination emanating from the SJCC.     "
In particular, the commenter questioned EPA's consideration of
the results of previous investigations conducted by the PRP, and    5
                                                                    (j\
                                                                    -j
                               11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

state and local governments, and the agency's limited scope in
approach to investigating the sites. The commenter provided EPA
with the results of the infra-red analysis conducted in the area
of the sites.
EPA gave careful consideration to the results of numerous
investigative efforts conducted by the SJCC, the NJDEP and the
Atlantic County Department of Health since 1981. This is
evidenced by the inclusion of the results of some of these
efforts in tables and discussions contained within the first
chapter of the RI Report. Groundwater plume plots were also
developed based on this data.
The infra-red photography provided by the commenter was also
previously analyzed by EPA during the RI. It was determined,
however, that the analysis could not replace the analytical
results of groundwater sampling obtained during the investigation
as a basis for recommendations regarding remediation of the
sites.
EPA believes that the data provided by the commenter as a basis
for the commenter's conclusions regarding the extent of
groundwater contamination is limited and represents a significant
gap in the data base for the site. All of the groundwater
monitoring wells installed by the SJCC were shallow. The
commenter contends that contamination generated by the SJCC
facility extends only to a shallow depth. This same conclusion
was reached in previous reports submitted by the SJCC which
attributed shallow groundwater contamination to a reported
existence of high percentages of matrix clay in borelogs of SJCC
monitoring wells located near the site. During EPA's RI,
however, clay of this sort was not found. In addition, other
data collected during the RI indicats that the groundwater plume
is migrating to greater depths with distance from the sites.
  The RI data also fails to support the commenters contention that
  two separate and distinct groundwater plumes exist downgradient
  from the sites. The groundwater plume delineation from the RI
  Report is supported by the fact that the plume, as discussed
  previously, has been shown to decrease in depth with distance
  from the source areas. This is supported by results from
. downgradient intermediate wells which indicate that the plume has
  reached this interval. In addition, the ratio of PCE to TCE in
 EPA Well EP-6I indicates that a large portion of this
  contamination originates from GSC. It was determined that it is
 highly unlikely that the concentration of PCE detected in this
 well is from a separate PCE source at the Babe's Village Inn.         w
                                                                       o
EPA believes that the groundwater contour maps on pages 4-74
through 4-76 of the RI report provide the most up-to-date              o
illustration of groundwater contamination in the vicinity of the       °
facilties based on EPA sampling of SJCC, NJDEP and EPA wells.
                                                                       o
                                                                       m
                                12
                                •*"*•                                  <j\
                                                              -    c    o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Finally, in response to the latter concern regarding EPA's
approach to investigating the sites, given that each site is
listed separately on the NPL, EPA was obligated to investigate
the sites accordingly. Thus, EPA undertook an investigation of
the sites and the contamination caused by operations at the
sites. Other contamination problems in the area are being
addressed by other local and state authorities.




                                                                 01
                                                                 en
                                                                 o
                                                                 o
                                                                 o
                                                                 to
                                                                 o
                                                                 Ul
                                                                 Ul
                              13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    SGC   002   0560




5
W
H


s

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SUPERFUND PROPOSED PLAN

South Jersey Clothing Company and
 Garden state Cleaners Superfund Sites
Atlantic County, New Jersey
USEPA, Region II                                               July 1991


INTRODUCTION

This Proposed Plan identifies the preferred option for cleanup of
contaminated soil and ground-water at the South Jersey Clothing
Company (SJCC) and Garden State Cleaners (GSC) Superfund sites
located in the area of Minotola, Buena Borough, New Jersey. In
addition, the Plan includes summaries of other remedial
alternatives analyzed for these sites. This document is issued
by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the lead
agency for site activities, and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP), the support agency for this
response action. EPA, in consultation with NJDEP, will select a
final remedy for these sites only after the public comment period
has expired and the information submitted during this period has
been reviewed and considered.
EPA is issuing the Proposed Plan as part of its public
participation responsibilities under Section 117(a) of the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act (CERCLA) as amended by the Superfund Amendments and
Reauthoriz'ation Act (SARA) in 1986. This document summarizes
information that can be found in greater detail in the Remedial
Investigation and Feasbility Study (RI/FS) reports and other
documents contained within the administrative record for these
sites. EPA and the State encourage the public to review all
documents in order to gain a more comprehensive understanding of
the sites and the activities conducted there under the Federal
Superfund program. The administrative record file, which
contains the information upon which the selected response action
will be based, is available at the following locations:
             Buena Borough Municipal Building .
             Central Avenue                     .                     •
             Minotola, New Jersey 08341
             (609)697-9393
             Hours: Mon. - Fri., 9 a.m. - 4 p.m.
             U.S. EPA Public Docket Office, Region II
             26 Federal Plaza, 7th Floor                                       a,
             New York, New York 10278                      •      -           n
                                                                               o
             (212)264-1217          .
             Hours: Mon. - Fri., 9 a.m. - 5 p.m.        ." .                       0
         .                   .                • "                             o
                                                                              to
Dates to Remember                            '.                   '       '
Friday, July 19 - Monday, August 19, 1991 —                                        en
Public comment period on remedial alternatives.                               2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

—' • -sday, August 8, 1991 —        .     '
       meeting at the Buena Borough Hunicipal Building, at 7 p.m.


Based on new information or public comments, EPA, in consultation
..!>:. NJDEP, may modify the 'preferred alternative or select
another response action presented in this Plan and the RI/FS
reports. The public is therefore encouraged to review and
comment on all of the alternatives described in this Proposed
Plan.

SITE BACKGROUND

From 1972 until early 1981, the SJCC (Block 144, Lots 1, 3, and
6) disposed of wastes on the grounds of its facility located at
Central and Atlantic Avenues in Buena Borough, New Jersey. As a
manufacturer of military clothing, the facility utilized
tri chl or oethene (TCE) in its dry cleaning processes. Liquid
process wastes and sludges, containing TCE, were dumped onto the
grounds located between the adjacent railroad tracks and original
ranufacturing building. In addition, a fire at the facility in
1979 may have resulted in the release of an estimated 275 gallons
of TCE from an on-site storage tank.
     s located adjacent to the manufacturing building, as well as
ground-water beneath and downgradient from the facility, were
contaminated with TCE and. other volatile organic compounds
(VOCs) . TCE is a volatile organic compound that is known to
~v,w&e cancer in laboratory animals and is classified as a
carcinogen. The highly-mobile contaminant typically migrates
downward through soils into groundwater.
GSC (Block 175, Lot 6) , located approximately 500 feet south of
SJCC, is an active dry cleaner in operation since 1966. Until
1985,   the facility discharged wastes from its operations through
^ipes located on the outer walls of the building directly to the
ground below. As a result of this practice, soils located
«- jicent to the building and groundwater downgradient frpm the
facility were contaminated with tetrachloroethene (PCE) and other
VOCs. PCE, like TCE, is also a volatile organic compound
classified as a carcinogen and exhibits similar migration
  - -parties.
                         •    •    '   .    '    •   •
.-..-ares l and 2 illustrate the areal extent of contaminated soils o
and -groundwater at and in the vicinity of the two sites.
                                                                    o
 "» sites are underlain by the Cohansey Sand consisting of an       N>
unconsolidated mixture of sand, silt and clay. Beneath the
^ohansey lies the dark-gray upper sands of the Kirkwood              °
Formation.       .'     •                                             <n
                                                                      to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Previous investigations of the sites were performed by the
Atlantic County Health Department and NJDEP during the early
1980s. In 1984, based on the sampling results of nearby
residential wells, a municipal water supply system was installed
in the borough. The municipal well is located approximately
2,000 feet northeast (upgradient) from the sites &nd is not
impacted by the sites. One year later, SJCC installed an on-site
groundwater pump and treatment system consisting of a series of
air-stripping units with a capacity of 25 gallons per minute
(gpm). This system remains in operation today.
SJCC was placed on the National Priorties List (NPL) on October
4, 1989, and GSC in March of 1989. Between November 1989 and
July 1991, EPA, in conjuction with NJDEP, conducted a RI/FS of
the sites. Given the proximity of the sites to each other and
their similar processes, both sites were addressed by one study.
The purpose of the study was to identify the types, quantities,
and locations.of contaminants and develop ways of addressing the
contamination problems. The results of the RI/FS included the
identification of a plume of primarily TCE- and PCE-contaminated
groundwater extending from the SJCC to the vicinity of Wheat Road
(i.e., approximately 2,000 feet southeast from the sites).
Maximum concentrations of the predominant groundwater
contaminants were as follows:   TCE (13,000 ppb), PCE (1,900 ppb),
cis-1,2-dichloroethene (77 ppb), 1,1,1-trichloroethane (27 ppb),
1,1-dichloroethene (17 ppb), benzene (12 ppb), and carbon
tetrachloride (3 ppb). At SJCC, approximately 1,400 cubic yards
of contaminated soil extends from the northwest corner of the
manufacturing building to the adjacent railroad bed. Maximum
concentrations of the predominant contaminants detected in soil
at SJCC were as follows: TCE (68,000 ppb), acetone (2,000 ppb),
and PCE (5,800 ppb). It was found that an estimated 200 cubic
yards of soil contamination at GSC was confined to a small area
adjacent to the north wall of the building. Maximum
concentrations of the predominant contaminants detected here were
as follows: PCE (1,100,000 ppb), acetone (4,700 ppb), and TCE
(100 ppb). Based on soil and groundwater sampling results, the
depth of soil contamination at SJCC and GSC is believed to extend
to approximately 25 feet (i.e., the depth of the water table).
SCOPE AND ROLE OF RESPONSE ACTION     .

EPA's proposal addresses remediation of the contaminated
groundwater plume, one of the threats posed by the SJCC and GSC
sites. In addition, the contaminated soils, which represent the
source of groundwater contamination, are addressed as the
principal threat posed by the sites. The remedial action             o
objectives for soil and'groundwater focus on protection of human     °
health and the environment. In addition, contaminant soil            0
concentrations should be reduced to comply with the appropriate      o
                                                                     w
requirements and minimize continued releases of contaminants to
groundwater. For groundwater, the objectives include controlling     0
                                                                     Of
                                ,
                                3            .
                                                                     c*
                                                                     ui

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

current and future exposure to and migration of groundwater
contaminants and reducing the groundwater contaminant
concentrations to within the appropriate Federal and State
drinking water standards.
SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS

As part of the RI/FS, an evaluation was conducted to estimate the
potential human health problems that could result 'if the soil and
groundwater contamination at the SJCC and GSC sites was not
addressed. This evaluation, commonly referred to as a baseline
risk assessment, included identification of the following:
contaminated media and contaminants of concern; exposure pathways
(e.g., groundwater, air, soil) and potentially-exposed
populations; and both noncarcinogenic and carcinogenic risks.
Contaminants of Concern
At the SJCC, the evaluation identified the following contaminants
of concern in surface soil: TCE, acetone, PCE, methylene
chloride, 1,1, 2, 2 -tetrachloroethane, 1,2-dichloroethene, 1,1,1-
trichloroethane, toluene, chlorobenzene, 1,1,2-trichloroethane,
and benzene. At GSC, the contaminants of concern in surface soil
included PCE, acetone, TCE, methylene chloride, and 1,1,2,2-
tetrachloroethane. In groundwater located downgradient from the
sites, the following contaminants of concern were identified for
risk characterization purposes: TCE, PCE, cis-l,2-dichloro-
ethene, 1, 1,1-trichloroethane, chloromethane, chloroform, carbon
tetrachloride, and 1,1, 1,2 -tetrachloroethane. Finally, TCE at
the SJCC and PCE at GSC were identified as contaminants of
concern in ambient air. The above contaminants are listed in
descending order of the contaminant's representative
concentrations.
Also, brief summaries of the critical human health effects
associated with long-term exposure to each of the above
contaminants of concern are presented in Chapter 6 (Baseline Risk
Assessment) of the RI report.
Exposure Assessment
The evaluation identified the following potentially-exposed
populations and relevant, potential current and future exposure
routes for media of concern at the SJCC and GSC sites:
    .Inhalation of ambient air (site workers, trespassers,
     customers and future site residents) ;                            w
-   Incidental ingest ion of surface soil (site workers,               8
    trespassers, and future site residents) ;                        0
                                                                      o


                                                                     <y\
                                                                     *>•

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Dermal contact with surface soil (site workers,
     trespassers, and future site residents); and
-    Future use of contaminated groundwater (future area
     residents via ingestion, inhalation of volatiles while
     showering, and dermal contact while bathing or showering).
Risk Characterization
       *                •            •
The potential human health risks resulting from the exposure
scenarios presented above were calculated. To assess the overall
potential for noncarcinogenic health effects posed by more than
one chemical, a Hazard Index (HI) approach was used. In
accordance with this approach, a hazard quotient (i.e., the ratio
of the level of exposure to an acceptable level) greater than 1.0
indicates that the exposure level exceeds the protective level
for that particular chemical. Also, if the hazard-quotients for
individual chemicals are less than 1.0, but the sum of the hazard
quotients for all substances in an exposure medium (i.e., the
hazard index) is greater than 1.0, then there may be a concern
for potential health effects. Furthermore, the HI is summed for
all media common to a particular receptor.
For the SJCC and GSC sites, none of the estimated HI values from
current exposure to surface soil exceeded 1.0 for any potential
receptor. Under the future scenario, the HI was also below 1.0
for surface soil exposure for an adult non-resident worker at
SJCC. At GSC, however, the HI exceeded 1.0 for on-site
adolescent and child residents. The HI values for these
receptors were 1.5. and 3.6, respectively. In addition, under the
future scenario, the HI exceeded 1.0 for both on- and off-site '
residents exposed to groundwater via ingestion. When the
estimated His were summed for each environmental media to
calculate the. total His for potential receptors, the total His
exceeded 1.0 (ranging from 1.0 - 7.3) for. all receptors except an
adult worker who is not a resident of the site area. .
For carcinogens, risks are represented in terms of an
individual's likelihood of developing cancer as a result of
exposure to a carcinogenic chemical present in the exposure
media. For example, a cancer risk level of IxlO"* indicates that
the exposed receptor has a one in a thousand chance of developing
cancer during their lifetime. Or, such a risk may be interpreted
AS representing one additional case of cancer in an exposed
population of one thousand people. EPA's     acceptable risk range
_— excess cancer risk is 1x10* to IxlO"4 (one in a million to one
in ten thousand). That is, if the lifetime excess cancer risk
exceeds IxlO"4, the contamination is of sufficient concern to
consider remedial actions. If the excess cancer risk falls
^ctween IxlO"6 and IxlO"4, the need for remedial action varies and
is site-specific. Finally, for sites where the calculated
                                                                     o
                                                                      Or
                                                                     <3\
                                                                     01

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

lifetime excess cancer risk is below 1x10*, no remedial action is
generally required.
The results from this portion of the risk assessment concluded
that the estimated lifetime excess cancer risk from current
exposure to surface soil at the GSC for adult workers and
trespassers fell within EPA's target risk.range at.total values
of 9.8x10* and 3.8x10*, respectively. The estimated excess
cancer risks from all other media for the various receptors were
below 1x10*. Under the future scenario, the estimated lifetime
excess cancer risks from exposure to groundwater for an adult
worker/off-site resident, adult off-site resident/trespasser   and
adult on-site resident were at values of l.lxlO*, 9.7X10"4 and
1.2X10*, respectively. Also, under this scenario, the lifetime
excess cancer risk for exposure to surface soil at GSC for an
adult on-site resident was at a value of 1.4x10"*. Finally, at
SJCC, the ambient air exposure had an estimated lifetime excess
cancer risk of 8.8x10* for an on-site adult resident. The
estimated lifetime excess cancer risks from surface soil exposure
at the SJCC and ambient air exposure at the GSC site were below
1x10*.
While the estimated lifetime excess cancer risk from exposure to
soils at GSC only slightly exceeds EPA's accectable risk range
for carcinogens, these soils represent a continuing source of
groundwater contamination in the vicinity of the sites. Also,
the groundwater contamination, if not addressed, could impact the
water quality of residential wells located south of Vine Road
downgradient from the sites (beyond the boundary served by the
municipal water supply system).
EPA and NJDEP have determined that the New Jersey proposed soil
cleanup levels would be used as the standard for cleanup of
contaminated soil at SJCC and GSC. These standards also formed
the basis for defining the extent of soil contamination at the
sites. It should be noted, however, that these standards are
preliminary and may be modified following their review. The
predominant contaminants detected in soil at the sites and their
respective cleanup levels are as follows: PCE (1,000 ppb), TCE
(1,000 ppb), and acetone (1,000 ppb).
The goal of the groundwater remedial action would be to restore
the groundwater to levels below the Federal or State of New
Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs).
MCLs are enforceable standards devised to protect drinking water
and based on health risks associated with an individual's
consumption of two liters of water per day over a seventy year
period. The predominant groundwater contaminants and their
respective MCLs are as follows: TCE (1 ppb), PCE (1 ppb),
cis-l,2-dichlorpethene (10 ppb), 1,1,1-trichloroethane (26 ppb),
1,1-dichloroethene (2 ppb), benzene (1 ppb) and carbon
tetrachloride (2 ppb).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from these
.sites, if not addressed by the preferred alternative or one of
 the other active measures considered, may present an imminent and
 substantial endangerment to the public health, welfare, or the
 environment.
SUKKARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES
SOIL ALTERNATIVE?       •                                    '     ~ •

The FS considered the following general response actions for the
contaminated soil at SJCC and GSC: no action, institutional
controls, containment, excavation, and various types of treatment
and disposal. The alternatives which passed the development and
screening process of the study are summarized below. They are
numbered to correspond with the numbers in the FS report. The
capital, operation and maintenance, and present worth costs
provided below are totalled for the sites. A more detailed
discussion of the soil alternatives (including a cost breakdown
by site) is presented within Chapter 3 of the FS report, entitled
Development and Analysis of Alternatives.
Alternative SI:   NO ACTION
Remedy Components:   None
Estimated Capital Cost: $20,000
Estimated Annual Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Cost:       $87,000
Estimated Total Present Worth (PW) Cost: $1,360,000
Estimated Implementation Timeframe": None
The Superfund program requires that the "No Action" Alternative
be evaluated at every site to establish a baseline for comparison
to the other alternatives. Under this alternative, EPA would
take no further action at the site to prevent exposure to the
soil contamination. Long-term monitoring of the groundwater,
however, would be performed.
Because this alternative would result in contaminants remaining
on site, CERCLA requires that the site be reviewed every five
years. If justified by the review, remedial actions'would be
implemented at that time to remove or treat .the wastes. The cost
estimates above include the cost to perform this review.
'Note: For all described alternatives, the implementation
ui;r,a frame refers to the time required to implement the
alternative from the start of construction and operation of the
treatment system to its completion.                                      w
                                                                         8
                            •                            •               o
                                                                         o
                                                                         to
                                7                                        o
                                                                         UTI

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

alternative 82:   SOIL VAPOR EXTRACTION
Remedy Components: In situ vapor extraction treatment of soil.
Estimated Capital Cost: $461,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $188,000
Estimated Total PW Cost: $649,000
estimated Implementation Timeframe: 6-9 months
Approximately 1,600 cubic yards of subsurface soil would be
treated by in situ vapor extraction. The extraction process
utilizes a vacuum generated by a pump or blower to induce air
*? rv through the contaminated soil, stripping and volatilizing
vocs from the soil into the air. Contaminated air and water from
the soil would flow to a water/vapor separator where the
contaminated water would be removed and pumped for treatment.
The contaminated air would flow through activated -carbon
canisters arranged in series for treatment. A surface liner
would be used to prevent air leakage from the soil surface.
Alternative 83:   EXCAVATION, LOW TEMPERATURE THERMAL DESORPTION,
                  BACKFILL TREATED SOIL
Kemedy Components: Excavation, on-site thermal treatment of
contaminated soil and backfill with treated soil.
Estimated Capital Cost:' $1,160,000
 i.-...i;nated Annual O&M Cost: $38,000
Estimated Total PW Cost: $1,198,000
Estimated Implementation Timeframe: 5-8 months
Approximately 1,600 cubic yards qf contaminated soil would be
excavated and staged prior to treatment in an on-site, mobile
thermal desorption unit. The VOCs in the soil would be removed
by the desorptioi; process. The treated soil would be used to
backfill the excavations. The thermal treatment unit would
comply with the appropriate Federal and State air quality
standards. Off-gases would be managed in a treatment unit and
condensate treated in an on-site groundwater treatment plant.
Alternative 84:   SOIL FLUSHING
Remedy Components: In situ flushing of contaminated soil and
- ••"Tndvater treatment.
           Capital Cost: $133,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $34,000
Estiroted Total PW Cost: $167,000
"^-timated Implementation Timeframe: 10 - 14 months                 o
                  . '                  .             .              n
Under this alternative, water is applied at or near the soil
           Infiltration of the water through the vadose zone        §
                                                                    to
                                  8
                                                                    o
                                                                    Ul
                                                                    ON
                                                                    CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

causes contaminants to desorb from the soil and move to the
groundwater. Using extraction wells, leachate would be extracted
from the groundwater and pumped to a groundwater treatment
system. The treated groundwater would then be reapplied to the
soil resulting in a cyclic flow pattern. Given that this
alternative requires treatment of the extracted groundwater, it
would be considered only in combination with one of the proposed
groundwater alternatives. Costs associated with treatment of the
extracted groundwater are included with the active groundwater
alternatives. Temporary dikes would surround the soil areas to
contain the flushing solution within the treatment area.
Alternative 65:   EXCAVATIOH, OFF-SITE DISPOSAL, BACKFILL WITH
                  BORROW MATERIAL

Remedy Components: Excavation, off-site treatment and disposal
of contaminated soil, and backfill with clean, borrow material.*-
Estimated Capital Cost: $5,890,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost: 0
Estimted Total PW Cost: $5,890,000
Estimated Implementation Timeframe: 4-5 months
Approximately 1,600 cubic yards of contaminated soil would be
excavated, loaded into trucks, and hauled to an approved off-site
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.(RCRA) landfill for
treatment and disposal. To comply with the RCRA land disposal
requirements, treatment of the contaminated soil would be
required prior to disposal. For cost estimation purposes, it was
assumed that the soil would undergo thermal treatment. The
excavations would be backfilled with clean fill material from an
off-site source.
GROUNDWATER ALTERNATIVES

The following general response actions were considered in the FS .
for contaminated groundwater: no action, institutional controls,
containment, extraction, and various types of treatment and
disposal. Below are summaries of the groundwater alternatives .
which passed the development and screening process of the FS..
The cost estimates for the active groundwater treatment
alternatives are based on a 30-year period which represents the
expected life of the proposed groundwater treatment plant. . A
more detailed discussion of the groundwater alternatives is
presented within Chapter 3 of the FS report, entitled Development
and Analysis of Alternatives.
                                                                     CO
The active groundwater alternatives below employ two types of        £J
groundwater extraction systems. The limited extraction system,
proposed under groundwater Alternatives GW2(a) and GW3(a), would     o
attempt to remediate only the highly-contaminated groundwater        5
areas located in the immediate vicinity of the sites. The

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

remainder of the groundwater plume would not be actively
remediated under this system, but would be allowed to naturally
attenuate. Extraction of the total groundwater plume, proposed
under groundwater Alternatives GW2(b) and GW3(b), would attempt
to remediate all zones of groundwater contamination exceeding the
appropriate Federal and State drinking water standards.
Alternative GW1: NO ACTION
Remedy Components: None
Estimated Capital Cost: $20,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $87,000
Estimated Total PW Cost: $1,360,000
Estimated Implementation Timeframe: .None                .
As previously indicated, the Superfund program requires that the
"No Action" Alternative be evaluated at every site to establish a
baseline for comparison to the other alternatives. Under this
alternative, EPA would take no further action at the site to
prevent exposure to the groundwater contamination and the
contamination would continue to migrate from the site and could
impact downgradient potable wells in the future. Long-term
monitoring of the groundwater, however, would be performed.
Because this alternative would result in contaminants remaining
on site, CERCLA requires that the site be reviewed every five
years. If justified by the review, remedial actions would be
implemented at that time to remove or treat the wastes. The
above cost estimates include the cost to perform this review.
Alternative GW2(a): LIMITED EXTRACTION, AIR STRIPPING, CARBON
ADSORPTION, REINJECTION OF TREATED WATER, LONG-TERM MONITORING

Remedy Components: Extraction, air stripping of groundwater,
further treatment by carbon adsorption, reinjection to
groundwater and long-term groundwater monitoring.
Estimated Capital Cost: $880,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $187,000
Estimated Total PW Cost: $3,760,000
Estimated Implementation Timeframe: More than 30 years
Using a series of an estimated 7 extraction wells, groundwater
would be extracted from the more highly-contaminated portions of
the water table aquifer at a flow rate of approximately 200 gpm.    Q
                                                                    n
To treat the VOCs in the extracted groundwater, an air stripping
column and activated carbon adsorption units would be constructed
on site. At least 95 percent of VOCs would be removed using         o
                                                                    M
these technologies. Injection wells would be placed upgradient
of the sites to enhance aquifer flushing and desorption of
contaminants. Groundwater monitoring would also be required to      S
                                                                    o
                               10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

/*"**>   ensure that the goals of the remedial action have been met. Air
         emissions from the treatment units would comply with the
         appropriate Federal and State air quality standards. A
         conceptual layout for the proposed limited extraction system is
         shown on Figure 2.
         Alternative GW2 (b) : TOTAL PLUME EXTRACTION, AIR STRIPPING,
         CARBON ADSORPTION, REINJECTION OF TREATED WATER, LONG-TERM
         MONITORING

         Remedy Components: Extraction, air stripping of groundwater,
         further treatment by carbon adsorption, reinjection to
         groundwater and long-term groundwater monitoring.
         Estimated Capital Cost: $3,233,000
         Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $354,000
         Estimated Total PW Cost: $8,680,000                             --
         Estimated Implementation Timeframe: More than 30 years
         This alternative is similar to Alternative GW2 (a) except that
         groundwater would be extracted from throughout the aquifer at an
         approximate flow rate of 1,000 gpm. Extracted groundwater would
         be treated via air stripping and carbon adsorption and reinjected
         upgradient from the 'sites. Groundwater monitoring would be
         required and air emissions would comply with the appropriate air
^^
/
         quality standards. A conceptual layout for the proposed total
"^'      plume extraction system is shown on Figure 3. .
         Alternative GW3(a): LIMITED EXTRACTION, ULTRAVIOLET
         (UV) /OXIDATION, REINJECTION OF TREATED WATER, LONG-TERM


         Remedy Components: Extraction, ultraviolet oxidation of
         groundwater, reinjection to c/roundwater and long-term groundwater
         monitoring.        •                      .     .
         Estimated Capital Cost: $1,024,000
         Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $234,000
         Estimated Total PW Cost: $4,630,000
         Estimated Implementation Timeframe: More than 30 years
         As described for Alternative GW2(a), a 'series of an estimated 7
         extraction wells would be used to extract groundwater from the
         water table aquifer at a flow rate of approximately 200 gpm.
         Extracted groundwater would be pumped to a "UV plant comprised of
         _ ~_'V radiation/ oxidation reactor and ozone generator modules, a
         hydrogen peroxide feed system and catalytic ozone decomposer unit     co
         for treatment. The treated water from the reactor would be            ^
         reinjected and long-term groundwater monitoring would be
         conducted. No waste residuals would remain after treatment.           o

                                                                              o
                                                                              07

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

             Alternative GW3 (b) : TOTAL PLUME EXTRACTION, UV/OXIDATION,
/^s          REINJECTION OP TREATED WATER, LONG-TERM MONITORING
             Remedy Components: Extraction, ultraviolet oxidation of
             groundwater, reinjection to groundwater and long-term groundwater
             monitoring.
             Estimated Capital Cost: $2,603,000 •
             Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $475,000
             Estimated Total PW Cost: $9,900,000
             Estimated Implementation Time frame: More -than 30 years
              This alternative is similar to Alternative GW3 (a) except that
              groundwater would be extracted from the aquifer at a flow rate of
            . approximately 1,000 gpm. Extracted groundwater would be pumped
              to an above-ground equalization tank before being pumped to the
             UV oxidation plant for treatment; Given the high flow rate,
              contaminated groundwater would undergo oxidation in two oxidation
              reactors before entering the UV oxidation reactor. Reinjection
              of treated groundwater and groundwater monitoring would follow.
             EVALUATION OF THE ALTERNATIVES AND THE PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE
             The preferred alternative for the remediation of soil at the SJCC
             and GSC sites is Alternative S2 — Soil Vapor Extraction. For
             the cleanup of contaminated groundwater beneath and downgradient
             from the sites, the preferred alternative is Alternative
/*-*-•>..    GW2(b) — Total Plume Extraction (1,000 gpm), Air Stripping and
             Carbon Adsorption, Reinjection of Treated Water and Long-Term
             Groundwater Monitoring. Based on current information, these
             alternatives appear to provide the best balance of trade-offs
             among the alternatives with respect to the nine criteria that EPA
             uses to evaluate alternatives. The following section profiles
             the performance of the preferred combination of alternatives
             against the nine criteria, noting how they compare to the other
             options under consideration. A glossary of the evalution
             criteria is provided below.
            ANALYSIS                                                .             .
            Overall Protection. All of the soil and groundwater
            alternatives, with the exception of the "no action" alternatives,
            would provide adequate protection of human health and the
            environment by eliminating, reducing, or controlling risks
            through treatment. The preferred alternative would treat the
            Vocs in the soil, thus eliminating the potential for further
            contaminant releases from the soil to groundwater. Further,
            treatment of the groundwater would reduce the risks associated
            with ingest ion and inhalation of VOCs in the groundwater.

                                                                                  o
                                                    '     .                       o
                                            12
                                                                                  -J
                                                                                  NJ

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Because the "No Action" Alternatives are not protective of human
health and the environment, they are not considered further in
this analysis as an option for the sites.
Compliance with ARARs. All of the active soil remedial
alternatives proposed for the SJCC and GSC sites would meet their
respective applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements
(ARARs) of Federal and State environmental laws. 'Soil
Alternative S2, however, would require only that air emissions "~
comply with the appropriate Federal and State air quality
standards. In addition, since Alternative S2 involves the use of
an in situ treatment technology, it meets the statutory
preference for treatment as a principal element. Finally, this
alternative would comply with other "to be considered" criteria
including the State of New Jersey's proposed soil cleanup levels.
The preferred groundwater Alternative GW2(b) would attempt to -
remediate all zones of contamination exceeding the -appropriate
Federal and State drinking water standards. Conversely, the
limited extraction system, proposed under groundwater
Alternatives GW2(a) and GW3(a), would attempt to remediate only
the highly-contaminated groundwater area. Thus, the appropriate
drinking water standards would not be met for the contaminated
groundwater areas located downgradient from the sites-.
Groundwater from this area would be allowed to naturally
attenuate.
Long-term effectiveness and permanence. The preferred soil
alternative would virtually eliminate the inherent hazard posed
by the contaminated soils. The long-term risks of exposure to
the contaminants in the soil would be eliminated by treating the
VOCs. Groundwater'monitoring would also be conducted to ensure
the effectiveness of the soil treatment. Under Alternative S3,
condensate would be generated containing VOCs. Although the
volumes are expected to be small, they will require further
treatment. Alternative S4 allows for soil contaminants to
further spread into the groundwater. This may also make
monitoring of the effectiveness of the remedy difficult. While
Alternative S5 would eliminate site risks by off-site treatment
and disposal of soil, it is the least preferred option under
CERCLA.                         .

Groundwater Alternative GW2(b) provides the greatest reliability,
of controls. The carbon beds are the only system component that
would require replacement. Alternatives GW3(a) and (b), on the
other hand, would require constant regulation of hydrogen
peroxide and ozone dosages. In addition, Alternative GW2(b)
represents the more comprehensive option as this alternative
would attempt to remediate both the highly-contaminated
groundwater located near the source of contamination, as well as
the less contaminated groundwater downgradient from the sites.      o
                                                                    o
                               13          ''       .'              §
                                                                    to
                                                                    o
                                                                    Ul
                                                                    -J

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       ~ s, the entire area of the contaminated groundwater plume would
       be addressed.                    '                         .
        Reduction of Toxicitv. Mobility, and Volume of Contaminants
        through Treatment. All of the active rerosdiation alternatives
        would treat both the soil and groundwater contamination to reduce
        -.*«* toxicity, mobility or volume of the VOCs. Soil Alternative
        S2 would treat the VOCs to meet the proposed New Jersey soil
        cleanup standards for TCE and PCE. Like Alternative S4, however",
      . some VOCs will remain at levels within the appropriate cleanup
        standards. For Soil Alternatives S2 and S3, the carbon used as a
        treatment media would require handling and disposal as a
        hazardous waste. Under Alternative S4, in addition to the soil,
        the leachate generated from the extraction process would require
        recovery and treatment.
       While all of the groundwater alternatives considered would employ
       treatment of VOCs, Alternatives GW2(b) and GW3(b) would,
       accomodate larger volumes of contaminated groundwater. In
       addition, the combination of technologies employed under
       Alternative GW2(b) are expected to result in VOC removal
       efficiencies of nearly 100 percent.
       Short-term effectiveness. In comparison with the other soil
       alternatives. Alternative S2 provides the greatest degree of
/—^    short-term effectiveness with regard to protection of the
       ~~-"r:unity- and workers during remedial actions and environmental
       impacts. Alternatives S3 and S5 would require excavation of the
       contaminated soil resulting in the generation of dust and vapors.
       Soil Alternative S5 also would involve the use of trucks to
       -xonsport the excavated soils off site. Alternative S4, soil
       flushing, would present potential short-term risks to the
       environment by temporarily increasing the mobility of the
       contaminants from within the soil to the groundwater.
       Provided that system equipment is properly maintained and the
       appropriate protective measures are followed during the
       construction and operation of the system, soil Alternative S2
       affords ample protection of the community, workers and the
       environment. Air emissions would comply with the appropriate
       standards and the soil remediation would be .completed with an
       estimated 6-9 months. Alternatives S3, S4 and S5 would require
       an estimated 5 - 8, 10-14, and 4 - 5 months for completion,
       •--pectively.
      . -r,j.i of the groundwater alternatives would result in virtually the
        same impacts on short-term effectiveness. As more limited                   co
        systems, however, Alternatives GW2(a) and GW3(a) would require              o
          •-"=•« clearance of underbrush, excavation of trenches along roads
        and the installation of fewer wells. Noise and dust due to the          o
_^      *~eguent movement of heavy vehicles carrying construction               M
        materials would also be less. An estimate of more than 30 years
                                                                               o
                                        14                                     v?

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

would be required to implement any of the groundwater
alternatives. This estimate is based on the life expectancy of
the groundwater .treatment plant.
          /
Implementability. While all of the soil and groundwater
alternatives are implementable, some of the alternatives are
easier to implement than others based on their design and '
availability. Soil Alternatives S2 and S4 involve easily-
constructed and operated technologies and require only routine ~"
site preparation. Both the soil type and predominant
contaminants present at SJCC and GSC would be amenable to air
stripping and carbon adsorption treatment under S2. Conversely, ,
Soil Alternatives S3 and S5 would require significant
preparation, mainly with regard to the excavation required.
Alternative S3 also would require numerous federal and state
approvals, in order to construct and operate the mobil thermal
unit. Alternatives S2 through S4 all require specialists to
operate the systems and could easily be modified in response to a
change in actions taken.                 '                     •
As the more comprehensive groundwater treatment systems,
groundwater Alternatives GW2(b) and GW3(b) would require more
extensive site preparation and construction. These alternatives
would require extensive clearance of underbrush, excavation of '
roadsides for system piping and the installation of approximately
20 extraction wells. Given the density of the area, it is likely
that residential properties would be affected by the construction
activities related to the installation of these systems. Roads
may also require closing temporarily. Acquiring access to the
affected properties may be difficult and time consuming. Where
possible, however, the piping and wells would be located within
public rights-of-way. The remaining groundwater alternatives,
Alternatives GW2(a) and GW3(a), would attempt to remediate the
groundwater contamination by pumping only from the highly-
contaminated area located closest to the sites. These
alternatives, conversely, would result in less disruption of the
surrounding community given their more limited scope.
Installation of the various treatment units for all of the
groundwater alternatives would require coordination. Under
Alternatives GW2(b) and GW3(b), the limited space available at
the SJCC may serve to limit expansion of the.proposed groundwater
treatment plant. The effectiveness of all of the groundwater
alternatives could easily be monitored via groundwater sampling
for VOCs. Finally, any services and materials required for the
operation of Alternatives GW2(a) and GW(b) would be readily
available in comparison to the remaining alternatives as numerous
vendors for the air stripping and carbon adsorption technologies
are available.                                                      o
                                                                    o
Cost. The total present worth costs of the preferred
alternatives for soil and groundwater are $649,000 (S2) and         o
                                      .     .   .        •    .     to
                               15
                                                                    o
                                                                    (ji
                                                                    -J
                                                                     (Jl

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

$8,680,000 (GW2(b)), respectively. The least costly soil and
groundwater alternatives are soil Alternative S4 at $167,000 and
groundwater Alternative GW2(a) at $3,760,000. The most costly
soil and groundwater alternatives are soil Alternative S5 at
$5,890,000 and groundwater Alternative GW3 (b) at $9,900,000.
Soil and groundwater Alternatives S3 and GW3(a) have total
present worth costs of $1,198,000 arid $4,630,000, respectively. ••
state Acceptance. The State of New Jersey supports the preferred
alternative.
Community Acceptance. Community acceptance of the preferred
alternative will .be assessed after the public comment period ends
and summarized in the Record of Decision (ROD) for the sites.
This will occur following a review of the public comments
received on the RI/FS report and the Proposed Plan.
SUMMARY OF PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE

In summary, the preferred alternative is believed to provide the
best balance of trade-offs among the alternatives with respect to
the criteria used to evaluate remedies. However, groundwater
Alternative GW2 (b) will require extensive site preparation and
construction including extensive excavation of roadsides for
system piping and the installation of extraction wells. Affected
residential properties will require access for the above
activities to occur. Based on information available at this
time, therefore, EPA and the State of New Jersey believe the
preferred alternatives would protect human health and the
environment, comply with ARARs, be cost-effective, and utilize
permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies to the
maximum extent practicable. Finally, the preferred alternativess
would satisfy the preference for ' treatment as a principal threat.

EVALUATION CRITERIA

For a more detailed analysis of each alternative, see the
Comparative Analysis section of Chapter 3 of the FS report.
Overall protection of human health and the environment addresses
whether a remedy provides adequate protection of human health and
the environment and describes how risks posed through each
exposure pathway are eliminated, reduced, or controlled through
treatment, engineering controls, or institutional controls.
Compliance with applicable or relevant and appropriate                o
requirements (ARARs) addresses whether a remedy will meet all of      °
the ARARs of other Federal and State environmental laws and/or        0
justifies a waiver.                                                   o
                                                                      to
                                                                      O
                                                                      U1
                               16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Lcsg-term effectiveness and permanence refers to expected
residual risk and the ability of a remedy to maintain reliable
protection of human health and the environment over time, once
cleanup goals have been met.
Reduction of toxicity, nobility, or volume through treatment is
the anticipated performance of the treatment technologies a
remedy may employ.                      . •                    .» •,

Short-term effectiveness addresses the period of time needed to
achieve protection and any adverse impacts on human health and
the environment that may be posed during the contraction and
implementation period, until cleanup goals are achieved.
Implementability is the technical and administrative feasibility
of a remedy, including the availability of materials and services
needed to implement a particular option.
Cost includes estimated capital and O&M costs, also expressed as
net present worth costs.
State/Support Agency Acceptance reflects aspects of the preferred
alternative and other alternatives that the support agency
favors, objects to, and any specific comments regarding State
ARARs or the proposed use of waivers.
Community Acceptance summarizes the public's general response to
the alternatives described in the Proposed Plan and in the RI/FS,
based on public comments received.

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION                 .

EPA solicits input"from the community on the cleanup methods
proposed for each Superfund response action. EPA-has established
a public comment period from July 19 through August 19, 1991, to
encourage public participation in the selection process. The
comment period includes a public meeting where EPA, along with
KJDEP, will present the RI/FS findings and the Proposed Plan,
answer questions, and accept both oral and written comments.
The public meeting is scheduled for Thursday, August 8, 1991 at 7
p.m., and will be held at the Buena Borough Municipal Building on
Central Avenue.                                   •
                                                                        CO
                                                                       o
                                                                       o
                                                                       o
                                                                       o
                                                                       K,

                                                                       O
                                                                       Ul
                                17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Comments will be summarized and responses provided in the
Responsiveness Summary section of the ROD.   The ROD is the
document that presents EPA's final selection for cleanup. To
send written comments, or obtain further information, contact;
                 Sharon Atkinson, Project Manager
         U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region II
                    26 Federal Plaza, Room 711
                     New York, New York 10278
            (212)264-1217, or toll-free (800)346-5009




                                                                 CO
                                                                 o
                                                                 o
                                                                 o
                                                                 o
                                                                 NJ

                                                                 O
                                                                 Ul
                               18                                w

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 •AftOCM STATE
                                   CICANCNS

                                                          M




      LE6ENO
            AREA WHERE VOCS
ESS         EXCEED PROPOSED
            CLEANUP LEVELS
mmm^mm      BOUNDARY   OF AREA
            RECOMMENDED FOR
            REMEDIATION




 • CAIC
I* - IS'
 DATE
                CLEANUP LEVELS AND AREA RECOMMENDED FOR
JULY 1991
                REMEDIATION         ___   _____ ____


               200

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          GROUNDWATER
                         FLOW DIRECTION               GROUNDWATER TREATMENT PLANT

                                                        SOUTH JERSEY
                                                        CLOTHING CO.



      I \

                                                                                AVENUE




              PACIFIC
                                                                         AEP-3S




              ARCTIC

                                        AEP-5S                            BABES VILLAGE
                                                                          INN WELL

              JONAS               AVENUE

                                                                                MARTINELLI AVE


            WILLIAMS              AVENUE

                                                       NJ
                                                            J «CLEARY SCHOOL WELL
                                                                            _
 FIGURE g
                              COARI      AVENUE                                  IRRIGATION

                                                     CLEARY SCHOOL
                                                        D.NJ4
                                                             • NJ5
                                 SOUTH    AVENUE


                  LEGEND.                          WHEAT          ROAD

——--SHALLOW AQUIFER CONCENTRATION
     CONTOUR INTERVAL (ug/L>
'——v-INTERMEDIATE AQUIFER CONCENTRATION
      CONTOUR INTERVAL (ufl/L)
  O    EPA PHASE 2 MONITOR WELLS
  ._ ».r;A PHASE I MONITOR WELLS
 0 7 -SJCC MONITORING WELL
  w
» "-NJDEP MONITORING WELL
      -oROUNDWATER RECOVERY AREA'                                           OEP-.3I
                                                   T.OUIS     ^
*—•   -EXTRACTION WELLS'AND HEADER PIPE
y——O-INJECTION WELLS AND HEADER PIPE
  ©-APPROXIMATE NEW MONITORING WELL
       LOCATION

  SCALE
  l" * 500'            AREA WHERE VOLATILE ORGANIC COMPOUNDS EXCEED
   DATE
                       MCLS IN GROUNDWATER AND LIMITED EXTRACTION
                       AND TREATMENT FOR ALTERNATIVES GW2A 8 GW3A
 JULY 1991

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 G R O U N D W A T I'ft                                            " ^— W»OWNO«(ATER TUtATMENT PLANT
                                                               QX
               FLOW O I R E C T I ON                 S2^<f
                                                                                   ^ ———— SOUTH JERSEY'
                                                                                   >.,   CLOTHING CO.
                                                                                     NO AEP-.f
                                                                                       ATLANTIC AVENUE
                                   s>               /                  m                 \
                                        GARDEN STATE
    •N                                  CLEANERS—v.
                                                                                            \
                                                                                                \
                                                                                       7
                                                                                   " ^o          SUMMER           .              AVENUE

                                                     \
                                                     \
                                                       \                   l 38                          \            4EP-3S
              PACIFIC                       AVENUE \                       1
                                        „ ,.,.„ ;.., ,„ \
                                                       \                                                      \
                                                        \
              ARCTIC                        AVENUE
                                                     \
                                                           \                         . .P . « \\
                                                                                        •Q w
                                                AEP-5S                                      ®                     V —— BABES VILLAGE
                                                     1                                                            /    INN WELL
                                                      1
              JONAS                          AVENUE   I                             L———«———————*^                          ————————————
                                                                                                 \                    \      MARTINELLI AVE

                                                               1
            WILLIAMS                        AVENUE  1
                                        ————————————\———.
                                                                                                NJ
                                                               1                                     | ^LEARY SCHOOL WELL
                                                  '            \
   FIGURE 3                                 QtP~\4l            \
                                                                   \
                                        COARI     AVENUE (                                              \                    ^IRRIGATION

                                                         \                                 CLEARY SCHOOL                     \
                                                          \
                                                           \
                                                                                                      • NJ5               OEp"'2I
                                          SOUTH    AVENUE \

                                                                               \   '      WHEAT         ROAD0
                                                                                                                            T'
                                                                                                                             I     ,          1



                'LEGEND
   Q - E P A PHASE 2 MONITOR WELLS
   A -EPA PHASE \ MONITOR WELLS
                                                                                    v 1, 1 ')•+*                  — — * * ' . • •

   0 7 -SJCC MONITORING WELL                                                                                                                      cn
                                                                                                                                                  (D
 • NJI-NJDEP MONITORING WELL                                                                                                                      o
——— --GROUNDWATER RECOVERY AREA
• ——t -EXTRACTION WELLS AND HEADER PIPE                                                               ^^^ ————————— .......,,,„, -—«^^f            o
                                                                                                                                                   c.
O ——O -INJECTION WELLS AND HEADER PIPE                                                                                                             **
   A -APPROXIMATE        NEW MONITORING WELL
      LOCATION                                                                                                                                         <
                                                                                                                                                       i
   SCALE
   f«500'                                                                  ;



   ,,ntT,L,             TOTAL PLUME EXTRACTION 8 TREATMENT FOR
  JULY 1991             ALTERNATIVES GW 2A a GW3A (1000 GPM)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SGC   002   0582




              c

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                          THE UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
                                                                                     announces a
                                          PROPOSED PLAN and PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD
                   s**iSs                                                                for the
                   **^M
                                                                SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY
                                              ' •••        •'             '               and         •             '
                                                                   GARDEN STATE CLEANERS
                                                                    . SUPERFUND SITES
                                                                      BUENA BOROUGH,
   %F$i%*£                                                       ATLANTIC COUNTY, NEW JERSEY
   s*SfiS^5:.:ir            (
                                The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) recently completed a Remedial Investigation and Feasibility
                                Study (RI/FS) of the South Jersey Clothing Company and Garden State Cleaners sites located in Buena Borough.
                                New Jersey. Based on the work done at the sites, EPA is announcing a Proposed Remedy for cleanup of
                                contaminated soil and groundwater at the sites.                              /                            •• •
                                Before selecting final remedies, EPA will consider written and oral commeore on these Pref «rr«H Alternatives, as
                                well as other alternatives that were consideredT^II comments must be/eceived on or before Mugust 17,1991.
                                EPA's final Record of Decision (ROD) will in^lude^ummary of puhw comments and EPA responses.
                                EPA will conduct an informational public meeting on August 8,199/at 7:00 p.m. at the Buena Borough Municipal
                                Building to discuss the findings of the RI/FS and to present EP/*s Preferred Alternatives.
                                EPA's Feasibility Study evaluated the following remedial\j^rnatives for cleanup of the sites:
                                SOIL
                                Alternative S1:       No Action
        m:                      Alternative S2:
                                Alternative S3:
                                                      Soil Vapor Extraction
                                                      Excavation, Low-Temperaty^ Thermal (\esorption, Backfill Treated Soil
                                Alternative S4:       Soil Flushing
                                Alternative S5:       Excavation, Off-Site Disofisal, Backfill will Borrow Material
                                GROUNDWATER
                                Alternative GW1:    No Action                  r
                                Alternative GW2(a): Limited Extraction,        r Stripping, Carbon Adsorption, Reinjection of Treated Water, Long-
  J£r\Z~S- - ':
  &•*£.•*-:--.•:
                                                    Term Monitoring
                                Alternative GW2(b): Total Plume Extr          'ion, Air Stripping, (farbon Adsorption, Reinjection of Treated Water,
                                                    Long-Term Monrtoi '9                /
 &***•?.*                       Alternative GW3(a): Limited Extraction, 'ttraviolet (UVyOxidation, Reinjection of Treated Water, Long-Term
            S^W-iS                                   Monitoring
  ^»s                           Alternative GW3(b): Total Plume Extraction?
                                EPA's Preferred Alternatives are as follows:
                                                                                      Sxidation. Reinjection of Treated Water. Long-Term Monitoring

  ^toi--
                                   SOIL
                 ^j-.
                                  Alternative S2:        Soil Vapor Extraction
                                  GROUNDWATER
                 « -              Alternative GW2(b): Total Plume Extraction. Air Stripping, Carbon Adsorption. Reinjection of Treated
                                                      Water, and Long-Term Monitoring

                                All of the above listed alternatives are outlined and discussed in the Proposed Plan.
        1
 fSssr                          The RI/FS reports, Proposed Plan, and other she-related documents are available tor review at the f oltawtng public
 «STk-;. . . „. .
  S^ij^W','-.^:
                                information repositories:
  1 : :
   ^-'•••«s;                                Buena Borough Municipal Bldg.                       USEPA Public Docket Office • Region II
          v.f--:^'*;*•••
                    *-
                                                     Central Avenue                                         26 Federal Plaza
     :'"• ^rr^.-r*!1
                                              Minotola, New Jersey 08341                                       7th Floor
 iSffi^
                                                      (609)697-9393                                    New York, New York 10278
«^Slfe^::
                                               Hour*: M-F9AM-4PM                                                (212)264-1217
  ^'.^f^-t              :.- '                                                      • • ; ' • . '          -Houra: M-F9AM - 4 P M
 «K;^                           Written comments on the Preferred Alternatives, as well as any other alternatives considered should be sent to:
 ^ :~y*?
    '• ^^'-'":
         £$r ~-         :
   ^:.^^?-                                                                   Sharon Atklnson
K?.i^cS-,-                                                           •       Project Manager
 i— -^.. T. *>*"«»•«,
                                                            U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region n
 E^5S'.
 fe i""*"** •
E^.. •>—:—.-i—.a
                                                                       26 Federal Plaza • Room 711
                                                                        New York, New York 10278
                                                                                                                               .
^"r5«^.fc                                                 .    (212) 264-1217 or toll-free HBOO) 346-5009
                                Written comments must be postmarked or received at the above address on or before August 17.1991.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    SGC   002   0584




o
o
H

W


s

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          UNITED STATED ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
                                            REGION II
                                   PUBLIC INFORMATIONAL MEETING
                                               FOR                    «
                   SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING & GARDEN STATE CLEANERS SUPERFUND SITE
                                         AUGUST 8, 1991
                                            ATTENDEES


                                     (Please Print clearly)
                                                                                      MAILING
  NAME                STREET          CITY        ZIP         PHONE    REPRESENTING   LIST



                                         )€J.




                                                 fit&f' (SK-7700

           w
     ^^        »

^tf^. L^Af*d

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
                                 REGION II

                     JACOB K. JAVITS FEDERAL BUILDING

                         NEW YORK. NEW YORK 1O27B




                                AGENDA
                          Public Meeting
                 South Jersey Clothing Company &
              Garden State Cleaners superfund sites
                 Buena Borough Municipal Building
                       Minolota, New Jersey
                    Thursday, August 8, 1991
                               7:00 P.M.        .


1. Welcome & Introduction                    Cecilia Echols
                                             Community Relations
                                              Coordinator
                                             U.S. EPA, Region II
2. Overview of the Superfund             "   Donald Lynch
    Program                                  Chief, Southern New Jersey
                                              Superfund Section I
                                             U.S. EPA, Region II
3. Site History/Previous                     Sharon Atkinson
   Investigations & Enforcement              Project Manager
                                             U.S. EPA, Region II
4. Remedial Investigation (RI)               Steve Stinger
                                             Site Manager/RI Leader
                                             C.C. Johnson & Malhotra, PC
5. Presentation of Feasibility               Erich Sonnenberg
   Study (FS)                                Feasibility Study Leader
                                             C.C. Johnson & Malhotra, PC
                                                                            CO
                                                                            o
6. Summary of Preferred Alternatives Sharon Atkinson                        ^
7. Questions & Answers                       Cecilia Echols                 o
                                                                           w
                                                                           o
                                                                           Or
                                                                           oo

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 108 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

PLAN GLOSSARY

This glossary defines terms in this Proposed Plan often used by
the EPA staff when describing activities under CERCLA. The
definitions apply specifically to the Superfund program and may
have other meanings when used under different circumstances.
Those words which appear underlined are defined separately
elsewhere in the glossary.
Administrative Record: A file which is maintained and contains
all information used by the lead agency to make its decision on
the selection of a response action under the Comprehensive
Environmental Response. Compensation, and Liability Act. This
file is to be available for public review and a copy is to be
established at or near the site, usually at one of the
information repositories. Also, a duplicate file is maintained
in a central location, such as a Regional or State office.
Air stripping: A treatment system that removes, or "strips",
volatile organic compounds from contaminated groundwater by
forcing an airstream through the water and causing the compounds
to evaporate.
Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements (ARARs): The
Federal and State requirements that a selected remedy will
attain. These requirements vary among sites and alternatives.
Aquifer: An underground rock formation composed of materials
such as sand, soil or gravel that can store and supply
aroundwater to wells and springs.
Carcinogen: A known substance that causes cancer.
Carbon Adsorption: A treatment system where contaminants are
removed from aroundwater when the water is forced through tanks
containing activated carbon, a specially-treated material that
attracts the contaminants.
Cleanup: Actions taken to deal with a release or threatened
release of hazardous substances that could affect public health
and/or the environment. The term "cleanup" is often used broadly
to describe various response actions or phases of remedial
responses such as the Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
(RI/FS1.

Comment Period: A time period during which the public can review
and comment on various documents and EPA actions. For example, a    w
30-day comment period is held to allow community members to         o
review and comment on a draft RI/FS and Proposed Plan.
                  •           .      •                              o
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability   5
Act (CERCLA): A federal law passed in 1980 and modified in 1986
by the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA). The     °
Acts created a special tax that goes into a Trust Fundf commonly    oo

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 109 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

known as Superfund. to investigate and cleanup abandoned or
uncontrolled hazardous waste sites.
Feasibility Study (PS): A study undertaken by the EPA or State
to develop and evaluate options for remedial action. The FS
emphasizes data analysis and is generally performed concurrently
and in an interactive fashion with the Remedial Investigation.
using data gathered during the investigation. The term also
refers to a report that describes the results of the study. See
also Remedial Investigation.
Groundwater: Water found beneath the earth's surface that fills
pores between materials such as sand, soil or gravel. In
groundwater aquifers, groundwater occurs in sufficient quantities
that it can be used for drinking water, irrigation and other
purposes.
Hazardous Substances: Any material that poses a threat to public
health and/or the environment. Typical hazardous substances are
materials that are toxic, corrosive, ignitable, explosive or
chemically reactive.
Information Repository: A file containing current information,
technical reports, and reference documents regarding a Superfund
site. The information repository is usually located in a public
building that is convenient for local residents, such as a public
school, town hall, or library.
Monitoring Wells: Special wells drilled at specific locations on
or off a hazardous waste site where groundwater can be sampled at
selected depths and studied to determine such things as the
direction in which groundwater flows and the types and amounts of
contaminants present.
National Priorities List (NPL): EPA's list of the most serious
abandoned or uncontrolled hazardous waste sites identified for
possible long-term remedial response using money from the Trust
Fund.
On-site: The areal extent of contamination and all suitable
areas in very close proximity to the contamination necessary for
implementation of the response action.
Operation and Maintenance (O&M): Activities conducted at a site
after a response action occurs, to ensure that the cleanup or
containment system is functioning properly.
Parts Per Billion (ppb): Units commonly used to express low              co
concentrations of contaminants. For example, one ounce of TCE in         o
one billion ounces of water is 1 ppb. If one drop of TCE is
mixed in a competition-size swimming pool, the water will contain    <=>
about 1 ppb of TCE.                                                  °
                                                                    o
                                                                    Or
                                                                    CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 110 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Flume: A column of contamination with measurable horizontal and
vertical dimensions that is suspended in and moves with
groundwater.
Record of Decision (ROD): A public document that explains which
cleanup alternative(s) will be used at National Priorities List
sites. The ROD is based on information and technical analysis
generated during the RI/FS and consideration of public comments
and community concerns.
Remedial Investigation (RZ): A problem undertaken by the State
or EPA to determine the nature and extent of the problem
presented by a release of hazardous substances. The RI
emphasizes data collection and site characterization, and is
generally performed concurrently with the Feasibility Study. The
RI includes sampling and monitoring, as necessary, and includes
the gathering of sufficient information to determine the
necessity for remedial action and to support the evaluation of
remedial alternatives. Together with the RI, the FS forms what
is commonly referred to as a "RI/FS".
Remedial Project Manager (RPM): The EPA or State official
responsible for overseeing remedial response activities.
Remedial Response: A long-term action that stops or
substantially reduces a release or threatened release of
hazardous substances that is serious, but does not pose an
immediate threat to public health and/or the environment.
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA): A Federal law
that established a regulatory system to track hazardous
substances from the time of generation to disposal. The law
requires safe and secure procedures to be used in treating,
transporting, storing and disposing of hazardous substances.
RCRA is designed to prevent new, uncontrolled hazardous waste
sites.
Response Action: A CERCLA-authorized action at a Superfund site
involving either a short-term action or long-term remedial
response that may include, but is not limited to the following
activities:
-   Removing hazardous materials from a site to an EPA-approved,
    licensed hazardous waste facility for treatment, containment,
    or destruction;                                                   co
                                                                     o
-   Containing the waste safely on site to eliminate further
    problems;                                                       o
                                                                    o
                                                                    M
-   Destroying or treating the waste on site using
    thermal treatment: and                                          o
                                                                    tn
                                                                    oo
-   Identifying and removing the source of groundwater              ^
    contamination and halting further movement of the

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 111 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   contaminants.
Responsiveness Summary: A summary of oral and/or written public
comments received by EPA during a comment period on key EPA
documents, and EPA's responses to those comments.
Source control: A remedy that addresses contamination problems
at their source, rather than at some other point along the chain
of exposure. At SJCC and GSC, for example, the source of
groundwater contamination is lodged in the soil at the sites.
Superfund: The common name used for the CERCLA. also referred to
as the Trust Fund.
Tetrachloroethylene (PCE): Tetrachloroethylene is a man-made
substance widely used for dry cleaning fabrics and textiles.
Other names that may be used for tetrachloroethylene include PCE,
perc and perchloroethylene.
Trichloroethylene (TCE): Trichloroethylene is mainly used as a
solvent to remove grease from metal parts. However, the*volatile
organic compound is also used as a spot remover and cleaning
fluid.
Trust Fund: A fund set up under the CERCLA to help pay for
cleanup of hazardous waste sites and to take legal action to
force those responsible for the site to clean them up.
Volatile Organic Compound: An organic (i.e., carbon-containing)
compound that evaporates (volatizes) readily at room temperature.
Thermal Desorption Treatment: Burning of certain types of solid,
liquid, or gaseous materials under controlled conditions to
destroy hazardous waste.




                                                                     03
                                                                     o
                                                                     o
                                                                    o
                                                                    o
                                                                    NJ


                                                                    vo
                                                                    o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 112 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     SGC   002   0591




g
M
H

W
Pi
Pi

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 113 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                      Information Respositories
                  South Jersey Clothing Company and
                     Garden State Cleaners sites


Buena Borough Municipal Building
Central Avenue
Minotola, New Jersey 08341
(609)697-9393
Contact Person: Ms. Marlene Sasdelli, Borough Clerk
Building Hours: Monday - Friday, 9 a.m. - 4 p.m.

Public Docket Office
U. S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region II
26 Federal Plaza, Room 711
New York, New York 10278
(212)264-1217
Contact Person:   Sharon Atkinson, Remedial Project Manager
Hours:            Monday - Friday, 9 a.m. - 5 p.m.




                                                               a
                                                              oc.
                                                              o
                                                              o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 114 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        APPENDIX E
ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX




                                03
                               CD
                               o
                               o
                               o
                              K)

                              O
                              171
                              VO
                              10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 115 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/20/91                              Index Chronological Order                                              Page: 1
                                      SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY SITE Documents



Document Number: SJC-002-0292 To 0292 .'                                              Date: 04/13/82

Title: (Memorandum forwarding the attached Order and Penalty Assessment against Mr. Francis Sparagna
     • and Angelo Sparagna, Jr. .and the South Jersey Clothing Company)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE       _                                                                       .
   Author: Vincent, Robert L.: NJ Dept of Environmental Protection
Recipient: Schiffman, Arnold: NJ Dept of Environmental Protection
 Attached: SJC-002-0293 SJC-002-0294

Document" Number: SJC-002-0293. To 0293                 Parent: SJC-002-0292         . Date: 04/14/82

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Administrative Order and Notice of Civil Administrative Penalty
       Assessment)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE                                                       /                            .
   Author: Schiffman, Arnold: NJ Dept of Environmental Protection
Recipient: Sparagna, Angelo Jr.: South Jersey Clothing Company
           Sparagna, Francis: South Jersey Clothing Company


Document Number: SJC-002-0294 To 0302                   Parent: SJC-002-0292          Date: 04/14/82

Title: Administrative Order and Notice of Civil Administrative Penalty Assessment - In 'the Hatter
       of the South Jersey Clothing Co., Francis Sparagna and Angelo Sparagna, Jr.

     Type: LEGAL DOCUMENT                  '       .
   Author: Schiffman, Arnold: NJ Dept of Environmental Protection
Recipient: Sparagna, Angelo Jr.: South. Jersey Clothing Company
           Sparagna, Francis: South Jersey Clothing Company


Document Number: SJC-002-0352 To 0365                   Parent: SJC-002-0351          Date: 12/22/83

Title: Administrative Consent Order - Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Water Resources,
       Petitioner v. South Jersey Clothing Company, Inc., and Francis Sparagna and Angelo Sparagna,
       Jr., Respondents

     Type: LEGAL DOCUMENT
   Author: Gaston, John W. Jr.: NJ Dept of Environmental Protection                                                   CQ
Recipient: Sparagna, Francis:' South Jersey Clothing Company              .                •                          £)

                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                 NJ

                                               •                                                                 O
                                                                                                                 Or

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 116 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/20/91                                Index Chronological Order                                        Page: 2
                                     SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY SITE Documents




Document Number: SJC-002-0351 To 0351                                               Date: 01/13/84

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed executed Administrative Consent Order)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Gruccio, James J.: Tuso, Gruccio, Pepper, Giovihazzi, & Butler
Recipient: Gaston, John W. Jr.: NJ Oept of Environmental Protection
 Attached: SJC-002-0352                         "

Document Number: SJC-002-0303 To 0303                                               Date: 07/08/87

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Administrative Order and Notice of Civil Administrative Penalty
       Assessment)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Mumman, James E.: NJ Dept -of Environmental Protection
Recipient: Transferini, John: Garden State Cleaners
 Attached: SJC-002-0304

Document Number: SJC-002-0304 To 0350                    Parent: SJC-002-0303       Date: 07/08/87

Title: Administrative Order and Notice of Civil Administrative Penalty Assessment

     Type: LEGAL DOCUMENT                                            '
   Author: Mumman, James E.: NJ Dept of Environmental Protection
Recipient: none: Garden State Cleaners


Document Number: SJC-002-0366 To 0368                                               Date: 07/05/88

Title: (Special Notice Letter Pursuant to Sections 106 and 122 of the Comprehensive Environmental
       Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA))

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Luftig, Stephen D.: US EPA
Recipient: none: Garden State Cleaners


Document Number: SJC-002-0371 To 0373                    Parent: SJC-002-0369       Date: 07/05/88
                                                                                                                    O
Title: (Special Notice Letter Pursuant to Sections 106 and 122 of CERCLA)
                                                                                                                    O
     Type: CORRESPONDENCE                                                                                          g
   Author: Luftig, Stephen D.: US EPA
Recipient: none: South Jersey Clothing Company                '                                                    O
                   '                                                                                               <Ji
                                                                                                                   vo

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 117 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/20/91                             Index Chronological Order                                           Page: 3
                                     SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY SITE Documents



Document Number: SJC-001-0001 To 0112    •                                           Date: 05/01/89

Title: Soil Gas Survey - Buena.Soil Gas Investigation - Buena, New Jersey - Final Report

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Butterfield, W. Scott: Roy F. Weston, Inc.
Recipient: Humphrey, Alan: US EPA           __


Document Number: SJC-001-0141 To 0287                  Parent: SJC-001-0139          Date: 08/01/89

Title: Final Work Plan for Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study - South Jersey Clothing Company
       and Garden State Cleaners Sites, Buena Borough, Atlantic County, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA


Document Number: SJC-001-0289 To 0434                  Parent: SJC-001-0288          Date: 08/01/89

Title: Final Field Operations Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (Rl/FS) South Jersey Clothing
       Company and Garden State Cleaners Sites, Buena Borough, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA


Document Number: SJC-002-0382 To 0412                  Parent: SJC-002-0380          Date: 08/01/89

Title: Final Community Relations Plan - South Jersey Clothing Company and Garden State Cleaners Sites,
       Buena Borough, Atlantic County, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: (Collar, William: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA

                                                                                                                        CO


                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                   1*0

                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                   01
                                                                                                                   (o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 118 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/20/91                                Index Chronological Order                                          Page: 4
                                        SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY SITE Documents



Document Number: SJC-001-0288 To 0288                                                     Date: 08/11/89

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Final Operations Plan for the South Jersey Clothing Company
       and Garden State Cleaners sites, Buena Borough, New Jersey)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services __           •
Recipient: Alvi, H. Shaheer: US EPA
 Attached: SJC-001-0289                        •

Document Number: SJC-001-0139 To 0140                                                  •• Date: 08/14/89

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Final Work Plan for the South Jersey Clothing Company and
       Garden State Cleaners sites located in Buena Borough, New Jersey)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Alvi, M. Shaheer: US EPA
 Attached: SJC-001-0141

Document Number: SJC-002-0380 To 0381                                                     Date: 08/21/89

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Community. Relations Plan for the South Jersey Clothing Company
       and Garden State Cleaners sites)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Johnson, Lillian: US EPA
 Attached: SJC-002-0382

Document Number: SJC-002-0369 To 0370                                                    Date: 08/31/89

Title: (Section 107(a) Notice Letter)

    Type: CORRESPONDENCE
  Author: Luftig, Stephen D.: US EPA
Recipient: Farnoly, Thomas P.: Gruccio, Pepper, Giovinazzi, & DeSanto
Attached: SJC-002-0371
                                                                                                                     03
                                                                                                                     O
                                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                                     to
                                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                                     CJ1
                                                                                                                     ID
                                                                                                                     -J

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 119 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/20/91                                Index Chronological Order                                            Page: 5
                                        SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY SITE Documents




Document Number: SJC-001-0435 To 0449              '                                   Date: 09/01/89

Title: Amendment for Air Sampling Activities to the Final Work Plan for Remedial Investigation/Feasibility
       Study - South Jersey Clothing Company and Garden State Cleaners Sites, Buena Borough, Atlantic
       County, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
Condition: DRAFT
   Author: none: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA


Document Number: SJC-002-0477 To 0478                                                  Date: 11/01/89

title: Superfund Update - EPA to Begin Investigation of the South Jersey Clothing Company and Garden
       State Cleaners Sites

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: none: US EPA
Recipient: none: none


Document Number: SJC-001-0125 To 0138                                                  Date: 09/27/90

Title: Health Assessment for South Jersey Clothing Company, Buena Borough, Atlantic County, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: none: NJ Dept of Health
Recipient: none: Agency for Toxic Substances & Disease Registry (ATSDR)


Document Number: SJC-001-0113 To 0124                                                  Date: 09/28/90                  _ _j

Title: Health Assessment for Garden State Cleaners Company, Buena Borough, Atlantic County, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: none: NJ Dept of Health
Recipient: none: Agency for Toxic Substances & Disease Registry (ATSDR)
                                                                                                                       OJ
                                                                                                                       o
                                                                                                                       o
                                                                                                                       o
                                                                                                                        M

                                                                                                                        O
                                                                                                                            U!
                                                                                                                            V0
                                                                                                                            CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 120 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/20/91                           '• Index Chronological Order                                          Page: 6
                                         SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY SITE Documents




Document Number: SJC-001 -0450 To 0563                                                  Date: 10/01/90

Title: Flux Chamber Measurement Survey for Garden State Cleaners and South Jersey Clothing, Buena,
       New Jersey                                 .                    .

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Burchette, Sella M.: Environmental Response Team (ERT)
Recipient: none: none


Document Number: SJC-002-0479 To 0479                                                   Date: 03/01/91

Title: Superfuiid Update - South Jersey Clothing Company/Garden State Cleaners, Atlantic County, New
       Jersey (Phase II Remedial Investigation)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE                •
   Author: none: US EPA
Recipient: none; none


Document Number: SJC-001 -0566 To 0889                    Parent: SJC-001 -0564         Date: 06/01/91

Title: Draft Remedial Investigation Report, South Jersey Clothing Company/Garden State Cleaners Sites,
       Minotola, Atlantic County, New Jersey, Volume 1 of II

     Type: REPORT
Condition: DRAFT
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Servic.es
Recipient: none: US EPA


Document Number: SJC-001-0890 To 1100                     Parent: SJC-001-0564          Date: 06/01/91

Title: Draft Remedial Investigation Report, South Jersey Clothing Company/Garden State Cleaners Sites,
      Minotola, Atlantic County, New Jersey, Volume II of II, Appendices

     Type: REPORT
Condition: DRAFT                                                                  •
  Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA




                                                                                                                   o
                                                                                                                   Oj

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 121 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/20/91                                Index Chronological Order                                          Page: 7
                                        SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY SITE Documents



Document Number: SJC-001-1802 To 2034 '                  Parent: SJC-001-1800          Date: 06/01/91

Title: Draft Feasibility Study Report, South Jersey Clothing Company/ Garden State Cleaners Sites,
     ' Hinotola, Atlantic County, New Jersey, Volume I of II

     Type: REPORT
Condition: DRAFT                            __
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA


Document Number: SJC-001-2035 To 2273                    Parent: SJC-001-1800          Date: 06/01/91

Title: Draft Feasibility Study Report, South Jersey Clothing Company/Garden State Cleaners Sites,
       Minotola, Atlantic County, Volume II of II, Appendices

     Type: REPORT
Condition: DRAFT
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services                                                       '
Recipient: none: US EPA


Document Number: SJC-001-0564 To 0565                                                  Date: 06/28/91

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Draft Remedial Investigation Report for the South Jersey Clothing
       Company and Garden State Cleaners sites)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Hacker, Jill: US EPA
 Attached: SJC-001-0566 SJC-001-0890

Document Number: SJC-002-0265 To 0285         •                                        Date: 07/01/91

Title: Superfund Proposed Plan - South Jersey Clothing Company and Garden State Cleaners Superfund
       Sites, Atlantic County, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: none: US EPA
Recipient: none: none
                                                                                                                     Ol


                                                                                                                      o
                                                                                                                      o
                                                                                                                      to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 122 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/20/91                      '         Index Chronological Order                                         Page: 8
                                     SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY SITE Documents




Document Number: SJC-001-1800 To 1801                                               Date: 07/02/91

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Draft Feasibility Study Report for the South Jersey Clothing
      Company and Garden State Cleaners sites)

    Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebaseo Services
Recipient: Hacker, Jill: US EPA                     '
                                                                                                      ;
 Attached: SJC-001-1802 SJC-001-2035                -

Document Number: SJC-002-0286 To 0289                                               Date: 07/17/91

Title: (Letter providing comments on the Draft Remedial Investigation Report for the Garden State
       Cleaners and South Jersey Clothing Company sites)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE                                 .
   Author: Braun, Gerald: NJ Dept of Environmental Protection
Recipient: Atkinson, Sharon: US EPA


Document Number: SJC-002-0374 To 0376                                               Date: 07/18/91

Title: (Letter discussing Notice of Potential Liability under Sections 106(a) and 107(a) of CERCLA,
       42 U.S.C. Sections 9606(a) and 9607(a))

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE                 '                                                               •
   Author: Callahan, Kathleen C.: US EPA
Recipient: none: Garden State Cleaners                                              -


Document Number: SJC-002-0377 To 0379                                               Date: 07/18/91

Title: (Letter discussing Notice of Potential Liability under Sections 106(a> and 107(a) of CERCLA.                 "
       42 U.S.C. Sections 9606(a) and 9607(a))

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Callahan, Kathleen C.: US EPA                                                                            C/3
Recipient: none: South Jersey Clothing Company                                                                      ^

                                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                                        o

                                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                                        o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 123 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

-*gn>^_




          09/20/91                                Index Chronological Order                                         Page: 9
                                              . SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY SITE Documents



          Document Number: SJC-002-0290 To 0291                                                Date: 07/29/91

          Title: (Letter providing comments on the Draft Feasibility Study for the South Jersey Clothing' Company
                 and Garden State Cleaners sites)

               Type: CORRESPONDENCE
             Author: Braun, Gerald: NJ Dept of Environmental Protection
          Recipient: Atkinson, Sharon: US EPA


          Document Number: SJC-001-1103 To H15                     Parent: SJC-001-1101        Date: 08/01/91

          Title: Final Draft Remedial Investigation Report, South Jersey Clothing Company/Garden State Cleaners
                 Sites, Minotola, Atlantic County, New Jersey, Volume I of II

               Type: REPORT
             Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
          Recipient: none: US EPA


          Document Number: SJC-001-1416 To 1718                    Parent: SJC-001^1101        Date: 08/01/91

          Title: Final Draft Remedial Investigation Report, South Jersey Clothing Company/Garden State Cleaners
                 Sites, Minotola, Atlantic County, New Jersey, Volume II of II, Appendices

               Type: REPORT
             Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
          Recipient: none: US EPA


          Document Number: SJC-001-2275 To 2494                    Parent: SJC-001-2274        Date: 08/01/91

          Title: Final Draft Feasibility Study Report, South Jersey Clothing Company/Garden State Cleaners
                 Sites, Minotola, Atlantic County, New Jersey, Volume 1 of II                           • .

               Type: REPORT
             Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
          Recipient: none: US EPA

                                                                                                                              cn
                                                                                                                              o
                                                                                                                              o
                                                                                                                              o
                                                                                                                              to

                                                                                                                              o
                                                                                                                               O\
                                                                                                                               O

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 124 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/20/91                        .       Index Chronological Order                                            Page: 10
                                        SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY SITE Documents




Document Number: SJC-002-0001 To 0264                    Parent: SJC-001-2274              Date: 08/01/91

Title: Final Draft Feasibility Study Report, South Jersey Clothing Company/Garden State Cleaners
      Sites, Minotola, Atlantic County, New Jersey, Volume II of II, Appendices

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.:   Ebaseo Services __                                            '   .
Recipient: none: US EPA


Document Number: SJC-002-0413 To 0413                                                  ' Date: 08/08/91 ;

Title: (Public Notice:) The United States Environmental Protection Agency announces a Proposed Plan
       and Public Comment Period for the South Jersey Clothing Company and Garden State Cleaners Superfund
       Sites

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: none: US EPA                                                                             .
Recipient: none: none


Document Number: SJC-002-0414 To 0476                                                      Date: 08/08/91

Title: Transcript of the Public Meeting (Garden State Cleaners and South Jersey Clothing Company
       sites)

     Type: LEGAL DOCUMENT
   Author: Parker-Stepkin, Patricia: Accurate Court Reporting Services
Recipient: none: US EPA


Document Number: SJC-001-1101 To 1102                                                      Date: 08/12/91

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed final Draft Remedial Investigation Report for the South Jersey
      Clothing Company and Garden State Cleaners sites)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebaseo Services         ;
Recipient: Hacker, Jill: US EPA
 Attached: SJC-001-1103 SJC-001-1416                                                   .
                                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                                        to


                                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                                        LO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 125 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/20/91                                Index Chronological Order                                    Page: 11
                                     SOUTH JERSEY CLOTHING COMPANY SITE Documents




Document Number: SJC-001-2274 To 2274              •                                Date: 08/12/91

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed final Draft Feasibility Study Report for the South Jersey
       Clothing Company and Garden State Cleaners sites)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services __
Recipient: Hacker, Jill: US EPA                "
 Attached: SJC-001-2275 SJC-002.-0001          •

Document Number: SJC-001-1719 To 1799                                               Date: 08/19/91

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed comments to the Draft Remedial Investigation Report and the
       proposed remedial planning activities at the South Jersey Clothing Company and Garden State
       Cleaners sites)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Riesenburger, Franklin J.: Riesenburger & Kizner
Recipient: Atkinson, Sharon: US EPA




                                                                                                                CO
                                                                                                                o
                                                                                                                o
                                                                                                                o
                                                                                                                o
                                                                                                                ro
                                                                                                                o
                                                                                                                0\
                                                                                                                o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 126 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/20/91                            . • Index Chronological Order            •                               Page: 1
                                        GARDEN STATE CLEANERS SITE Documents




Document Number: GSC-002-0292 To 0292.                                               Date: 04/13/82

Title: (Memorandum forwarding the attached Order and Penalty Assessment against Mr. Francis Sparagna
       and Angelo Sparagna, Jr. and the South Jersey Clothing Company)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Vincent, Robert L.: NJ Dept of Environmental Protection
Recipient: Schiffman, Arnold: NJ Dept of Environmental 'Protection
 Attached: GSC-002-0293 GSC-OD2-0294            -                                             -

Document Number: GSC-002-0293 To 0293                    Parent: CSC-002-0292        Date: 04/14/82

Title: (Letter. forwarding the enclosed Administrative Order and Notice of Civil Administrative Penalty
       Assessment)                                                       •"

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE                                                                                         .     •
   Author: Schiffman, Arnold: NJ Dept of Environmental Protection
Recipient: Sparagna, Angelo Jr.: South Jersey Clothing Company .
           Sparagna, Francis: South Jersey Clothing Company


Document Number: GSC-002-0294 To 0302                     Parent: GSC-002-0292       Date: 04/14/82

Title: Administrative Order and Notice of Civil Administrative Penalty Assessment • In the Matter
       of the South Jersey Clothing Co., Francis Sparagna and Angelo Sparagna, Jr.

     Type: LEGAL DOCUMENT
   Author: Schiffman, Arnold: NJ Dept of Environmental Protection
Recipient: Sparagna, Angelo Jr.: South Jersey Clothing Company
              Sparagna, Francis: South Jersey Clothing Company


Document Number: GSC-002-0352 To 0365                    Parent: GSC-002-0351        Date: 12/22/83

Title: Administrative Consent Order - Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Water Resources,
       Petitioner v. South Jersey Clothing Company, Inc., and Francis Sparagna and Angelo Sparagna,
       Jr.,   Respondents

     Type: LEGAL DOCUMENT
   Author: Gaston, John U. Jr.: NJ Dept of Environmental Protection
Recipient: Sparagna, Francis: South Jersey Clothing Company                                                            Co
                                                                                                                       <D
                                                                                                                       O

                                                                                                                      o
                                                                                                                      o
                                                                                                                      NJ

                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                  07

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 127 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/20/91                                Index Chronological Order                                                     Page: 2
                                        GARDEN STATE CLEANERS SITE Documents

===================================================:. rr======================i=====r==================================-.= _ .


Document Number: GSC-002-0351 To 0351 •• •                                              Date: 01/13/84

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed executed Administrative Consent Order)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Gruccio, James J.: Tuso, Gruccio, Pepper, Giovinazzi, t Butler
Recipient: Gaston, John W. Jr.: NJ Dept of Environmental Protection
 Attached: GSC-002-0352                           '
•.....»...-..---......-...---..-.- ......••.-•. .».r »..-.-..-.»»....».-....».........»...»_»...........»..»•-.-..-...»-...
Document Number: GSC-002-0303 To 0303                                                  Date: 07/08/87

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Administrative Order and Notice of Civil Administrative Penalty            '              ~
      .Assessment)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE                                                                 '        .          '
   Author: Munman, James E.: NJ Dept of Environmental Protection                   ••
Recipient: Transferini, John: Garden State Cleaners
 Attached: GSC-002-0304

Document Number: GSC-002-0304 To 0350                    Parent: GSC-002-0303      "    Date: 07/08/87

Title: Administrative Order and Notice of Civil Administrative Penalty Assessment

     Type: LEGAL DOCUMENT
   Author: Humman, James E.: NJ Dept of Environmental Protection
Recipient: none: Garden State Cleaners                                         •                       . -.


Document Number: GSC-002-0366 To 0368"                                                  Date: 07/05/88

Title: (Special Notice Letter Pursuant to Sections 106 end 122 of the Comprehensive Environmental
       Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 CCERCLA))                                                                   _

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Luftig, Stephen D.t US EPA
Recipient: none: Garden State Cleaners


Document Number: GSC-002-0371 To 0373                    Parent: GSC-002-0369           Date: 07/05/88

Title: (Special Notice Letter Pursuant to Sections 106 and 122 of CERCLA)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Luftig, Stephen D.: US EPA                                                                                            ^
Recipient: none: South Jersey Clothing Company               .                                                                   O
                                                                                                                                o
                                                                                                                                o
                                                                                                                                NJ



                                                                                                                                o
                                                                                                                                en

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 128 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/20/91                                Index Chronological Order     -                     '             Page: 3
                                        GARDEN STATE CLEANERS SITE Documents




Document Number: GSC-001-0001 To 0112               "                                Date: 05/01/89

Title: Soil Gas Survey -- Buena Soil Gas Investigation - Buena, New Jersey • Final Report

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Butterfield, W. Scott: Roy F. Ueston, Inc.
Recipient: Humphrey, Alan: US EPA


Document Number: GSC-001-0141 To 0287                    Parent: GSC-001-0139        Date: 08/01/89

Title: Final Work Plan for Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study - South Jersey Clothing Company
       and Garden State Cleaners Sites, Buena Borough, Atlantic County, New Jersey
                                                                                N.

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA


Document Number: GSC-001-0289 To 0434        •           Parent: GSC-001-0288        Date: 08/01/89

Title: Final Field Operations Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) South Jersey Clothing
       Company and Garden State Cleaners Sites, Buena Borough, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA


Document Number: GSC-002-0382 To 0412                    Parent: GSC-002-0380        Date: 08/01/89

Title: Final Community Relations Plan - South Jersey Clothing Company and Garden State Cleaners Sites,.
       Buena Borough, Atlantic County, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Kollar, William: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA



                                                                                                                     CO


                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                    o

                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                    01
                                                                                                                    o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 129 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/20/91                           • Index Chronological Order                                          Page: 4
                          /   '      GARDEN STATE CLEANERS SITE Documents



Document Number: GSC-001-0288 To 0288                                               Date: 08/11/89

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Final Operations Plan for the South Jersey Clothing Company
       and Garden State Cleaners sites, Buena Borough, New Jersey)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Alvi, M. Shaheer: US EPA                "
 Attached: GSC-001-0289

Document Number: GSC-001-0139 To OUO     '•    .                                     Date: 08/U/89

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Final Work Plan for the South Jersey Clothing Company and
       Garden State Cleaners sites located in Buena Borough, New Jersey)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Alvi, H. Shaheer: US EPA
 Attached: GSC-001-0141

Document Number: GSC-002-0380 To. 0381                 .                    .        Date: 08/21/89

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Community Relations Plan for the South Jersey Clothing Company
       and Garden State Cleaners sites)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Johnson, Lillian: US EPA
 Attached: GSG-002-0382

Document Number: GSC-002-0369 To 0370                                               Date: 08/31/89

Title: (Section 107(a) Notice Letter)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Luftig, Stephen D.: US EPA
Recipient: Farnoly, Thomas P.: Gruccio, Pepper, Giovinazzi, & DeSanto
 Attached: GSC-002-0371


                                                                                                                  cn
                                                                                                                  d
                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                  NJ



                                                                                                                   o
                                                                                                                   00

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 130 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/20/91                                 Index Chronological Order                                           Page: 5
                        '                GARDEN STATE CLEANERS SITE Documents



Document Number: GSC-001-0435 To 0449                                                Date: 09/01/89

Title: Amendment for Air Sampling Activities to the Final Work Plan for Remedial Investigation/Feasibility
     : Study - South Jersey Clothing Company and Garden State Cleaners Sites, Buena Borough, Atlantic
       County, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
Condition: DRAFT                                      '                                   .
   Author: none: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA


Document 'Number: GSC-002-0477 To 0478                                               Date: 11/01/89

Title: Super-fund Update * EPA to Begin Investigation of the South Jersey Clothing Company and. Garden
       State Cleaners Sites

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: none: US EPA
Recipient: none: none        •                    .       '


Document Number: GSC-001-0125 To 0138                                                Date: 09/27/90

Title: Health Assessment for South Jersey Clothing Company, Buene Borough, Atlantic County, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: r.^ne: NJ Dept of Health
Recipient: none: Agency for Toxic Substances & Disease Registry (ATSDR)


Document Number: GSC-001-0113 To 0124                                                Date: 09/28/90

Title: Health Assessment for Garden State Cleaners Company, Buena Borough., Atlantic County, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: none: NJ Dept of Health
Recipient: none: Agency for Toxic Substances & Disease Registry (ATSDR)




                                                                                                                       o
                                                                                                                       CT>
                                                                                                                       O

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 131 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/20/91                                Index Chronological Order                                         Page: 6
                                        CARDEK STATE CLEANERS SITE Documents




Document Number: GSC-001-0450 To 0563              '                                 Date: 10/01/90

Title: Flux Chamber Measurement Survey for Garden State Cleaners and South Jersey Clothing, Buena,
       New Jersey

    Type: PLAN
  Author: Burchette, Sella H.:   Environmental Response Team {ERT)
Recipient: none: none



Document Number: GSC-002-0479 To 0479                                                Date: 03/01/91

Title: Superfund Update - South Jersey Clothing Company/Garden State Cleaners, Atlantic County, New
       Jersey (Phase II Remedial Investigation)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: none: US EPA
Recipient: none: none


Document Number: GSC-001-0566 To 0889                    Parent: GSC-001-0564        Date: 06/01/91

Title: Draft Remedial Investigation Report, South Jersey Clothing Company/Garden State Cleaners Sites,
       Minotola, Atlantic County, New Jersey, Volume I of II

     Type: REPORT
Condition: DRAFT
   Author: Sachdev, Dev 3.:   Ebasco Services             •                              .       :
Recipient: none: US EPA


Document Number: GSC-001-0890 To 1100                    Parent: GSC- 00 1-0564      Date: 06/01/91

Title: Draft Remedial Investigation Report, South Jersey Clothing Company/Garden State Cleaners Sites-,
       Minotola, Atlantic County, New Jersey, Volume II of II, Appendices

     Type: REPORT
Condition: DRAFT
  Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA                                                                      •
                                                                                                                     CO
                                                                                                                     O
                                                                                                                     n
                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                    10


                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                    0\

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 132 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/20/91                                Index Chronological Order                  •                       Page: 7
                                        GARDEN STATE CLEANERS SITE Documents



Document Number: GSC-001-1802 To 2034                       Parent: GSC-001-1800       Date: 06/01/91

Title: Draft Feasibility Study Report, South Jersey Clothing Company/Garden State Cleaners'Sites,
     • Minotola, Atlantic County, New Jersey, Volume I of II

     Type: REPORT
Condition: DRAFT
  .Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services        "
Recipient: none: US EPA


Document Number: GSC-001-2035 To 2273                       Parent: GSC-001-1800       Date: 06/01/91 .

Title: Draft Feasibility Study Report, South Jersey Clothing Company/Garden State Cleaners Sites,
       Minotola, Atlantic County, Volume II of II, Appendices

     Type: REPORT
Condition: DRAFT
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA      "                                                                                 '


Document Number: GSC-001-0564 To 0565                                                  Date: 06/28/91

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Draft Remedial Investigation Report for the South Jersey Clothing
       Company and Garden State Cleaners sites)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Hacker, Jill: US EPA             '           :
 Attached: GSC-001-0566 GSC-001-0890

Document Number: GSC-002-0265 To 0285                                                  Date: 07/01/91                '

Title: Superfund Proposed Plan - South Jersey Clothing Company and Garden State Cleaners Superfund
       Sites, Atlantic County, New Jersey

    Type: PLAN
  Author: none: US EPA
Recipient: none: none
                                                                                                                     W
                                   '                                                                                 O
                                                                                                           •         o
                                                                                                                     o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 133 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/20/91                                 Index.Chronological Order                                           Page: 8
                          /              GARDEN STATE CLEANERS SITE Documents



Document Number: GSC-001-1800 To 1801 •'                                             Date: 07/02/91

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Draft Feasibility Study Report for the South Jersey Clothing
       Company and Garden State Cleaners sites}

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services __
Recipient: Hacker, Jill: US EPA                     "
 Attached: GSC-001-1802       GSC-001-2035

Document Number: CSC-002-0286 To 0289                                                Date: 07/17/91

Title: (Letter providing comments on the Draft Remedial Investigation Report - Garden State Cleaners/South
       Jersey Clothing Company)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE                                                       .•       ;
   Author: Braun, Gerald: NJ Dept of Environmental Protection
Recipient: Atkinson, Sharon: US EPA


Document Number: GSC-002-0374 To 0376                                                Date: 07/18/91

Title: (Letter discussing Notice of Potential Liability under Sections 106(a) and 107(a) of CERCLA,
       42 U.S.C. Sections 9606(a) and 9607(a)>

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Catlahan, Kathleen C.: US EPA
Recipient: 'none: Garden State Cleaners


Document Number: GSC-002-0377 To 0379                                                Date: 07/18/91

Title: (Letter discussing Notice of Potential Liability under Sections 106(a) and 107(a> of CERCLA,
      42 U.S.C. Sections 9606(a) and 9607(a))

    Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Callahan, Kathleen C.: US EPA
Recipient: none: South Jersey Clothing Company

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 134 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/20/91                         ,     Index Chronological Order                                          Page: 9
                                       GARDEN STATE CLEANERS SITE Documents



Document Number: GSC-002-0290 To 0291                                               Date: 07/29/91

Title: (Letter providing corrments on the Draft Feasibility Study- South Jersey Clothing Company/Garden
       State Cleaners)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Braun, Gerald: NJ Dept of Environmental Protection
Recipient: Atkinson, Sharon: US EPA


Document Number: GSC-001-1103 To U15                     Parent: GSC-001-1101       Date: 08/01/91

Title: Final Draft Remedial Investigation Report, South Jersey Clothing Company/Garden State Cleaners
       Sites, Minotola, Atlantic County, New Jersey, Volume I of II

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA


Document Number: GSC-001-U16 To 1718                     Parent: GSC-001-1101       Date: 08/01/91

Title: Final Draft Remedial Investigation Report, South Jersey Clothing Company/Garden State Cleaners
       Sites, Minotola, Atlantic County, New Jersey, Volume II of II, Appendices

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US IPA


Document Number: GSC-001-2275 To 2494                   Parent: GSC-001-2274        Date: 08/01/91

Title: Final Draft Feasibility Study Report, South Jersey Clothing Company/Garden State Cleaners
       Sites, Minotola, Atlantic County, New Jersey, Volume I of II

     Type: REPORT            '                                                        '
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 135 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09/20/91                     ..         Index Chronological Order                                            Page: 10
                                        GARDEN STATE CLEANERS SITE Documents



Document Number: GSC-002-0001 To 0264                    Parent: GSC-001-2274          Date: 08/01/91

Title: Final Draft Feas-ibUity Study Report, South Jersey Clothing Company/Garden State Cleaners
       Sites, Minotola, Atlantic County, New Jersey, Volume II of II, Appendices

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: none: US EPA                            "


Document Number: GSC-002-0413 To 0413       '                                          Date: 08/08/91

Title: (Public Notice:) The United States Environmental Protection Agency Announces a Proposed Plan
       and Public Comment Period for the South Jersey Clothing Company and Garden State Cleaners Superfund
       Sites

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: none: US EPA
Recipient: none: none


Document Number: GSC-002-0414 To 0476                                                  Date: 08/08/91

Title: Transcript of the Public Meeting (Garden State Cleaners and South Jersey Clothing Company
       sites)

     Type: LEGAL DOCUMENT
   Author: Parker-Stepkin, Patricia: Accurate Court Reporting Services             '
Recipient: none: US EPA


Document Number: GSC-001-1101 To 1102                                                  Date: 08/12/91              _     -=

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed final Draft Remedial Investigation Report for the South Jersey
       Clothing Company and Garden State Cleaners sites)

    Type: CORRESPONDENCE
  Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services
Recipient: Hacker, Jill: US EPA                                                                                          o
 Attached: GSC-001-1103 GSC-001-1416                                                                                     O

                                                                                                                         o
                                                                                                                         o
                                                                                                                        K>

                                                                                                                        O
                                                                                                                        <y>
                                                                                                                        M
                                                                                                                        •fe.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 136 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

£9/20/91                                 Index Chronological Order            .                        Page: 11
                                        GARDEN STATE CLEANERS SITE Documents



Document Number: GSC-001-2274 To 2274                                                 Date: 08/12/91

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed final Draft Feasibility Study Report for the South Jersey
     • Clothing Company and Garden State Cleaners sites)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE                                                 '       .
   Author: Sachdev, Dev R.: Ebasco Services       •       .   .   •   •
Recipient: Hacker, Jill: US EPA                       "                                    .
 Attached: GSC-001-2275     GSC-002-.OOO'i            •

Document Number: GSC-001-1719 To 1799                                                 Date: 08/19/91

Title: (tetter forwarding the enclosed comments to the Draft Remedial Investigation Report and the
       proposed remedial planning activities at the South Jersey Clothing Company and Garden State
       Cleaners sites)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Riesenburger, Franklin J.: Riesenburger & Kizner
Recfpient:; Atkinson, Sharon: US EPA




                                                                                                                  Cfl


                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                  N)

                                                                                                                  O
