LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: Declaration for the Record of Decision - Kin-Buc Landfill, Edison Township, Middlesex County,
New Jersey
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/56343
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: ad2c0528e8d14bbfad7f00a0533b8e9bf70fe4e71459a954f794242a3f192c6d
Source PDF pages: 122
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                   *56343*
                                                                                        56343

           DECLARATION FOR THE RECORD OF DECISION


   SITE NAME AND LOCA TION

   Kin-Buc Landfill

   Edisoh Township, Middlesex County, New Jersey


   STA TEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

     This decision document presents the selected remedial action for the Kin-Buc Landfill site,
 '"' which was chosen in accordance with the requirements of the Comprehensive Environmen-
     tal Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of ISSO.^as amended, and to the extent
- practicable, the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan. This
     decision document explains the factual and legal basis forselecting the remedy for this site.

   The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy concurs with the
   selected remedy. The information supporting this remedial action decision is contained in
   the administrative record for this site.

"* ASSESSMENT OF THE S/TE

   Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from the Kin-Buc site, if not
   addressed by implementing the response action selected in this Record of Decision, may
   present an imminent and substantial endangerment to public health, welfare, or the
   environment.

   DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY

    The selected response action represents the second of two pJanriecf operable units for the
   4^n-Buc site, A landfill containment system including a slurry wall, extension of the existing
f Sap, and leachate collection and treatment will be implemented as part of the first operable
  t?
    iit*ft, in accordance with the Record of Decision signed in 1988. This second action will
    Address contamination found outside of the containment system, in particular, sediments
    contaminated by polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in the Edmonds Creek wetlands located
    to the east of the landfill mounds. These sediments have been found to pose unaccept-
    able threats to human health and the environment.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The major components of the selected remedy for the second operable unit include the
following:

       Q      excavation of approximately 2200 cubic yards of sediments
              containing PCBs at levels greater than 5 parts per million;

      Q       consolidation of the excavated sediments within the Operable
              Unit 1 containment system;

      Q       restoration of wetlands areas impacted by the excavation of
              contaminated sediments; and

      Q      long-term monitoring of ground and surface water to ensure the
             effectiveness of the remedy.

The selected remedy will reduce ecological and human health risks caused by the uptake
of PCBs from sediments into local aquatic species such as fish and crabs. However,
because this remedy will involve on-site containment of contaminated sediments, long-term
management and controls will be necessary.


DECLARA TION OF STA TUTORY DETERMINA TIONS

The selected remedy is protective of human health and the environment, complies with
Federal and State requirements that are legally applicable or relevant and appropriate, and
is cost-effective. It utilizes permanent solutions and alternative treatment (or resource
recovery) technologies to the maximum extent practicable for this site. However, treatment
of the principal threats of the site was not found to be practicable, since the small volume
of sediments which exceeded the remediation goal of 5 ppm could not be cost-effectively
treated. Therefore, this remedy does not satisfy the statutory preference for treatment as
a principal element.

Because this remedy will result in hazardous substances remaining on the site within the
first operable unit containment system, a review will be conducted within five years after
commencement of the first operable unit remedial action to ensure that the selected
remedies continue to provide adequate protection of human health and the environment.




Constantine Sidamon-Eristoff
Regional Administrator     y

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  ROD FACT

SITE

Site name: Kin-Buc Landfill

Site location: Edison Township, Middlesex County, New Jersey

MRS score: 50.64



ROD

Selected remedy: Sediment Removal and Consolidation in On-Site Containment

Capital cost: $3,537,000

O & M cost: $67,100 (annual)

Present-worth cost: $4,314,900


LEAD

USEPA

Primary Contact: Alison Barry, (212) 264-8678

Secondary Contact: Janet Feldstein, (212) 264-0613

Main PRPs: Kin-Buc, Inc. (Transtech)
       SCA Services (Waste Management NA)


WASTE

Waste type: PCBs

Waste origin: landfill leachate

Estimated waste quantity: 2200 cubic yards

Contaminated medium: wetlands sediment

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         RECORD OF DECISION
          DECISION SUMMARY



               Kin-Buc Landfill

Edison Township, Middlesex County, New Jersey




United States Environmental Protection Agency
                   Region II
             New York, New York

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         TABLE OF CONTENTS




SITE LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

SCOPE AND ROLE OF OPERABLE UNIT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

        Human Health A s s e s s m e n t . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
        Ecological Risk Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

SUMMARY OF COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

SELECTED REMEDY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25



ATTACHMENTS

APPENDIX I.              FIGURES
APPENDIX II.             TABLES
APPENDIX III.            ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX
APPENDIX IV.             STATE LETTER OF CONCURRENCE
APPENDIX V.              RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE NAME, LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION

The Kin-Buc Landfill, located at the end of Meadow Road, Edison Township, Middlesex
County, consists of several inactive disposal areas which cover approximately 200 acres.
The Kin-Buc site is located within an industrial and commercial area of Edison Township,
Middlesex County, which is zoned for light industry. Figure 1 indicates the site location.
The site is bordered on the south by the Edison Landfill, on the east by the wetlands and
the inactive ILR Landfill, on the west by the Raritan River, and on the north by the Edison
Salvage Yard and a chemical manufacturing plant. The Edgeboro Landfill is located across
the river from the Kin-Buc and Edison landfills. The Heller Industrial Park, a light-industrial
and commercial complex, is located approximately one-half mile to the northeast of Kin-
Buc. Some residences are located approximately between one and a half and two miles
to the north of the site. No drinking water supply wells, municipal or private, are located
within a two-mile radius of the site. Upstream of the site, the City of New Brunswick
withdraws water from the Lawrence Brook, a tributary of the Raritan River which enters the
river from the west.

The site includes three landfill mounds, the 14-acre Low-Lying Area situated in between
Kin-Buc I and the Edison Township Landfill, as well as the Edmonds Creek/Marsh area.
Kin-Buc I is the largest of the landfill areas, covering 30 acres with a maximum elevation
of 93 feet. Kin-Buc II, the smaller mound immediately north of Kin-Buc I, covers 12 acres
at a maximum elevation of 51 feet. Mound B is located along the shoreline of the Raritan
River to the west of Kin-Buc I, and consists of approximately nine acres at an average
elevation of 15 feet. The 14-acre Low-Lying Area in between Kin-Buc I and the Edison
Landfill has an elevation ranging between 10 and 25 feet, of which approximately 10 feet
is fill material and refuse. The locations of these features are illustrated in Figure 2.
Portions of the site, including the Edmonds Creek wetlands, the Pool C area, the eastern
end of the Low-Lying Area, the mouth of Martins Creek, and the southern end of the
Mound B area fall within the 100- or 500-year floodplain.

The Edmonds Creek wetlands consist of approximately 50 acres of tidal wetlands which
border the landfill mounds on the east. The wetlands are drained by Edmonds Creek,
which discharges to the Raritan River southeast of the Edison Landfill. A small channel
connects Pool C, a tidal pool on the southeastern edge of Kin-Buc I into which oily
leachate from Kin-Buc drains, to Edmonds Creek, and allows contaminants from the landfill
to discharge into the creek and the surrounding wetlands. Because the marsh and
Edmonds Creek are tidally influenced, with a maximum elevation of 4 feet above mean sea
level, contaminants and sediments are regularly redistributed in response to tidal
fluctuations and storm events. Edmonds Creek also receives drainage from the ditch
between the Low-Lying Area and the Edison Landfill. On the northwestern side of Kin-Buc
I and II, the Mill Brook/Martins Creek system flows past the site and discharges to the
Raritan River at Mound B. This stream system receives runoff from the Kin-Buc mounds
as well as upgradient sources, and is tidally influenced in the vicinity of Mound B.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES

The Kin-Buc Landfill began operating as early as 1947, accepting municipal, industrial, and
hazardous waste. Between 1971 and July 1976, Kin-Buc Inc. operated the site as a state-
approved landfill for industrial (solid and liquid) and municipal wastes. Hazardous wastes
were disposed in the main landfill mound, Kin-Buc I, as well as in Kin-Buc II. The
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) estimates, on the basis of owner-operator records,
that approximately 70 million gallons of liquid waste and at least one million tons of solid
waste were disposed of at Kin-Buc between 1973 and 1976. However, in 1976, the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy (NJDEPE) revoked Kin-Buc's
permit to operate because of violations of both state and federal environmental statutes.

EPA's involvement with the site began in 1976 during investigation of an oil spill at the site
which revealed discharge of hazardous substances from the facility. EPA filed initial
charges against the owner-operators in 1979, under such statutes as the Water Pollution
Control Act, and the Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA). Under a 1980 partial settlement, Kin-Buc Inc. (and not the
other defendants) agreed to install a landfill cap and initiate a long-term monitoring
program, but not to remediate the site or control the further migration of contaminants in
the area. Therefore, in 1980, EPA began cleanup activities under Section 311(k) of the
Clean Water Act, collecting aqueous and oily leachate from the Pool C area for treatment
and disposal. In 1981, the site was placed on the Superfund National Priorities List.

When negotiations with the owner-operators for additional remediation failed, EPA issued
a Unilateral Administrative Order (UAO) pursuant to the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act, as amended (CERCLA), requiring a removal
program, a remedial investigation and feasibility study (RI/FS), implementation of a
remedial action, and operation and maintenance of that selected remedy. Between 1982
and 1988, an RI/FS was conducted by the owner-operators for the site. This investigation
determined that the Kin-Buc I and II landfill mounds were the source of hazardous
constituents in the surrounding environment. In 1984, EPA also sent information request
letters under CERCLA Section 104(e) to over 400 potentially responsible parties (PRPs)
identified on the basis of Kin-Buc records as generators of wastes disposed of at Kin-Buc.
Under a 1987 Consent Decree, EPA recovered $5,000,000 in past oversight and response
costs from approximately half of these generators.

On the basis of the RI/FS conducted by the owner-operators, a remedy for the site was
selected in a Record of Decision signed in 1988. The Record of Decision divided the site
into two remedial phases known as operable units: Operable Unit 1 consists of the Kin-Buc
1 and II mounds, as well as portions of the Low-Lying Area and Pool C, while Operable Unit
2 includes adjacent areas impacted by contaminant migration from the landfill. The
Operable Unit 1 selected remedy was intended to provide source control for the landfill
mounds and includes:




                                                                                   002. Z'VfeOA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      D maintenance and upgrading of the Kin-Buc I cap, and installation of a
      RCRA Subtitle C cap on the remainder of the source area, consisting of Kin-
      Buc II, the Pool C area, and portions of the low-lying area between Kin-Buc
      I, the Edison Landfill and Pool C;

      D installation of a circumferential slurry wall to bedrock on all sides of the
      source area;

      D collection and off-site incineration of oily phase leachate;
      D collection and on-site treatment of aqueous phase leachate and ground
      water from within the slurry wall, in order to ensure the integrity of the slurry
      wall containment system, with discharge of treated water to the Raritan River;

      D periodic monitoring;

      D operation and maintenance; and
      D an additional RI/FS to determine the nature and extent of off-site
      contamination associated with the site (Operable Unit 2).

The owner-operators are currently performing the design of this remedy. EPA anticipates
that construction of this remedy will begin during the summer of 1993.

The additional RI/FS was conducted by the owner-operators under amendments to the
initial Unilateral Administrative Order issued in 1986 and 1990.

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

The RI/FS report and the Proposed Plan for the second operable unit were released to the
public for comment on July 15,1992. These documents were made available to the public
in the administrative record file at the Superfund Records Center at EPA's Region II office
in New York City, and the information repository at the Edison Free Public Library, 340
Plainfield Avenue, Edison, New Jersey. The notice of availability for the above-referenced
documents was published in the Home News on July 15, 1992. The public comment
period on these documents was held from July 15, 1992 to August 14, 1992.

On August 4,1992, EPA and the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and
Energy conducted a public meeting at the Edison Township Municipal Building, to inform
local officials and interested citizens about the Superfund process, to review current and
planned remedial activities at the site, and to respond to any questions from area residents
and other attendees.

Responses to the comments received at the public meeting and in writing during the public
comment period are included in the Responsiveness Summary (see Appendix V).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SCOPE AND ROLE OF OPERABLE UNIT

This is the second of two operable units planned for the Kin-Buc site. The Record of
Decision issued in September 1988 for Operable Unit 1 selected source control measures
intended to prevent the further migration of contaminants from Kin-Buc I and II landfill
mounds, the Pool C area, and adjacent portions of the Low-Lying Area between Kin-Buc
I and the Edison Landfill. The ROD also called for a second supplemental investigation of
surface-water and ground-water contamination emanating from the site, as well as in the
wetlands adjacent to the landfills, and Mound B. This investigation, Operable Unit 2, has
focused on evaluating the nature and extent of

       4 ground-water contamination in the Low-Lying Area and Mound B,
       * wetlands contamination in the Edmonds Creek/Marsh system, and
       4 surface-water contamination in Edmonds Creek and Mill Brook/Martins
       Creek.

The second operable unit remedy, as described in this document, is intended to address
the contaminated sediments found in the Edmonds Creek marsh area. The primary goal
of this remedy is to reduce the risks to human health and the environment caused by the
uptake of contaminants from sediment into the aquatic food chain. The selected alternative
for the second operable unit, in conjunction with the first operable unit containment system,
will address all remaining concerns associated with the migration of contaminants from the
landfill. Long-term monitoring of the ground water in the Operable Unit 2 study area, and
of the Raritan River, will be conducted to confirm the expected performance of the
Operable Unit 1 containment system.

ERA is the lead governmental agency for the Kin-Buc site, and NJDEPE is the support
agency.

SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS

Wehran Engineering Corporation performed the second Remedial Investigation for the
owner-operators between August 1989 and July 1990. The following section describes the
results of the Rl.

Environmental Setting

The Operable Unit 2 study area consists of Mound B, the Low-Lying Area, Edmonds
Creek, Mill Brook/Martins Creek, and the wetlands associated with Edmonds Creek. Both
Mound B and the Low-Lying Area are known to contain refuse; however, no additional
information regarding the nature or origin of the refuse is available. Boring logs indicate
that the primary components of the fill are municipal and household refuse and debris.
Mound B received a cap in 1982, which consisted of clay and sand layers. The Mound B
area includes a variety of dense grasses, as well as Phragmites communis and eastern red



                                                                                  2 4A

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

cedar, although portions of the Mound B cap are barren of vegetation. Cover soils were
placed over the Low-Lying Area during the landfilling operation. The Low-Lying Area
supports a scrub-shrub vegetative community, including sumac, eastern red cedar, and
black cherry shrubs. The wetlands vegetative community is dominated by Phragmites
communis. with Spartina alterniflora. commonly found along drainage channels and in
areas of lower elevation. Narrow-leaved cattails (Typha angustifolia) dominate the less
saline reaches of the marsh. Although no areas of the Operable Unit 2 study area support
extensive forest communities, a variety of deciduous forest species are found in the Mill
Brook/Martins Creek area, and along a former railroad bed which constitutes the upper
bound of the Edmonds Creek marsh.

Wildlife identified at the site include invertebrates, fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and
mammals. Fiddler crabs were the most abundant species of invertebrate, although blue
crabs and grass shrimp were also observed. Mummichogs were the most frequently
observed species of fish in Edmonds Creek and Martins Creek, although the type of
sampling equipment used did not permit collection of larger species of fish from these
streams. Turtles and terrapins were observed in Edmonds Creek and the Raritan River.
Numerous bird species were observed at the site. A large community of muskrats is
supported by the Edmonds Creek marsh area, and were also observed in Mill
Brook/Martins Creek. Smaller mammals in the Edmonds Creek marsh consist largely of
the house mouse and the Norway rat. No federal endangered or threatened species were
observed at Kin-Buc, although several New Jersey threatened and endangered species
were observed either on the site or in the vicinity of Kin-Buc; these are the northern harrier,
the osprey, the great and little blue herons, and the yellow-crowned night heron.

Geology and Hydrogeology

The Kin-Buc site is underlain by sedimentary rocks of Triassic Age, the Brunswick
Formation and the Lockatong Formation. These formations consist chiefly of siltstone,
mudstone and shale, and occur at depths ranging between 25 and 46 feet below the OU
2 study area. A sand-and-gravel unit, representing Recent Raritan River channel fill,
overlies the bedrock locally at an average thickness of 16 feet. Within the Operable Unit
2 study area, a layer of organic-rich clay and silt known as "meadow mat" overlies the
sand-and-gravel deposit at an average thickness of 7 feet. A refuse layer of varying
thickness (between 7 and 24 feet) overlies the meadow mat deposit throughout the OU 2
study area. The refuse contains relatively old waste materials, such as household and
municipal solid waste, debris, white goods (household appliances), industrial wastes and
fill materials. This layer is overlain by a thin (between 1 and 9 feet) layer of cover soil.

All four stratigraphic units are water-bearing, although only the bedrock unit is regionally
extensive and used for water supply. In the refuse layer, ground water flows radially from
the Kin-Buc I mound toward the Pool C area, the Edison Landfill, and the Raritan River, and
is not tidally influenced by the river. The underlying meadow mat layer acts as a semi-
confining layer; its fine-grained organic-rich matrix exhibits very low permeability, indicating
that ground water does not readily flow in this unit either vertically or laterally. The sand-
and-gravel unit is in direct hydraulic contact with the river, and is therefore affected by tidal

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

influences. At low tide, ground water in this unit flows across the site from southeast to
northwest. At high tide, this flow is reversed when ground water flows from Mound B
toward the Low-Lying Area. However, net flow is west, towards the river. Ground water
flows in the bedrock unit towards the south. However, in the Operable Unit 2 study area,
where bedrock is directly overlain by the sand-and-gravel unit, bedrock flow is tidally
influenced, causing a general oscillation of flow in the Mound B and Low-Lying areas.
Vertical gradients within the four units indicate that net discharge from these units is to the
Raritan River, either directly or indirectly. The refuse and sand-and-gravel units discharge
directly into the Raritan River at high and low tides, respectively, while the bedrock unit
discharges upward into the sand-and-gravel unit, from which ground water discharges to
the river.

Contaminants were found in the refuse unit leachate, as well as in ground water from the
sand-and-gravel unit and, at very low levels, in the bedrock aquifer. Leachate in the refuse
unit contains volatile organic compounds (VOCs), base-neutral/acid extractable
compounds (BNAs), metals and pesticides, and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). Table
1 shows the maximum concentrations of contaminants in the leachate. These constituents
appear to have originated within the Kin-Buc I and II mounds and have migrated toward
Mound B and the Raritan River to the west, and towards the Edmonds Creek marsh on the
east. The sand and gravel unit contains similar VOCs and BNAs as were found in the
refuse unit, although at lower concentrations. Table 2 indicates the maximum levels of
contaminants in this unit. These constituents also appear to have migrated from the landfill
mounds. The bedrock unit contains very low levels of VOCs, as illustrated in Table 3,
which may also be attributed to migration from Kin-Buc I.

Sediment

Sediments in the Edmonds Creek/Marsh system contain PCBs, polyaromatic hydrocarbons
(PAHs) and metals. PCBs were found at concentrations less than 10 parts per million
(ppm) in most parts of the marsh, although portions of the Edmonds Creek channel
contained concentrations which ranged up to 81 ppm, and areas immediately adjacent to
Pool C exhibited concentrations between 100 and 290 ppm. Table 4 indicates the range
in concentrations observed during the investigation. PCBs identified were predominantly
Arochlors 1248 and 1254. Distribution of these contaminants indicate that PCBs are
attributable to Pool C via the connecting channel to Edmonds Creek. PAHs and metals
were found throughout the marsh. Distribution patterns were less clear regarding PAHs
and metals in the sediments; other man-made sources of PAHs and metals in the vicinity
of the site have most likely contributed to the distribution of these constituents in the study
area. However, certain metals and PAHs are highest in areas also characterized by high
levels of PCBs. Figure 3 indicates the levels and distribution of PAHs in the Operable Unit
2 study area. Figures 4, 5, 6, and 7 illustrate the distribution of arsenic, copper, lead and
nickel throughout the study area. Only one sample from Mill Brook contained PCBs, and
the level observed was significantly below the detection limit. No site-attributable patterns
of metals of PAHs were observed in sediment samples from Mill Brook/Martins Creek.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Wehran also conducted a supplemental sediment sampling program which further refined
the extent of PCB contamination in the Edmonds Creek wetlands sediment. The report
confirmed the findings of the Rl that low levels (less than 1 ppm and 10 ppm respectively)
of PCBs and PAHs are present in the marsh. Metals were observed at higher levels in the
vegetated areas of the Edmonds Creek marsh than in the stream channels which transect
these wetlands, but distribution patterns are not related to Pool C or elevation within the
marsh.

Surface waters in Edmonds Creek did not appear to be affected by site-derived contamina-
tion.

Biota

PCBs and metals were detected in resident wildlife collected in Edmonds Creek/Marsh, Mill
Brook/Martins Creek, and the Reference Area (a similar area, located across the Raritan
River from the site, which is intended to represent local background conditions). Tables
5 summarizes data from tissue analysis. The highest concentrations of PCBs were
detected in fiddler crabs and small fish from the Edmonds Creek/Marsh area, while elevat-
ed levels of cadmium were observed in muskrat kidneys from the lower end of Edmonds
Creek and Mill Brook/Martins Creek.

EPA conducted supplementary biological sampling in 1990 and 1991. In July 1990, EPA
collected sediment and fiddler crab tissue samples from Edmonds Creek, Martins Creek,
and an upstream reference location. The samples were analyzed for PCBs, semivolatile
organics, and cadmium, chromium, copper, mercury and zinc. The results indicated that
bioaccumulation of PCBs, chromium, copper and zinc was evident in the fiddler crabs.
EPA also collected samples of muskrat tissues during the October 1990 through January
1991 period, but found no evidence of PCB bioaccumulation in muskrat livers. However,
the study did show bioaccumulation of metals in these samples, although a specific source
of metals contamination could not be ascertained, since distribution of metals throughout
the OU 2 study area did not point to a single source. Tables 6 and 7 summarize the
results of these studies.

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS

EPA conducted a baseline risk assessment to evaluate the potential risks to human health
and the environment associated with the Kin-Buc Landfill site in its current state. The Risk
Assessment focused on contaminants in the sediment, ground water, surface water, and
fish which are likely to pose significant risks to human health and the environment. The
summary of the contaminants of concern (COC) in sampled media is listed in Table 8 for
human health receptors. Tables 9,10 and 11 provide a statistical summary of the data for
all three media, including the frequency-of-detection, mean concentration, and the 95
percent Upper Confidence Limit (UCL).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Human Health Assessment

 EPA's baseline risk assessment identified ieveral potential exposure pathways by which
the public may be exposed to contaminant releases at the site under current and future
 land-use conditions. Exposures to sediment, surface water, ground water, and fish were
 assessed for both potential present and future land use scenarios, such as residential and
 recreational land use. A total of eight exposure pathways were evaluated, using
reasonable maximum exposure assumptions. The baseline risk assessment evaluated the
health effects that could result from exposure to contamination as a result of ingestion of
ground water, ingestion of fish, dermal contact with sediments during recreation, inhalation
of chemicals volatilizing during showering, dermal exposure to shower water, dermal
absorption and ingestion of surface water during recreation, and ingestion of sediment
during recreation. These pathways were evaluated separately for children and adults.
Certain pathways were eliminated on the basis of the existing landfill cap or existing site
characteristics, such as the air pathways. It should also be noted that the site is not
currently used for residential purposes and only for limited recreational use (i.e., fishing in
the vicinity of the site). Current and past land use is primarily light-industrial and
commercial. In addition, since there are no private or public drinking water wells located
within the area of contaminated ground water or downgradient of the site, there is no
existing mechanism for human exposure to the contaminated ground water. However, for
the purposes of evaluating all possible risks associated with the site, EPA considered
potential future residential scenarios involving ground-water consumption and current recre-
ational exposure scenarios such as fishing and swimming.

Under current EPA guidelines, the likelihood of carcinogenic (cancer-causing) and
noncarcinogenic effects due to exposure to site chemicals are considered separately. It
was assumed that the toxic effects of the site-related chemicals would be additive. Thus,
carcinogenic and noncarcinogenic risks associated with exposures to individual
compounds of concern were summed to indicate the potential risks associated with
mixtures of potential carcinogens and noncarcinogens, respectively.

Noncarcinogenic risks were assessed using a hazard index (HI) approach, based on a
comparison of expected contaminant intakes and safe levels of intake (Reference Doses).
Reference doses (RfDs) have been developed by EPA for indicating the potential for
adverse health effects. RfDs, which are expressed in units of milligrams per kilogram per
day (mg/kg-day), are estimates of daily exposure levels for humans which are thought to
be safe over a lifetime (including sensitive individuals). Estimated intakes of chemicals from
environmental media (e.g., the amount of a chemical ingested from contaminated drinking
water) are compared to the RfD to derive the hazard quotient for the contaminant in the
particular medium. The HI is obtained by adding the hazard quotients for all compounds
within a particular medium that impact a particular receptor population.

An HI greater than 1.0 indicates that the potential exists for noncarcinogenic health effects
to occur as a result of site-related exposures. The HI provides a useful reference point for

                                              8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

gauging the potential significance of multiple contaminant exposures within a single medium
or across media. The reference doses for the compounds of concern at the site are
presented in Table 12. A summary of the noncarcinogenic risks associated with these
chemicals for individual exposure pathways is found in Table 13.

It can be seen from Table 13 that the His for noncarcinogenic effects from ingestion of fish
(reasonable maximum exposures) are 20 and 7.19, for children and adults, respectively.
For ingestion of ground water, the His for noncarcinogenic effects are 6.13 and 5.42,
respectively. Therefore, noncarcinogenic effects may occur from these pathways evaluated
in the Risk Assessment. The noncarcinogenic risk was attributable to several compounds
including PCBs, vinyl chloride, chlorobenzene, arsenic, antimony, beryllium, bis(2-
ethylhexyl)phthalate, 4,4'-DDT, and manganese.

Potential carcinogenic risks were evaluated using the cancer slope factors developed by
ERA for the contaminants of concern. Cancer slope factors (SFs) have been developed
by EPA's Carcinogenic Risk Assessment Verification Endeavor for estimating excess
lifetime cancer risks associated with exposure to potentially carcinogenic chemicals. SFs,
which are expressed in units of (mg/kg-day)'1, are multiplied by the estimated intake of a
potential carcinogen, in mg/kg-day, to generate an upper-bound estimate of the excess
lifetime cancer risk associated with exposure to the compound at that intake level. The
term "upper bound" reflects the conservative estimate of the risks calculated from the SF.
Use of this approach makes the underestimation of the risk highly unlikely. The SF for the
compounds of concern are presented in Table 12.

For known or suspected carcinogens, ERA considers excess upper-bound individual
lifetime cancer risks of between 10"4 to 10"6 to be acceptable. This level indicates that an
individual has not greater than approximately a one in ten thousand to one in a million
chance of developing cancer as a result of site-related exposure to a carcinogen over a
70-year period under specific exposure conditions at a site. The potential cancer risk from
ingestion of fish from the site during a lifetime is 1.31 x 10"1 for an adult and 1.1 x 10"1 for
a child. The potential carcinogenic risk for ingestion of the most contaminated ground
water at the site by an adult during a 70-year lifespan is 6.6 x 10"4, and by a child, 2.3 x
10"4. These risk numbers can be interpreted to mean that 1.31 out of ten adults are at an
excess risk of developing cancers because of their regular consumption of contaminated
fish during their lifetime, or that 6.6 people out of ten thousand are at an excess risk of
developing cancer because of their regular consumption of ground water from the site
during their lifetime. These risks exceed the acceptable risk range for carcinogens of 10"4
to 10"6. A summary of cancer risks associated with the chemicals of concern for various
exposure pathways appears in Table 13.

The estimated total risks for both carcinogens and noncarcinogens are primarily due to the
ingestion of contaminated fish from the site and secondarily to the ingestion of contaminat-
ed ground water by potential future residents at the site. These estimates were developed
by taking into account various conservative assumptions about the likelihood of a person
being exposed to these media. However, in reviewing both the baseline risk assessment
and the site conditions, ERA concluded that the location and characteristics of Kin-Buc

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

preclude any current exposure to contaminated ground water at the site. Furthermore,
EPA believes that it is highly unlikely that humans will ever use the ground water underlying
this site, given the historical and current land use in this area of Edison Township. The
proximity of the Edison Landfill immediately to the south of Kin-Buc and the defunct ILR
Landfill on the eastern side of the Edmonds Creek wetlands limit the future development
of this area for residential purposes. In addition, ground-water modeling conducted during
the FS indicates that natural attenuation will gradually reduce contaminants to acceptable
levels after the source control measures provided by Operable Unit 1 are implemented.
Since it is highly unlikely that any exposure pathways will exist in the foreseeable future,
EPA does not believe that there are any actual or plausible potential site risks associated
with ground water which would justify active response measures to reduce contaminant
concentrations in ground water.

In summary, ingestion of fish from the site constitutes a risk to human health, since both
carcinogenic and noncarcinogenic risks exceed the acceptable levels. Other plausible
exposure pathways present risks that are within or below EPA's allowable range.

Ecological Risk Assessment

Potential risks to the environmental receptors associated with the Kin-Buc Landfill site were
identified in the ecological risk assessment. The ecological risk assessment identified fish
found in Edmonds Creek and the Raritan River and benthic invertebrates such as fiddler
crabs found in the Edmonds Creek marsh as those receptors most threatened by the site
contaminants under current site conditions. The major site-related risks to aquatic life are
posed by PCBs in sediments in the area adjacent to Pool C and Edmonds Creek, since
fish and crabs come into direct contact with sediments or may ingest other species which
have accumulated contaminants through the food chain.

EPA, through its contractor, evaluated the potential ecological impacts to fish, wildlife and
plants in the wetlands from chemicals of concern detected in sediments and surface
waters. These chemicals include a variety of VOCs, PAHs, PCBs, pesticides and metals.
Potentially affected biota include fiddler crabs, mummichogs (small fish), large birds such
as herons and hawks which feed on smaller fish and mammals, muskrats and other small
mammals (mice, Norway rats) found in such environments. The ecological risk assessment
included an evaluation of sediment samples from the Operable Unit 2 study area. Tissue
samples from key species captured in corresponding locations were collected in order to
determine the extent of bioaccumulation relative to contaminant levels in sediment. The
ecological risk assessment concluded that the major site-related risk to aquatic life is from
exposure to PCBs in sediments in the vicinity of Pool C and the connecting channel, and
portions of Edmonds Creek. Organics in surface waters do not appear to pose a threat
to aquatic life at the site. Although several metals were elevated in species and sediments,
those levels appear to reflect regional inputs and/or natural sources. Metals are present
in levels of concern in the vicinity of Pool C and portions of Edmonds Creek, although
distribution patterns do not indicate that Kin-Buc is the sole, or even primary source of
metals contamination. Mammals do not appear to be at risk from PCBs or metals,
although elevated levels of cadmium, chromium and lead were observed in muskrat

                                             10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

tissues. Marsh plants may also be at risk from exposure to arsenic, copper and lead, but
uncertainties associated with plant toxicity information preclude establishing risks in this
case.

Sediments contaminated by PCBs and metals can serve as a source of PCB and metals
contamination in fish and benthic invertebrates. The literature data indicate that levels
present in Edmonds Creek fish samples may pose adverse effects in these species,
although the effects of elevated body-burden levels in fiddler crabs are unknown. Both fish
and fiddler crabs can be a food source to large birds such as the great blue heron.
Estimated dosages did not exceed the toxicity reference values for this species, but a high
level of uncertainty is associated with these estimates and the possibility of adverse effects
cannot be dismissed for this or other predatory bird species occurring in the site area.
Threatened and endangered species, such as the great blue heron, the little blue heron,
the yellow-crowned night heron, the northern harrier, and the osprey, have been observed
on or near the Kin-Buc site during the Rl.

EPA has determined that no remediation will be required for surface or ground water in the
study area, based on the available data and the unlikely possibility that the ground water
will be used for human consumption. However, exposure pathways involving the ingestion
of contaminated fish will continue to pose a threat to human health without active
remediation of the contaminated sediments which act as the source of contaminants to fish
and fiddler crabs. In addition, the ecological risk assessment indicates that contaminants
are being taken up into the food chain via various aquatic species which come into contact
with the sediments. Bioaccumulation of PCBs through this pathway may adversely impact
these species as well as species which feed on them, including threatened and
endangered birds.

Therefore, actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from this site, if not
addressed by implementing the response action selected in this Record of Decision, may
present a current or potential threat to public health, welfare or the environment.

Uncertainties

The procedures and inputs used to assess risks in this evaluation, as in all such
assessments, are subject to a wide variety of uncertainties. In general, the main sources
of uncertainty include:

- environmental chemistry sampling and analysis
- environmental parameter measurement
- fate and transport modeling
- exposure parameter estimation
- toxicological data.
Uncertainty in environmental sampling arises in part from the potentially uneven distribution
of chemicals in the media sampled. Consequently, there is significant uncertainty as to the
actual levels present. Environmental chemistry-analysis error can stem from several

                                             11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

sources including the errors inherent in the analytical methods and characteristics of the
matrix being sampled.

Uncertainties in the exposure assessment are related to estimates of how often an
individual would actually come in contact with the chemicals of concern, the period of time
over which such exposure would occur, and the models used to estimate the concentra-
tions of the chemicals of concern at the point of exposure.

Uncertainties in toxicological data occur in extrapolating both from animals to humans and
from high to low doses of exposure, as well as from the difficulties in assessing the toxicity
of a mixture of chemicals. These uncertainties are addressed by making conservative
assumptions concerning risk and exposure parameters throughout the assessment. As
a result, the Risk Assessment provides upper-bound estimates of the risks to populations
near the site, and is highly unlikely to underestimate actual risks related to the site.

More specific information concerning public health risks, including a quantitative evaluation
of the degree of risk associated with various exposure pathways, is presented in the Risk
Assessment Report.

REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES

Remedial action objectives are specific goals to protect human health and the environment;
they specify the contaminant(s) of concern, the exposure route(s), receptor(s), and
acceptable contaminant level(s) for each exposure route. These objectives are based on
available information and standards such as applicable or relevant and appropriate
requirements (ARARs) and risk-based levels established in the risk assessment.

ERA has developed remedial action objectives for the wetlands sediments which are
intended to reduce risks to human health via ingestion of contaminated fish and to the
environment via bioaccumulation of contaminants in aquatic species. Although the general
remedial objectives for this site include reduction of risks associated with metals and PAHs
in the wetlands sediments, EPA chose to develop numerical cleanup goals only for PCBs.
PCBs are clearly site-derived, whereas PAHs and metals may be derived from other
sources in the area. In addition, the levels of cadmium, chromium and lead measured
aquatic and terrestrial species did not appear to constitute significant risks to these
species. PAHs were not observed in any species sampled. Finally, areas subject to reme-
diation for PCB contamination also contain high levels of PAHs and metals, such that a
PCB-driven remedial action will effect reduction of these other contaminants.

EPA's remediation goal for PCBs in wetlands sediment is 5 ppm. This goal reflects several
different contributing factors: EPA's evaluation of bioavailability, based on application of
the Interim Equilibrium Partitioning Method developed by the Office of Water; biological
effects data from literature studies; and remediation goals for PCBs in sediment at other
Superfund sites. EPA also considered competing factors such as the technical feasibility
of full remediation and the desire to minimize, as much as possible, the impact of invasive
remediation techniques on the existing wetlands, which currently support a variety of plant

                                             12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

and animal species. Application of the 5 ppm cleanup goal to the sediments in the
Edmonds Creek marsh provides for removal of PCBs that exceed the level EPA has
determined to be adequately protective of resident wildlife. Removal of these sediments
also reduces risks associated with the PAHs and metals which accompany PCBs in the
connecting channel and the vicinity of Pool C, portions of Edmonds Creek, and the
northern area of the marsh. The total volume of sediments to be excavated is approxi-
mately 2200 cubic yards, and involves approximately 1.36 acres of the Edmonds Creek
wetlands. This area is shown in Figure 8.

As discussed above, under the Summary of Site Risks, EPA did not develop remedial
action objectives for ground water or surface water. The implementation of source control
provided for in the Operable Unit 1 remedial action will be sufficient to prevent further
migration of contaminants into the environment. Contaminants which have already
migrated into the ground water will be gradually reduced by natural attenuation to
acceptable levels. Although significant impacts to the Raritan River are not suggested by
current data, the future migration of contaminants from Kin-Buc will decrease following
construction of the OU 1 containment system. In addition, EPA has determined that there
are no current or plausible future exposure scenarios which could pose a risk to human
health.
                                                          i


DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

CERCLA requires that each selected site remedy be protective of human health and the
environment, be cost-effective, comply with other statutory laws, and utilize permanent
solutions, alternative treatment technologies and resource recovery alternatives to the
maximum extent practicable. In addition, the statute includes a preference for the use of
treatment as a principal element for the reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume of the
hazardous substances.

The information presented in the Rl and Risk Assessment was used to prepare a Feasibility
Study. The FS provides a detailed evaluation of various options, referred to as remedial
alternatives, which address the environmental problems identified at the site. Detailed
descriptions of these remedial alternatives may be found in the Draft Final FS Report
available in the administrative record file. The following alternatives passed through a
development and screening process which is also described in the FS Report.

This Record of Decision evaluates in detail, six remedial alternatives for addressing the
contamination associated with the Kin-Buc Landfill site. The time to implement reflects only
the time required to construct or implement the remedy, as well as the time required to
design the remedy and procure contracts for design and construction.

The numbers in parentheses correspond to the numbering used in the FS Report to identify
each alternative or subalternative.




                                            13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 1-No Further Action

Capital Cost: $0
Annual Operation and Maintenance (O & M) Cost: $61,000/yr
Present Worth Cost: $938,900 (on a 30-year basis)
Time to Implement: between 7 and 82 years

The Superfund program requires that the No Action alternative be considered as a baseline
for comparison of other alternatives. Under this alternative, no remedial activities would be
conducted in any portion of the Edmonds Creek Marsh OU 2 study area. The source of
contamination to the Edmonds Creek Marsh would be contained by implementation of the
OU 1 remedy which includes a slurry wall, cap, and extraction and treatment of leachate
and ground water within the slurry wall. Under this alternative, the 5 ppm remediation goal
would be achieved, to the extent possible, through natural sediment burial and diffusive
partitioning into the water column. A sediment dynamics model for estimating vertical
sediment burial rates was applied to provide a rough estimate of the timeframe during
which natural recovery of the wetlands would be expected to occur. The model was
applied using the overall average PCB concentration in the wetlands (7.1 ppm), the
average concentration exceeding the 5 ppm goal in the wetlands (77 ppm) and the
maximum concentration (300 ppm) outside the OU 1 slurry wall. The model indicated that
a concentration of 5 ppm would be achieved within 7 years, 55 years and 82 years, respec-
tively. A sediment sampling program would be undertaken every 6 months to determine
the rate at which burial of PCBs is taking place. This data would be reviewed periodically
to evaluate changes in PCB concentrations over time. A 30-year monitoring program was
used for costing purposes. There are no federal or state ARARs associated with this
alternative, since the no action alternative does not involve any remedial activity in existing
wetlands. Given the level of uncertainty in the model's results, the actual time required to
reach compliance with the preliminary remediation goal of 5 ppm may exceed the
estimated timeframe. To confirm the effectiveness of the OU 1 containment system, a
ground water and surface water monitoring program will also be implemented. Present
worth costs associated with this alternative include the monitoring program estimated over
30 years.


Alternative 2A (3A)-Sediment Removal and Consolidation in On-Site Containment

Capital Cost- $3,537,000
Annual O&M Cost-$67,100
Present Worth Cost--$4,314,900
Time to Implement-3 years

Under this alternative, soils and benthic sediments containing PCBs in excess of 5 ppm in
the Edmonds Creek marsh, creek, and areas adjacent to Pool C would be removed,
dewatered and placed within the OU 1 on-site containment system. The total volume of
sediment, as indicated in Figure 9, is estimated to be approximately 2200 cubic yards,

                                             14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

based on the total estimated area which exceeds the cleanup goal (approximately 1.36
acres) and an excavation depth of one foot. Containment of excavated sediment would
be provided within the OU 1 containment system. Supernatant from dewatering would be
disposed of off site in compliance with the requirements of the Toxic Substances Control
Act (TSCA) governing PCS disposal. Prior to excavation, additional surface sampling for
PCBs would be conducted in areas previously identified as exceeding 5 ppm PCBs, as well
as in the area east of Pool C, in order to refine the actual areas for excavation. Sampling
would also be conducted at depth in selected locations to confirm the vertical extent of
contamination. Engineering methods for controlling surface water flow, such as tide gates
or temporary earthen dams, and to reduce impact to wetlands, such as hydraulic dredging
or dragline dredging, would be utilized during excavation. Excavated areas would be
restored by active revegetation with any of several marsh species. This alternative would
meet ARARs requiring mitigation or restoration of disturbed wetlands, as well as chemical-
specific ARARs associated with PCBs (TSCA), and meet the site-specific remediation goal
of 5 ppm PCBs. RCRA Land Disposal Restrictions are not applicable to consolidation
within the Area of Contamination (AOC), so testing for RCRA characteristics would not be
required. Additional studies of surface water and biota will be necessary to design a
restoration/mitigation program for the Edmonds Creek Marsh. Present worth and O&M
costs for this alternative also include a ground-water and surface-water monitoring
program, estimated over 30 years.


Alternative 2B (3B)~Sediment Removal and Off-Site Disposal

Capital Cost-$5,168,000
Annual O&M Cost~$67,100
Present Value Cost--$5,945,900
Time to Implement-3 years

This alternative is the same as Alternative 2A, Sediment Removal and Consolidation On-
Site, except that the excavated sediments would be land disposed off site in a chemical
waste facility in accordance with TSCA requirements governing disposal of PCB-
contaminated soils. Prior to disposal, the sediments would be dewatered. The supernatant
would be disposed of off site in a TSCA facility. Sediments would be tested to determine
characteristicity for metals prior to disposal, so that compliance with RCRA Land Disposal
Restrictions is ensured. Present worth and O&M costs include a ground water and surface
water monitoring program, estimated over 30 years.




                                           15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 2C (3C)-Sediment Removal and On-Site Treatment

Capital Cost-$6,225,000
Annual O&M Cost--$67,100
Present Worth Cost«$7,002,900
Time to Implement-4 years

This alternative is the same as Alternative 2A except that the excavated sediments would
be treated on site to reduce PCB concentrations to below 5 ppm, using one of the
following processes: solvent extraction, thermal extraction, or chemical dechlorination.
Excavated sediments would be tested to determine whether they are RCRA characteristic
due to metals content during predesign. A stabilization/solidification stage would be added
prior to disposal in accordance with RCRA Land Disposal Restrictions if the sediments are
characteristic wastes. Depending on costs, disposal would be either on site in an OU 2
containment system, or off site in a commercial disposal facility. A pilot-scale treatability
study would be necessary in order to design a full-scale treatment train. Use of an on-site
treatment system would require additional site preparation to accommodate the trailer and
other equipment. Although no consolidation will be required prior to treatment, the system
would have to meet ARARs for air pollution controls or TSCA requirements for disposal of
a residual waste stream from the thermal and solvent extraction processes. This alternative
involves higher costs per unit of sediment because of the treatability study and mobiliza-
tion/demobilization costs associated with treatment equipment. Additional ARARs, as
described in Table 12, involve requirements for wetlands mitigation/restoration. Present
worth and O&M costs also include a ground-water and surface-water monitoring program,
estimated over 30 years.

Alternative 3 (4)-Sediment Capping with Stream Relocation

Capital Costs-$4,956,000
Annual O&M Costs--$114,100 (year 1)
                $104,100 (year 2)
                  $ 96,100 (years 3-5)
               $49,100 (years 6-10)
               $ 46,100 (years 11-30)
Present Worth Cost-$5,907,900
Time to Implement-4 years

This alternative would involve in-situ capping of sediments which exceed the 5 ppm cleanup
level for PCBs, either with clean sediments or a single layer synthetic membrane cap.
Portions of streams containing or immediately adjacent to contaminated sediments would
be re-routed through a new channel dug parallel to the old channel in uncontaminated
sediments. Excavated clean sediments would be used to fill in the former stream channel,
burying the contaminated sediment. Any remaining exposed sediments which exceed 5
ppm and those adjacent to Pool C would be covered by a single layer synthetic membrane
cap. A sampling program to further refine the actual areas for removal and identify the new
stream channel would be necessary. This alternative would also require a hydrologic study

                                             16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

of Edmonds Creek/Marsh in order to design the new stream system. Vegetation control
would be required to prevent regrowth of marsh plants through the capped portions. The
cap and protective berms would displace approximately 5.9 acres of wetlands, and there
would be long-term impacts to the remaining wetlands associated with maintenance of the
containment system. Mitigation of wetlands would be required. Engineering methods to
reduce impacts to the wetlands during construction would be utilized. RCRA Land Disposal
Restrictions are not applicable to consolidation within the Area of Contamination, so metals
testing for characteristicity will not be required. Higher O&M costs reflect the maintenance
costs associated with capping, as well as higher wetlands mitigation costs. Present worth
and O&M costs include a ground-water and surface-water monitoring program, estimated
over 30 years.

Alternative 4 (5)~Sediment Containment in Vicinity of Pool C by Capping and Slurry
Wall to Meadow Mat, Remaining Sediment Consolidation, Limited Stream Relocation

Capital Costs~$4,706,000
Annual O&M Costs--$110,100 (year 1)
                $103,100 (year 2)
                $ 96,100 (years 3-5)
                $ 50,100 (years 6-10)
                $ 49,100 (years 11-30)
Present Worth Cost~$5,686,900
Time to Implement-3 years

This alternative would require excavation of soils and benthic sediments exceeding the 5
ppm cleanup level. These sediments would be dewatered and placed within an on-site
containment unit constructed in the vicinity of Pool C, which is the most highly contaminat-
ed area of OU 2. This area would be encompassed by a slurry wall to the meadow mat
layer, extending out from the OU 1 slurry wall. The resulting contained area would be
separate from OU 1 but located on the perimeter, and would receive a single-layer
synthetic membrane cap similar to the OU 1 cap. Construction of this containment unit
would require relocation of a portion of Edmonds Creek. The area subject to removal is
approximately 0.94 acres, although sampling would be done during the predesign phase
to refine the extent of excavation and after excavation to confirm compliance with the
cleanup level. This alternative would require a hydrologic study of Edmonds Creek in order
to determine the effects of the tidal cycle on the remedial action. The alternative may also
involve compatibility testing to determine the composition of the slurry/backfill mixture used
for the wall, and a subsurface boring program to obtain the geologic information necessary
to the design. A wetlands mitigation program would be required to compensate for the
wetlands area lost. Liquid from dewatering would be sent to an off-site disposal facility in
accordance with TSCA requirements. RCRA Land Disposal Restrictions are not applicable
to consolidation within the AOC. Higher costs reflect higher maintenance costs associated
with capping and the slurry wall, as well as wetlands mitigation. Present worth and O&M
costs reflect a ground water and surface water monitoring program, estimated over 30
years.


                                             17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Because Alternatives 1, 2A, 3, 4 and possibly 2C would result in contaminants remaining
on the site, CERCLA requires that the site be reviewed every five years. The five-year
review for Alternative 2A would be accomplished by the five-year review also required for
the Operable Unit 1 remedy. If justified by the review, additional remedial actions may be
implemented to remove or treat the wastes.


SUMMARY OF COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES

During the detailed evaluation of remedial alternatives, each alternative was assessed
utilizing nine evaluation criteria as set forth in the National Oil and Hazardous Substances
Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP) and Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response
(OSWER) Directive 9355.3-01. These criteria were developed to address the requirements
of Section 121 of CERCLA to ensure all important considerations are factored into remedy
selection decisions.

The following "threshold" criteria are the most important, and must be satisfied by any
alternative in order to be eligible for selection:

1.    Overall protection of human health and the environment addresses whether or not
      a remedy provides adequate protection and describes how risks posed through
      each exposure pathway (based on a reasonable maximum exposure scenario) are
      eliminated, reduced, or controlled through treatment, engineering controls, or institu-
      tional controls.

2.    Compliance with ARARs addresses whether or not a remedy would meet all of the
      applicable, or relevant and appropriate requirements of federal and state environ-
      mental statutes and requirements or provide grounds for invoking a waiver.

The following "primary balancing" criteria are used to make comparisons and to identify the
major trade-offs between alternatives:

3.    Long-term effectiveness and permanence refers to the ability of a remedy to
      maintain reliable protection of human health and the environment over time, once
      cleanup goals have been met. It also addresses the magnitude and effectiveness
      of the measures that may be required to manage the risk posed by treatment
      residuals and/or untreated wastes.

4.    Reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment is the anticipated
      performance of a remedial technology, with respect to these parameters, that a
      remedy may employ.

5.    Short-term effectiveness addresses the period of time needed to achieve protection
      and any adverse impacts on human health and the environment that may be posed
      during the construction and implementation periods until cleanup goals are
      achieved.

                                            18

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

6.     Implementability is the technical and administrative feasibility of a remedy, including
       the availability of materials and services needed.

7.     Cost includes estimated capital and operation and maintenance costs, and the
       present-worth costs.

The following "modifying" criteria are considered fully after the formal public comment
period on the Proposed Plan is complete:

8.     State acceptance indicates whether, based on its review of the RI/FS and the
       Proposed Plan, the State supports, opposes, and/or has identified any reservations
       with the preferred alternative.

9.     Community acceptance refers to the public's general response to the alternatives
       described in the Proposed Plan and the RI/FS reports. Factors of community
       acceptance to be discussed include support, reservation, and opposition by the
       community.

A comparative analysis of the remedial alternatives based upon the evaluation criteria noted
above follows.

o      Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment

With the exception of the No Further Action alternative, all of the alternatives will prevent
the further migration of contaminated sediments, reducing human health risks associated
with ingestion of contaminated fish and environmental risks associated with uptake of PCBs
and other contaminants from sediment into the aquatic and terrestrial food chains.
Therefore, all of these alternatives except the no action alternative will provide adequate
protection of human health and the environment through containment of contaminated
sediments or a combination of treatment and containment. All active response actions will
impact the wetlands and Edmonds Creek during construction. Alternatives 3 and 4 will
involve permanent ecological impacts in the Edmonds Creek marsh, since they include in-
situ containment and stream relocation.

Modeling of sediment burial rates indicates that maximum PCB concentrations could take
as long as 82 years to decline through burial to the 5 ppm cleanup goal. Since EPA's
ecological and human health assessments have indicated that the contaminated sediments
currently pose a risk to human health and the environment, the no action alternative will
not provide sufficient protection within a reasonable timeframe.

o      Compliance with ARARs

The applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements for the Operable Unit 2 remedial
action are listed in Table 14. Portions of the study area lie within the 100- and 500-year
floodplains, and the remedial objectives for this site require response action within the


                                             19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Edmonds Creek wetlands area. Therefore, a variety of state and federal wetlands and
floodplain regulations will be ARARs for the remedial action at the Kin-Buc site.

Although ERA has established a cleanup goal of 5 ppm for PCBs in the sediments, there
are no chemical-specific ARARs for sediments in the Edmonds Creek/Marsh area. All of
the alternatives will comply with the action/location-specific ARARs for remedial activities
in wetlands and floodplains, although certain alternatives require compliance with a greater
number of ARARs. Alternatives 2B and 2C involve off-site disposal and on-stte treatment
and disposal, respectively. Both of these actions constitute "placement" (removing the
waste from the area of contamination prior to land disposal) of a potential RCRA charac-
teristic waste. Sediments for these alternatives must be tested to determine whether they
are characteristic RCRA wastes prior to any disposal; if they are characteristic because of
their metals content, additional treatment (solidification/stabilization) will be required prior
to disposal. All treatment residues must be disposed of in accordance with either TSCA
or RCRA depending on their constituents. All alternatives involving dewatering of sediment
must also comply with TSCA requirements for disposal of the supernatant. Alternatives 3
and 4 call for in-situ containment and stream relocation. Since these alternatives will
involve greater displacement and have permanent ecological impacts compared to Alterna-
tives 2A, 2B or 2C, a greater degree of mitigation/restoration will be required to satisfy both
state and federal ARARs.


o      Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence

Alternative 1, No Further Action, does not provide for long-term protection of human health
and the environment, since it will not prohibit the migration of contaminants into the aquatic
and terrestrial food chains for a significant period of time, nor can the effectiveness of
natural sedimentation rates be evaluated with a high degree of confidence. Alternative 2A
provides adequate protection by removing the source of contaminants, the sediments, from
direct contact with the wetlands and placing them within the OU 1 containment system,
which is equivalent in specifications to a chemical waste landfill. Alternative 2B is similar
in that it provides for containment of the source materials, but removes the excavated
sediments from the site completely, to a commercial chemical waste land disposal facility.
Alternative 2C provides the greatest degree of permanence by requiring treatment of the
sediments to remove or destroy the contaminants. In-situ containment in the wetlands,
such as described in Alternatives 3 and 4, may be the least effective over the long term
because of the technical difficulty of constructing and maintaining containment in this
environment. In addition, unlike Alternatives 2A, 2B, and 2C, contaminants will remain in
the wetlands. Maintenance of containment structures-cap, slurry wall-will have long-term
effects on the hydrology of the wetlands as well as on the plant and animal species which
inhabit the wetlands. Construction of Alternative 3 is expected to result in a greater loss
of wetlands acreage (5.9 acres) than Alternatives 2A, B, and C (1.36 acres), or 4 (2.67
acres). All alternatives, except Alternatives 2B and 2C, will result in contaminants remaining
on-site and will be subject to a regular five-year review. However, containment in the OU
1 landfill will be more protective and provide more long-term effectiveness than either
containment in a much smaller unit constructed (in the area adjacent to Pool C) or in-situ

                                              20

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

containment in the wetlands, since OU 1 includes a slurry wall constructed to bedrock as
well as leachate and ground water control. All alternatives except No Action will provide
reduction in risks associated with the sediments, but only Alternative 2C will not require
long-term monitoring or maintenance.



o      Reduction in Toxicity. Mobility, or Volume

Only Alternative 2C addresses the principal threats (PCB-contaminated sediment containing
more than 5 ppm PCBs) by treatment. All available treatment technologies for PCBs can
be expected to meet the remediation objective of 5 ppm PCBs through either removal of
PCBs via solvent extraction, or thermal destruction of organics. Treatment would therefore
effect a reduction in toxicity, mobility and volume of contaminants. None of the other
alternatives involve treatment of the principal threats. Although dewatering may remove
some percentage of the total mass of PCBs in the sediment, this process is not expected
to result in significant reduction since PCBs adsorb to sediments. Residuals will remain
after either thermal treatment or solvent extraction; these will be disposed of off-site in a
chemical waste facility.


o      Short-Term Effectiveness

Short-term effectiveness denotes the length of time it takes for the remedy to become
effective, as well as the adverse impacts that implementation of the remedy may have on
human health or the environment. The No Further Action alternative is not considered
effective in the short-term, since it would allow continued migration of contaminants in the
wetlands, and provides no immediate protection of human health or the environment.
Alternatives 2A, and 2B could be completed within approximately three years, compared
to a longer implementation time for Alternatives 2C (four years), 3 and 4 (at least four
years). Therefore, Alternatives 2A, 2B, and 2C would involve fewer short-term impacts to
the wetlands during construction. Alternatives 3 and 4 also involve construction of a
permanent containment system in the wetlands, as well as permanent relocation of the
Edmonds Creek stream channel. This construction would result in more short-term
impacts to the wetlands than construction of Alternatives 2A, 2B, and 2C, due to lengthier
implementation times and the more complex and invasive nature of the remedies.
Construction of Alternative 3 is expected to result in a greater loss of wetlands acreage (5.9
acres) than Alternatives 2A, B, and C (1.36 acres). Construction of Alternative 4 would
result in impacts to 2.67 acres of wetlands, although only .94 acres represent excavated
sediment. These features would result in both short- and long-term adverse impacts to
resident wildlife, including mammals and aquatic species, in the wetlands. All alternatives
would involve adverse impacts to the wetlands, either through containment of contaminated
sediment or excavation of sediment which exceeds the remedial objective of 5 ppm PCBs.
Mitigation of these impacts will be required, either in the form of active restoration (revege-
tation by marsh plants) of disturbed areas, or replacement of areas which will be
permanently disrupted. Use of temporary surface water controls and specialized

                                             21

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

excavation methods and equipment can reduce the amount of sediment remobilized during
excavation as well as impacts to the wetlands.

Minimal health risks to workers are anticipated for implementation of Alternatives 2A, B and
C. Removal of sediment may result in a potential exposure pathway for on-site workers,
although use of protective equipment can mitigate health risks to these workers. Off-site
disposal presents some degree of risk to workers and off-site communities relative to on-
site disposal, since it involves transportation of potentially hazardous materials. On-site
treatment will transfer contaminants to additional media (air, liquid), requiring additional
controls to reduce exposures of on-site workers and to prevent migration off site of these
residuals.

o      Implementability

All of the alternatives are considered implementable. Alternative 1, No Further Action, is
the easiest to implement since it requires only periodic monitoring to evaluate natural
recovery. All alternatives depend on additional hydrologic and biota studies to minimize
impacts due to construction and maximize restoration of the wetlands. On-site disposal
of sediments in OU 1 depends on the design and construction schedule for the OU 1
remedial action; placement of the excavated sediment within OU 1 must be coordinated
to avoid delays in implementation of the OU 1 remedy. Off-site disposal depends on the
availability of a disposal facility and on the results of hazardous classification testing, since
the sediments will have to be solidified prior to disposal if they are characteristic wastes.
Treatment of wastes on the site is technically implementable, but the small volume of
sediments to be treated (2200 cubic yards) may not warrant performance of a pilot-scale
treatabilrty study and mobilization of equipment designed for much larger volumes of soil.
In addition, the treated wastes will have be tested to determine if they are RCRA
characteristic based on metals content. If they are characteristic, the sediments will have
to be solidified prior to any land disposal since treatment will only be effective for PCBs and
other organic compounds. Alternatives 3 and 4 require long-term maintenance and
operation of the containment systems, which include control of vegetation and surface
water flow, as well as maintenance of a cap and/or slurry wall in a wetlands environment.


o      Cost

A summary of cost estimates for all alternatives evaluated appears in Table 15.

The No Further Action alternative is the least costly, with a present worth cost of $938,900
which includes long-term ground water and surface water monitoring. The present worth
costs of Alternatives 2A, 2B, and 2C are, respectively, $4,314,900, $5,945,900, and $7,002,-
900. Present worth costs for Alternatives 3 and 4 are $5,907,900, and $5,686,9000,
respectively.

It should be noted that the O&M costs for Alternatives 3 and 4, estimated over thirty years,
far exceed those associated with Alternatives 2A, 2B and 2C: $189,000 for Alternative 3 and

                                              22

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

$188,000 for Alternative 4, as compared to $23,000 for each of the previous alternatives.
These O&M costs reflect relatively high maintenance costs for containment structures such
as caps and slurry walls, including control of vegetation and burrowing animals, over an
indefinite period of time. The most expensive remedy is Alternative 2C, because of the high
unit cost associated with on-site treatment of the sediments. On-site sediment treatment
is not usually implemented for volumes of waste smaller than 10,000 to 15,000 cubic yards
because of the costs associated with equipment mobilization/demobilization and
performance of treatability studies. The high cost of Alternative 2B derives from the high
unit costs associated with land disposal in a commercial chemical waste facility. Alternative
2A, which provides for on-site disposal of the sediment in OU 1, is the second least
expensive option, since it uses the containment system currently in design as part of the
OU 1 response action. All estimated costs include a long-term surface-water and ground-
water monitoring program.

o      State Acceptance

The State of New Jersey concurs with EPA's preferred alternative, 2A.

o      Community Acceptance

In general, both officials and community residents expressed support for Alternative 2A.
A more detailed discussion of community concerns is presented in the Responsiveness
Summary.

SELECTED REMEDY

Based upon consideration of the requirements of CERCLA, the detailed analysis of the
alternatives, and public comments, both the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection and Energy and EPA have determined that Alternative 2A is the most
appropriate remedy for Operable Unit 2 of the Kin-Buc site.

The major components of the selected remedy are as follows:

       D      Excavation of approximately 2200 cubic yards of sediments
              with PCB levels that exceed the remedial action objective of 5
              ppm total PCBs;

       D      Disposal and containment of the excavated sediment within the
              OU 1 slurry wall and cap;

      D      Active restoration of the approximately 1.36 acres of excavated
             wetlands, according to a restoration program which will be
             developed during the design phase, in the Edmonds Creek
             Marsh, as well as mitigation of impacts caused by remedial
             activities;


                                            23

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      D       Long-term monitoring of ground water underlying Mound B and
             the Low-Lying Area, surface water in Edmonds Creek, and the
             Raritan River adjacent to Mound B; and

      D        Maintenance of the Mound B cover.

 By excavating contaminated sediments, the preferred alternative will prevent the further
 bioaccumulation of PCBs and metals in aquatic and terrestrial species residing in the
 Edmonds Creek Marsh, thereby reducing ecological and human health risks associated
with the Kin-Buc Landfill. Disposal of the excavated sediment in the OU 1 containment
 system will provide long-term protection of human health and the environment. Although
this alternative does not satisfy the statutory preference for treatment, ERA concluded that
the costs and implementability of available treatment technologies did not justify selection
of Alternative 2C, given the small volume of sediment with relatively low concentrations of
PCBs. Alternative 2B did not provide more protectiveness than 2A, despite considerably
greater costs. The preferred alternative will have fewer short-term impacts to wetlands in
comparison to Alternatives 3 and 4, which involve stream relocation and some degree of
in-situ containment in the marsh, thereby reducing the subsequent mitigation requirements.
Alternative 3 would involve disturbance of a significantly greater area of the wetlands
compared to Alternatives 4, 2A, 2B, or 2C. Few long-term adverse impacts on plants or
wildlife are anticipated with 2A, 2B, or 2C, since the remedial action will not involve any
permanent changes in the wetlands environment, unlike Alternatives 3 and 4. With respect
to cost, Alternative 2A is the least costly of the active response measures. With respect
to compliance with ARARs, Alternative 2A is expected to satisfy all of the action- and
location-specific ARARs described in the FS. A wetlands restoration/mitigation program
will be developed during the design phase and implemented after excavation of the
contaminated sediments. No RCRA Land Disposal Restrictions are potentially applicable
to this action, because consolidation within the same area of contamination does not
constitute "placement." Finally, Alternative 2A will take approximately three years to
implement, as compared to at least five for Alternatives 3 and 4. A shorter timeframe will
lessen impacts to wildlife species and encourage more rapid restoration of the marsh.

ERA has determined that ground water underlying Mound B and the Low-Lying Area does
not currently pose a risk to human health, and is not expected to pose such a risk.
Ground water in this area is not a source of potable water and is prevented from further
migration by discharge to the Raritan River. ERA believes, with a high degree of certainty,
that ground water underlying the site will not be used for drinking water in the foreseeable
future. However, because contaminants already present in the ground water will continue
to discharge to the Raritan River for an extended period of time, both the ground water and
the river water will be monitored to ensure that the preferred alternative is protective of
human health and the environment. »

As part of the OU 2 selected remedy, no further remedial action will be taken to reduce
ground-water contaminant concentrations or to control leachate in the refuse layer. The
source of Kin-Buc contributions to the contamination in these areas will be eliminated after
construction of the OU 1 remedial action, which includes a slurry wall and cap. Natural

                                            24

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

remediation or attenuation, involving natural process such as degradation, dispersion and
dilution, will gradually reduce contaminant concentrations to acceptable levels in the sand
and gravel aquifer and in the refuse layer. Contaminants in the bedrock aquifer are already
at acceptable levels. Contaminant transport modeling for both the Mound B and Low-Lying
areas was conducted as part of the Feasibility Study to determine how long natural
remediation would take to achieve this reduction. Results indicate that levels of contami-
nants drop most rapidly in the Low-Lying Area (MCLs may be attained within 50 years) and
less quickly within the Mound B area. However, over time, compliance with federal and
state ground-water quality standards will be achieved.

Maintenance of the Mound B cap will continue. As discussed above, a comprehensive
ground water monitoring program will be implemented to track changes in ground water
quality over time, using existing monitoring wells installed during the OU 2 Rl. These wells
will be sampled regularly. During each periodic review of the remedy, ERA will determine
the need to continue monitoring, based on the collected sampling data. A river water
sampling and analysis program will also be implemented in order to monitor the Raritan
River water quality adjacent to the site. Although current data does not indicate impacts
due to Kin-Buc, this issue will continue to be evaluated over time, as part of the periodic
reviews.

ERA and the NJDEPE believe that the preferred alternative is protective of human health
and the environment, complies with federal and state requirements that are legally
applicable or relevant and appropriate to the remedial action, and is cost-effective. The
selected alternative achieves the ARARs more quickly, or as quickly, and at less cost than
the other options. Therefore, the selected alternative will provide the best balance of trade-
offs among alternatives with respect to the evaluating criteria. This remedy utilizes
permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies to the maximum extent
practicable. However, since the contaminated sediments could not be cost-effectively
treated due to the small volume of material excavated, the preferred alternative does not
satisfy the statutory preference for treatment as a principal element of the remedy with
respect to source control. Because this action will result in contamination remaining on
site, CERCLA requires that the site be reviewed every five years. This review will be
conducted as part of the OU 1 review, since the contaminated sediments will be
consolidated within OU 1. If justified by the review, ERA will revise the remedial decision
as necessary.

Contingency Remedy

If, during the design process for this operable unit, ERA determines that disposal of the
excavated sediment in OU 1 will delay the construction of the OU 1 remedy, ERA may
change the preferred alternative to Alternative 2B, which differs from Alternative 2A only in
the disposal of the excavated materials at an off-site chemical waste facility. The following
description of how the selected remedy meets the CERCLA 121 statutory determinations
also applies to the contingency remedy, except where noted.



                                             25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

Under its legal authorities, EPA's primary responsibility at Superfund sites is to undertake
remedial actions that are protective of human health and the environment. In addition,
Section 121 of CERCLA establishes several other statutory requirements and preferences.
These specify that when complete, the selected remedial action for this site must comply
with applicable or relevant and appropriate environmental standards established under
federal and state environmental laws unless a statutory waiver is justified. The selected
remedy also must be cost-effective and utilize permanent solutions and alternative
treatment technologies or resource-recovery technologies to the maximum extent
practicable. Finally, the statute includes a preference for remedies that employ treatment
that permanently and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity, or mobility of hazardous
wastes, as available. The following sections discuss how the selected remedy meets these
statutory requirements.


Protection of Human Health and the Environment

The selected alternative provides for protection of human health and the environment by
removing the source of PCB contamination, thereby reducing the volume of contaminated
sediments in the wetlands from which PCBs and other contaminants migrate via
bioaccumulation into resident biota such as fish and fiddler crabs. The excavated sediment
will be consolidated within the Operable Unit 1 containment system, which will prevent
future releases into the surrounding environment. Because this remedy involves removal
of a limited portion of the marsh, approximately 1.36 acres, short-term and long-term
impacts to the wetland are expected to be minimal. In addition, a shorter timeframe for
implementation of the remedy will lessen impacts to wetlands biota and encourage more
rapid restoration of the wetlands ecosystem. No permanent alteration of the wetlands will
result from implementation of the remedy. Active restoration of excavated areas will reduce
any long-term impacts.

Compliance with ARARs

The selected remedy is expected to comply with all ARARs, as described in Table 3. There
are no chemical-specific ARARs for the sediment medium. However, the remedy is
designed to comply with all action- and location-specific ARARs that pertain to activities in
wetlands, coastal areas, and floodplains, including design and implementation of a
wetlands mitigation program and restoration of excavated areas of the marsh. The
remedial activity will comply with the National Ambient Air Quality Standard. Any
dewatering liquid derived from sediment consolidation will be disposed of in accordance
with TSCA requirements. Potential RCRA Land Disposal Restrictions do not apply to
consolidation of contaminated materials within the area of contamination. Should EPA find
it necessary to change the selected remedy from Alternative 2A to Alternative 2B, the
excavated sediments will be tested to determine whether they constitute RCRA characteris-
tic hazardous wastes prior to removal from the site. If the sediments are RCRA


                                            26

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

characteristic, RCRA Land Disposal Restrictions will apply, and treatment such as
solidification or stabilization will be utilized prior to disposal.


Cost-Effectiveness

The selected remedy has been determined to provide the greatest overall long-term and
short-term effectiveness in proportion to its present worth cost, $3,637,000, when
compared to equivalently protective alternatives, such as Alternatives 2B and 2C.
Alternatives 3 and 4 were determined to be less effective and more costly.

Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment Technologies to the Maximum
Extent Practicable

The selected remedy represents the maximum extent to which permanent solutions and
treatment technologies can be utilized in a cost-effective manner for the second operable
unit action at the site. ERA has determined that the selected remedy provides the best
balance of trade-offs in terms of the five primary balancing criteria, including state and
community acceptance, although the selected remedy does not involve reduction of
toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment. The selected remedy provides the greatest
long- and short-term effectiveness, is easily implementable, and provides the greatest cost-
effectivness compared to Alternatives 2B and 2C.

Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element

The selected remedy does not satisfy the preference for treatment as a principal element,
since treatment of the contaminated sediment did not provide greater effectiveness, or risk
reduction and resulted in disproportionately higher costs because of the small volume and
relatively low levels of contaminants of concern observed in the sediments.

DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES

The costs described in the Proposed Plan did not include the comprehensive ground-water
and surface-water monitoring program as described in the Selected Remedy section.
Present worth costs of this program are estimated at $677,900, based on a 30-year time
period. Annual O&M costs are estimated at $44,100. These costs have been added to
the costs reported in the Proposed Plan, resulting in the higher present worth and O&M
costs which appear in the Description of Alternatives and Comparative Analysis
sections.




                                            27

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX

 FIGURES




           !• BC

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         Figures

Figure 1 - Site Location

Figure 2 - Site Base Map

Figure 3 - Distribution of PAHs in Sediment

Figure 4 - Distribution of Arsenic in Sediment

Figure 5 - Distribution of Copper in Sediment

Figure 6 - Distribution of Lead in Sediment

Figure 7 - Distribution of Nickel in Sediment

Figure 8 - Total PCB concentrations with Areas Exceeding 5 ppm

Figure 9 - Sediment Removal Areas for Alternatives 2A, 2B, 2C

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                          TTgure I




                                                   PREVIOUSLY EXCAVATED
                                                   SOIL BORROW AREAS

                                                         EDMONOS CREEK AND MARSH




                 »^\ -^»>
                 ,d^     LOW-LYING AREA #"   | |


             i.isi^V   /('TV'Y'^V'M1''
             4?v M.V^v^
             •JXiL -*V&$8d




SOURCE:
TOPOGRAPHY TAKEN FROM           ZOOU
1954 NEW BRUNSWICK, N.J.
•954 SOUTH AMBOY, N.J./N.Y.                  ^-7
1955 PLAINFIELD, N.J.             SLALL IN
1956 PERTH AMBOY, N.J./N.Y.
U.S.G.S QUADRANGLES 7.5 MIN. SERIES                 REGIONAL LOCATION MAP

                                                            KIN-BUC LANDFILL
                                                           EDISON, NEW JERSFY

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      500           U           3UU

                                                         1
2oiiio«4oe.r«.H6)ric u   % BASC iHf
                                       U bB-'"" ™""I                  Figure 2       v
DUGl MO6922*             /
                                            SCALt       JFEET                    j

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         ^-   4lh DRMNAGE CHANNEL
         >- \Jld DRAMAQE\MANNEL
         — Md DRAM4GE CH>NNEL
                         CHANNEL




              EDISON\




,' „• A R E A .X




                                    PAH i.o PP» -
                                    PAH 11 ppm - 20 »pm

                                        21 ppm - 60 ppr

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    LCACMATC STOHACt r/fclLIIY




; LOW \\




                                                  SEDIMENT SAMPLING LOCATION

                                           30.1   CONCENTRATION (Mg/Kf)

                                            U     UNDETECTED
                                                  DATA REJECTED IN ACCORDANCE
                                                  WITH VALIDATION CRITERIA




                                 DISTRIBUTION OF COPPER
                                   IN SEDIMENT SAMPLES

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

<lh DRAINAGE CHANNEL

3id DRAINAGE CHANNEL
?f.<l DRAINAGE CHANMEL

l«r\DRAINACK CHANNEL




                         DISTRIBUTION OF LEAD
                          N SEDIMENT SAMPLES

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

CK r^ftt
•—vs LJV\




                                  J_£G£M1
                     MI6
                           A   SEDIMENT SAMPLING LOCATION

                      30.1     CONCENTRATION (Mg/Kg)

                               UNDETECTED
                               DATA REJECTED IN ACCORDANCE
                               WITH VALIDATION C R I T E R I A


                    Figure 7
            DISTRIBUTION OF NICKEL
              IN SEDIMENT SAMPLES

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

RABLE UNIT I PROPOSED
RRY WALL ALIGNMENT
EN FROM OU.I.£RE-FINAL
SURE OESIGNIOCTOeCR..
I).

BOX I MATE LIMIT OF WETLANDS
EN FROM WETLANDS
INEAT ION MAP. (SHEET
f 31


                                                                                                      HI*     SAMPLE LOCATIONS
                                                                                                    1.30      TOTAL PCBi IN mq/kg (PPM
                                                                                                              O.U.2. AREAS EXCEEDING
                                                                                                              SPPM (DRY WEIGHT)

                                                                                                              SURFACE WATER GAUGE

                                                                                                              L J U I T OF POOL C
                                                                                                              APPROXIMATE L I M I T OF
                                                                                                              WETLANDS (SEE NOTE 21
                                                                                                              EXISTING ELECTRICAL TO*-:=
                                                                                                              PROPOSED OPERABLE UNIT
                                                                                                              SLURRY WALL ALIGNMENT
                                                                                                              (SEE NOTE I)




                                                                                               IO!*L PCS CONCENTRATIONS WITH
       WehraniinnMMh)                                   KIN-BUC LANDFILL
                                               OPERABLE UNIT 2 F E A S I B I L I T Y STUDY
                                                                                             W>PROXIU«Tt DlSIKIBUIION Of O.U.Z
                                                                                               exC EtOiNG   5 PPM PCS. -   -i£OII«:NTS
           Wehion F      peering Cotpotplion                  MIDOLCMI COUN1I

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                     UNNAMED DITCH




                                                                               EMBANKMENT           ~\      i




      APPROXIMATE LIMIT OF
      HCTLANDS (SEE NOTE J)
      PROPOSED OPERABLE UNIT I
---.i-^Udgr WALL ALIGNMENT
       SCC NOTE 21




      CXIST4NO CLCCTRIOU. T(MCK                                                     APPROXIMATE L I M I T




 OF CONTAMINATED SEDIMENT TAKEN
SHEET 2 or 3. TOTAL PCB CONCENTRATIONS
KPPROXIUATC DISTRIBUTIONS OF AREAS
)INC 5PPM rCBS IN SEOIMINT.

M.C UNIT I PROPOSED SLURRY WALL
KNT TAKEN FROM OUI PRC-FIIMt.
IE DESIGN (APRIL                                                                                                      ALT.
                                                                                                         SEDIMENT REMC
tIMATE L I M I T OF DCTLANDS TAKEN FROM                              EXIST                                IN ON-SITC C
IDS DELINEATION utf.       iStCCT I OF 31
                                                                     LEACHAT                                    DISPOSAL/ A^
                                                                                                                          RE
      W«hion C n q i n t       V Coipof ol ion ''/                                                                  MAY 199;
 .rr.poinc MAY uSSXt           /JA » "TSETTS

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       APPENDIX II

                                         TABLES

Table 1 - Contaminant Concentrations in Leachate

Table 2 - Contaminant Concentrations in Sand and Gravel Unit

Table 3 - Contaminant Concentrations in Bedrock Aquifer

Table 4 - Summary of Sediment PCB Data

Table 5 - Compounds Detected in Biota (RI/FS Report)

Table 6 - Compounds detected in Fiddler Crabs (EPA/Adams et al., 1990)

Table 7 - Compounds Detected in Muskrats (EPA/Charters et al., 1991)

Table 8 - Chemicals of Concern by Media, Human Health Assessment

Table 9 - Ground-Water Data Statistical Summary

Table 10 - Surface Water Data Statistical Summary

Table 11 - Sediment Data Statistical Summary

Table 12 - Critical Toxicity Values for Oral and Inhalation Routes

Table 13 - Summary of Risks by Exposure Pathway

Table 14 - Potential Location/Action-Specific ARARs

Table 15 - Summary of Cost Estimates

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             Table E-1
                                                                                                                                      Table 1
                            KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 FEASIBILITY STUDY
             COMPARISON OF MAXIMUM CONCENTRATIONS OF CONTAMINANTS IN GROUNDWATER
                           (REFUSE) WITH CHEMICAL-SPECIFIC ARARs AND TBCs

                                                                                ARARs                                     TBCs
                                Operable Unit 2
                            Maximum Concentrations                 Federal                      State                         State

                                                                                                                NJOEPE                NJDEPE
                                                                                     NJACStds                 Proposed GW         Proposed GW
                                            Low-Lying          RCRA      SDWA          Class        SDWA        Cleanup              Quality
          Compound           Mound B          Area            StdsO)     MCLSU)       GW2<3>        MCLSW     Standards (5)       Standards <*>
Volatile Organic! (ug/f J
Acetone                            22 J         31.000 J         NA            NA         NA            NA          700                  700
Benzene                           1,200         16.000 J         NA              5        NA              1           1                  0.2
Toluene                            62 J       51,000 BJ          NA          1,000        NA            NA        1,000                1,000
Chlorobenzene                     550 J          9.500 J         NA           100         NA              4           5                    5
Ethylbenzene                           83        13,00 J         NA           700         NA            NA         700                  700
Xylene (total)                     610            2,200          NA      10,000           NA             44          40                   40
Base/Neutnl-Acid      '
fxtractafrfes 0*0/0
Phenol                             400              120          NA            NA       3,500           NA        4.000                4,000
2-Chlorophenol                         U             4J          NA            NA         NA            NA           40                   40

1 ,3-Oichlorobenzene                   U             2J          NA            NA         NA            600        600                  600
1 ,4-Dtchlorobenzene                   5J               18       NA            75         NA            NA           70                   75

1 ,2-Dichlorobenzene                   U            200          NA           600         NA            600        600                  600

Isophorone                             U             7J          NA            NA         NA            NA          100                 100

2,4-Dimethylphenol                 17 J             130          NA            NA         NA            NA         100                  100

Naphthalene                            15           110          NA      .     NA         NA            NA           30                  NA


                                                                                                                                       10.7/92 09406 F9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              Table E-1
                             KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 FEASIBILITY STUDY
            COMPARISON OF MAXIMUM CONCENTRATIONS OF CONTAMINANTS IN GROUNDWATER
                          (REFUSE) WITH CHEMICAL-SPECIFIC ARARs AND TBCs

                                                                              ARARs                                     TBCs
                                 Operable Unit 2
                             Maximum Concentrations                 Federal               State *                       Statt

                                                                                                            NJOEPE              NJOEPE
                                                                                   NJACStds               Proposed GW       Proposed GW
                                             Low-Lying         RCRA        SDWA      Class    SDWA          Cleanup            Quality
           Compound           Mound B          Area            StdsO)     MCLSU)    GW2U)     MOS«>       Standards <s>     Standards <«
Acenaphthene                            11              4J        NA          NA        NA           NA        400                400
Diethylphthalate                        2J               2J       NA          NA        NA           NA       5.000             5,000
Fluorene                                10              6J        NA          NA        NA           NA         300               300
n-Nitrosodiphenylamin*                  7J             110        NA          NA        NA           NA          20                 7

Anthracene                              2J              2J        NA          NA        NA           NA       2.000             2.000
di-n Butylphthalate                     7J            13J         NA          NA        NA           NA        900                900
Fluoranthene                            4J            12 J        NA          NA        NA           NA         300               300

Pyrene                                  3J            11 J        NA          NA        NA           NA         200               200

Butylbenzylphthalate                    U             19 J        NA          NA        NA           NA         100               100

bis (2-EthythexyDphthalate              U          520 B          NA          NA        NA           NA          30                 3

Meriddes/PC0s fag/O
4.4'-DDE                                U          0.71 J         NA          NA      0.001          NA           0.1             0.1

PCB-1242                                                                                            0.5           •                *•
                                        U             20 J        NA          NA      0.001

                                                                                                    0.5           •                *•
PCB- 1254                               U             6.3 J       NA          NA      0.001

Total Metals fag/t)
Aluminum                           2,020        83.000 EJ         NA      50-200        NA           NA         NA              50-200

Antimony                          34.4 B                 U        NA          6         NA           NA          20                 2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       Table E-1
                          KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 FEASIBILITY STUDY
            COMPARISON OF MAXIMUM CONCENTRATIONS OF CONTAMINANTS IN GROUNDWATER
                          (REFUSE) WITH CHEMICAL-SPECIFIC ARARs AND TBCs

                                                                           ARARs                                   TBCs
                              Operable Unit 2
                          Maximum Concentrations             Federal                       State               .   State

                                                                                                          NJOEPE           NJDEPE
                                                                                NJACStds                Proposed GW    Proposed GW
                                         Low-Lying      RCRA        SDWA          Class        SDWA        Cleanup        Quality
          Compound         Mound B         Area         StdsO)     MCLSW         GW2<3)        MCLSW    Standards <»   Standards <«

Arsenic                          18.3            170        50             50         50           NA          8             0.02
Barium                          745 EJ         2.400     1,000          2,000      1,000           NA      2,000            2,000
Beryllium                            U         4.8 B       MA             NA         NA            NA         20            0.008
Cadmium                         3BNJ            86.3        10              5         10           NA          4                4
Chromium                         19.4          390 J        50             10         50           NA        100              100
Copper                               U          823        MA             NA       1,000           NA        NA             1,000
Iron                           59,600        503.000       NA            300        300            NA        NA              300

Lead                         1,170 SJN      2,490 *J        50             50         50           NA         10                5
Manganese                       1,510          4.610       NA              50         50           NA        NA                50
Mercury                            1.3        2.0 NJ         2              2          2           NA          2                2

Nickel                            134         576 EJ       NA            100"        NA            NA        100              100

Selenium                      1.7 BMW         1.6 BW        10            50          10           NA         50               50

Silver                               U         7.1 B        50            50          50           NA         20               20

Sodium                      673,000 EJ       617,000       NA             NA     50,000            NA        NA            50,000

Zinc                            32.4 J        18,100       NA           5,000      5,000           NA      5,000            5,000

Dissolved Metals Qtg/()
Antimony                             U        20.8 B       NA      *«
                                                                          NA         NA            NA         20                2


                                                                                                                            10.7/92.09406 F9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 5

                                                        Table E-1
                          KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 FEASIBILITY STUDY
            COMPARISON OF MAXIMUM CONCENTRATIONS OF CONTAMINANTS IN GROUNDWATER
                          (REFUSE) WITH CHEMICAL-SPECIFIC ARARs AND TBCs

                                                                            ARARs                                     TBCs
                              Operable Unit 2
                          Maximum Concentrations              Federal                       State                     State

                                                                                                             NJDEPE           NJDEPE
                                                                                 NJACStds                 Proposed GW     Proposed GW
                                         Low-Lying       RCRA        SDWA          Class         SDWA        Cleanup         Quality
          Compound         MoundB          ATM           StdsO)     MCLSO)        GW2«>         MCLS<«>   Standards (S>   Standards W
Arsenic                          19.7            170         50             50         50           NA            8              0.02
Barium                            621          2.400      1,000          2.000      1.000           NA        2.000            2.000
Beryllium                           U           1.7 B       NA       '     -4'        NA            NA           20           0.008
Cadmium                             U           86.3         10              5         10           NA            4                4

Chromium                         8.2 B           390         50             10         50           NA          100              100
Copper                              U           4.2 B       NA             NA       1,000           NA          NA             1,000
Iron                           50.000        503.000        NA            300        300            NA          NA               300

Lead                             21.4           2490         50             50         50           NA           10                5

Manganese                       1,520        4.610 E        NA              50         50           NA          NA                50

Mercury                             U            2N           2              2          2           NA            2                 2

Nickel                            132          576 E        NA             NA         NA            NA          100              100

Selenium                            U         1.6BW          10            50          10           NA           50               50

Silver                              U           7.1 B        50            50          50           NA           20               20

Sodium                      674,000 EJ       333.000        NA             NA     50.000            NA          NA            50.000

Zinc                                R         74.9 EJ       NA           5.000      5.000           NA        5.000            5,000

Other Inorganics (mg/fj
Ammonia-Nitrogen                  323            400        NA             NA         0.5           NA          NA                0.5


                                                                                                                               I0.7/92L. _-*.*

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                            Page 5 of S

                                                                     Table E-1
                                  KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 FEASIBILITY STUDY
             COMPARISON OF MAXIMUM CONCENTRATIONS OF CONTAMINANTS IN GROUNDWATER
                           (REFUSE) WITH CHEMICAL-SPECIFIC ARARs AND TBCs

                                                                                        ARARs                                    TBCs
                                       Operable Unit 2
                                   Maximum Concentrations                   Federal                    State                     State

                                                                                                                         NJDEPE          NJDEPC
                                                                                             NJACStds                 Proposed GW    Proposed GW
                                                      Low-Lying       RCRA        SDWA         Class        SDWA        Cleanup         Quality
           Compound                  Mound B            Area          StdsU)     MCLS »)      GW2(»        MCLS (4)   Standards W    Standards <«>

 Cyanide                                       -             0.184        NA          200         02           NA          0.2               0.2
 Nitrate-Nitrogen                             2.6             0.34        NA            10         10          NA          NA                10
 Total Dissolved Solids                     3,370            2,380        NA           NA         SOO          NA          NA               SOO
                                                                                             Nat. Back.

Motes:
 NA No Standard Available
 • Combined total of PCBs shall not exceed 0.05 ug/f
 * * Combined total of PCBs shall not exceed 0.02 ug/f
 (1) 40 CFR Part 264.94 (Table 1 - Maximum Concentration of Constituents for Groundwater Protection)
 (2) 40 CFR Part 141.11 (Maximum Contaminant Levels for Inorganic Chemicals), 40 CFR Part 141.12 (Maximum Contaminant Levels for Organic
     Chemicals), 40 CFR Part 141.61 (Maximum Contaminant Levels for Organic Contaminants), 40 CFR Part 141.62 (Maximum Contaminant Levels for
     Inorganic Contaminants), and 40 CFR Part 143.3 (Secondary Maximum Contaminant Levels)
 (3) NJ.A.C. Part 7:9-6.6 - Groundwater Quality Criteria
 (4) N J. Safe Drinking Water Act* A-280 Amendments" (N.J.A.C Part 7:10-16.7 - Maximum contaminant levels (MCLs) for hazardous contaminants)
 (5) 24 NJ.R. 373 (a) Cleanup Standards for Contaminated Sites - Proposed New Rules: N.J.A.C. 7:26 D, February 3,1992
 (6) 24 NJ.R. 193 (a) Groundwater Quality Standards - Proposed Repeal and New Rules: N.J.A.C. 7:9-6. January 21,1992
        U = Result less than instrument detection limit (IDL).
        B = Result between IDL and contract required detection limited (CRDL).
        N = Spiked sample recovery not within control limits
        W = Post-digest spike recovery furnace analysis was out of 85-115 percent control limit, while sample absorbance was less than 50 percent of
               spike absorbance
        S = Reported value was determined by the method of standard additions (MSA).
        J = Concentration is estimated.
        R = Data rejected in accordance with validation criteria
        * = Duplicate analysis not within control limit


                                                                                                                                                  W406.F9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                        Pag« 1 01 ««

                                                                                                                                             Table 2
                                                 Table E-2
                                KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 FEASIBILITY STUDY
           COMPARISON OF MAXIMUM CONCENTRATIONS OF CONTAMINANTS IN GROUNDWATER
                     (SAND & GRAVEL) WITH CHEMICAL-SPECIFIC ARARs AND TBCs

                                                                                            ARARs                                           TBCs
                                    Operable Unit 2
                                Maximum Concentrations                    Federal                          State                            State

                                                                                                                             NJDEPE                 NJDEPE
                                                                                                NJACStds                  Proposed GW          Proposed GW
                                                   Low-Lying         RCRA      SDWA               Class          SDWA        Cleanup              Quality
          Compound               Mound B             Area            StdsO)    MCLSU)            GW2<*>         MCLS<«>    Standards"           Standards*
Volatile Organic* tvg/t)
Vinyl Chloride                             46                    U      NA                  2         NA             2                2               0.08
Acetone                               230 J                      U      MA             NA             NA            NA          700                    700
1 , 1 -Dichloroet hane                     13                  18       NA             NA             NA            NA            70                     70
1,2-Dichloroethene (total) *-              93                    U      NA             NA             NA            10                (7)                    (71

Trichloroethene                            4J                  26       NA                  5         NA             1           NA                          1

Benzene                                220                  17 J        NA                  5         NA             1                1                 0.2
4-Methyl-2-pentanone                       U                 140        NA             NA             NA            NA          400                    400
Tetrachloroethene                          U                   86       NA                  5         NA             1                1                 04
Toluene                                    28                570        NA          1.000             NA            NA        1,000                  1,000
Chlorobenzene                          260                     23       NA            100             NA             4                5                      5
Ethylbenzene                               82                  57       NA            700             NA            NA          700                    700
Xylene (total)                          120                 290         NA     10.000                 NA            44            40                     40
Base/Neutral-Acid
ExtractaMes<po/f)
Phenol                                     U             3.100          NA             NA           3.500           NA        4,000                  4,000
1 ,2-Dichlorobenzene                   0.8 J                     U      NA            600             NA           600          600                    600
2.4- Dimethyl phenol                       20                    U      NA            NA              NA           NA           100                    100
Naphthalene                             130                 0.3 J       NA            NA              NA           NA             30                    NA

                                                * CIS -1,2 dlchloroethene                   70ug/l (MCL)
                                                trans - 1,2 dichloroethene                  100ug/l (MCL)                                            10 7/9209406 F9


                                                                                                            J

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                           Page 2 of 4

                                                               Table E-2
                              KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 FEASIBILITY STUDY
             COMPARISON OF MAXIMUM CONCENTRATIONS OF CONTAMINANTS IN GROUNDWATER
                       (SAND & GRAVEL) WITH CHEMICAL-SPECIFIC ARARs AND TBCs

                                                                                   ARARs                                     TBCs
                                  Operable Unit 2
                              Maximum Concentrations                  Federal                      State                     State

                                                                                                                    NJOEPE            NJDEPE
                                                                                        NJACStds                 Proposed GW
                                              Low-Lying         RCRA       SDWA           Class         SDWA        Cleanup            Quality
            Compound           Mound B          Area            StdsO)     MCLSW         GW2<»         MCIS<«>    Standard**         Standards**
Dimethyl phthalate                       u                1J        NA           NA          NA            NA        7.000              7.000
Acenaphthane                             10               U         NA           NA          NA            NA         400                 400
Diethylphthalate                         4J            2J           NA           NA          NA            NA        5.000              5.000
Fluor ene                                5J               U         NA           NA          NA            NA         30C                 300
n-NitrosodiphenylamineO >                U           0.3 J          NA           NA          NA            NA          20                  . 7
di-n-Butylphthalate                      4J            4J           NA           NA          NA            NA         900                 900
Pyrene                                   U                U         NA           NA          NA            NA         200                 200
Butylbenzylphthalate                 0.5 J           0.5 J          NA           NA          NA            NA         100                 100
bis<2-Ethythexyl) Phthalate        200 JB                 U         NA            6          NA            NA          30                    3
di-n-Octylphthalate                      U           0.5 J          NA           NA          NA            NA         100                 100
Fota/ Metals Ipg/C)
Aluminum                         60.200 EJ         26.300           NA         50-200        NA            NA          NA             50-200
Antimony                           53.7 BJ         52.1 B           NA            6          NA            NA          20                    2
Arsenic                              40.5                 15         50          50           50           NA            8               0.02
Barium                                978           1.620         1.000        2.000       1.000           NA        2.000              2.000
Beryllium                           4.2 B           44 B            NA            4          NA            NA          20               0.008
Cadmium                                  U          2.6 B            10            5          10           NA            4                   4

Chromium                            88.5 J          76.6 J           50         100           50           NA         100                 100

Copper                              260 B             178           NA         1300        1.000           NA          NA               1,000
Iron                              233000          112.000           NA     ^    300         300            NA          NA                 300

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              Table E-2
                           KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 FEASIBILITY STUDY
            COMPARISON OF MAXIMUM CONCENTRATIONS OF CONTAMINANTS IN GROUNDWATER
                      (SAND & GRAVEL) WITH CHEMICAL-SPECIFIC ARARs AND TBCs

                                                                                     ARARs                                     TBCs
                               Operable Unit 2
                           Maximum Concentrations                      Federal                       State                     State

                                                                                                                      NJDEPE           NJDEPE
                                                                                         NJACStds                  Proposed GW    Proposed GW
                                              Low-Lying         RCRA         SDWA          Class          SOWA        Cleanup        Quality
          Compound          Mound B             Area           StdiO)       MCLSW)        GW2<»          MCLS<«>    Standards'"    Standards*
Lead                            52.7 JN              32.8          50              50            50          NA           10                     5
Manganese                        6.670              3.650          NA              50            50          NA          NA                  50
Mercury                                U             0.21            2               2               2       NA            2                     2
Nickel                              109             90.1 j         NA        100               NA            NA          100               100
Selenium                        1.5 JBN          1.5 JBNW           10          50               10          NA           50                 50
Sodium                        2,260.000         4,000.000          NA              NA     50.000             NA          NA             50.000
Zinc                                230             438 J          NA            5,000       5,000           NA        5,000             5,000
Dissolved Metals (pg/f )
Aluminum                                  R        86.1 B          NA      50-200              NA            NA          NA            50-200
Antimony                          1,220            44.98           NA              NA          NA            NA           20                     2
Arsenic                               23             27.5          50              50           50           NA            8              0.02
Barium                              614             416 J        1,000           2.000       1,000           NA        2.000             2,000
Beryllium                         1.1 B                   U        NA              NA          NA            NA           20             0.008
Chromium                          3.9 B              968           50              10            10          NA          100               100
Copper                           18.4 B              6.9 B         NA              NA        1.000           NA          NA              1,000
Iron                           191,000            46.300 J         NA             300          300           NA          NA                300

Lead                                  4.8             4.6          50              50           50           NA           10                     5
Manganese                        6,670              3,260          NA              50           50           NA          NA                 50

Nickel                             92.2             3848           NA              NA          NA            NA         100                100

Selenium                               U           1.6 BN           10             50           10           NA          50                 50

                                                                                                                                        10.7/92 09406 f 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                Page 4 of 4

                                                                          Table E-2
                                   KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 FEASIBILITY STUDY
              COMPARISON OF MAXIMUM CONCENTRATIONS OF CONTAMINANTS IN GROUNDWATER
                                                                                                                                                              -0
                        (SAND & GRAVEL) WITH CHEMICAUSPECIFIC ARARs AND TBCs                                                                                  o


                                                                                            ARARs                                    TBCs
                                         Operable Unit 2
                                     Maximum Concentrations                     Federal                     State                    State
                                                                                                                            NJDEPE           NJDEPE
                                                                                                NJACStds                 Proposed GW     Proposed 6W
                                                       Low-Lying           RCRA       SOWA        Class         SOWA        Cleanup         Quality
           Compound                    Mound B           Area              Stdsd)     MCLSM      GW2U>          MCtS«>    Standards^      Standards*
 Sodium                                  2.320.000        3,610.000           MA           NA    50,000             NA         NA            50,000
  Zinc                                      80.1 EJ             66.4          NA       5.000        5,000           NA       5,000   .        5,000
  Other Inorganics (my/I)
 Ammonia-Nitrogen                              272                   15       MA           NA         0.5           NA         NA               0.5
 Nitrate-Nitrogen                             0.27              0.24          NA           10         10            NA         NA                10
 Total Dissolved Solids                      7.680           12,800           NA          500        500            NA         NA               500
                                                                                                Nat-Back.

Notes:
 NA No Standard Available
 (1) 40 CFR Part 264.94 (Table 1 - Maximum Concentration of Constituents for Groundwater Protection)
 (2) 40 CFR Part 141.11 (Maximum Contaminant Levels for Inorganic Chemicals), 40 CFR Part 141.12 (Maximum Contaminant Levels for Organic
     Chemicals). 40 CFR Part 141.61 (Maximum Contaminant Levels for Organic Contaminants), 40 CFR Part 141.62 (Maximum Contaminant Levels for
     Inorganic Contaminants), and 40 CFR Part 143.3 (Secondary Maximum Contaminant Levels)
 (3) N.J.A.C. Part 7:9-6.6-Ground water Quality Criteria
 (4) N.J. Safe Drinking Water Act "A-280 Amendments" (N.J.A.C Part 7:10-16.7 - Maximum contaminant levels (MCLs) for hazardous contaminants)
 (5) 24 NJ.R. 373 (a) Cleanup Standards for Contaminanted Sites -Proposed New Rules: NJ.A.C. 7:26 D.February 3.1992
 (6) 24 NJ.R. 193 (a) Groundwater Quality Standards - Proposed Repeal and New Rules: N.J.A.C. 7:9-6, January 21,1992
 (7) GW Standards f or 1.2*Dichloroethene are 10 ug/fcis-, 100 ug/ftrans-.
        U = Result less than instrument detection limit (IDL).
        B = Result between IDL and contract required detection limited (CRDL).
        N — Spiked sample recovery not within control limits
        W = Post-digest spike recovery furnace analysis was out of 85-115 percent control limit, while sample absorbance was less than 50 percent of
               spike absorbance
        £  «»
               Reported value was determined by the method of standard additions (MSA).
        j = Concentration is estimated.
         R SB Data rejected in accordance with validation criteria

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                       Page 1 of 4
                                                                                                                                     Table 3

                                                            Table E-3
                           KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 FEASIBILITY STUDY
 COMPARISON OF MAXIMUM CONCENTRATIONS OF CONTAMINANTS IN GROUNDWATER (BEDROCK)
                      WITH CHEMICAL-SPECIFIC ARARs AND TBCs

                                                                              ARARs                                       TBCs
                               Operable Unit 2
                           Maximum Concentrations                 Federal                  State                          State

                                                                                                                 NJDEPf           NJDEPE
                                                                                     NJACStds                 Proposed GW    Proposed GW
                                            Low-Lying        RCRA        SDWA          Class       SDWA         Cleanup         Quality
        Compound            Mound B           Area           StdsO)     MCLSO)        GW20)     Mas H)        Standards^)    Standards^)
Volatile Orpanks (uo/0
1 , 1 -Dichloroethane              u                1.3          NA            NA         NA          NA            70                70
1,1,1 -Trichtoroethane             u                1.3          NA           200         NA          26            30                30
Benzene                               1.3         0.25 J         NA              5        NA              1           1              0.2
Toluene                           0.3 J            0.7 J         NA          1.000        NA          NA          1,000            1.000
Tetrachloroethene                      U            1.6          NA              5        NA              1           1              0.4
Chlorobenzene                         1.2          1.7 J         NA           100         NA              4           5                5
Ethylbenzene                      1.1 J                 U        NA           700         NA          NA           700               700
Xylene (total)                     5.4              7.5          NA         10,000        NA          44            40                40
1 ,3-Dichlorobenzene              0.8 J                 U        NA            NA         NA         600           600              600
1 ,4-Dichlorobenzene              0.2 J            4.4 J         NA            75         NA          NA            70                75
1 ,2-Dichlorobenzene                   U           0.6 J         NA           600         NA         600           600              600
Trichlorobenzene                  0.7 J                 U        NA            70         NA              8          9                 9
(1.2.4-Trichlorobenzene)
Base/Neutral-Acid
CxtractabJes (pg/()
n-Nitrosodiphenylamine                4J                U        NA            NA         NA          NA            20                 7
di-n-Butylphthalate                   1J           0.9 J         NA            NA         NA          NA           900              900




                                                                                                                                    10 7/92 09406 f 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                 Page 2 of 4

                                                             Table E-3
                              KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 FEASIBILITY STUDY
 COMPARISON OF MAXIMUM CONCENTRATIONS OF CONTAMINANTS IN GROUNDWATER (BEDROCK)
                       WITH CHEMICAL-SPECIFIC ARARs AND TBCs                                                                                                   CO
                                                                                                                                                               O

                                                                                  ARARs                                     TBCs
                                  Operable Unit 2
                              Maximum Concentrations               Federal                      State                       State
                                                                                                                  NJDEPE            NJDEPE
                                                                                          NJACStds              Proposed GW    Proposed GW
                                              Low-Lying       RCRA        SOWA              Class       SDWA      Cleanup         Quality
          Compound             Mound B          Area          StdsO)      MCLS0)           GW20)     Mas <4>    Standards*!)    Standards**)
Pyrene .                                  U          0.1 J        NA              NA           NA          NA         200                  200
Butylbenzylphthalate                     2J          0.4 J        NA              NA           NA          NA         100                  100
bi&(2-Ethylhexyl) phthalate              U           788          NA              NA           NA          NA          30                        3
di-n-Octylphthalate                   22B            0.5 J        NA              NA           NA          NA         100                  100
Tot»IMetak fag/0
Aluminum                           41,200          24.500         NA      50-200               NA          NA         NA            50-200
Antimony                              326          36.78          NA              6            NA          NA          20                        2
Arsenic                                  21        68.9 S            50            50           50         NA           8                 0.02
Barium                                814           1.310       1,000        2,000           1,000         NA       2,000             2.000
Beryllium                            2.3 B          2.38          NA          4                NA          NA          20             0.008
Cadmium                                  U          4.58             10               5         10         NA           4             •          4
Chromium                              906            60.5            50           "10           50         NA         100                  100
Copper                                116            58.5         NA              NA         1,000         NA         NA              1,000
Iron                               52,100          31.000         NA           300             300         NA         NA                   300
Lead                               20.3 NJ          14 NJ            50            50           50         NA          10                        5
Manganese                           2.350           4,960         NA               50           50         NA         NA                    50
Nickel                                432             130         NA         100               NA          NA        100                   100
Sodium                           2,480,000      3,060,000         NA              NA        50,000         NA         NA            50,000

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                               Page 3 of 4

                                                             Table E-3
                          KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 FEASIBILITY STUDY
 COMPARISON OF MAXIMUM CONCENTRATIONS OF CONTAMINANTS IN GROUNDWATER (BEDROCK)
                       WITH CHEMICAL-SPECIFIC ARARs AND TBCs

                                                                                 ARARs                                       TBCs
                              Operable Unit 2
                          Maximum Concentrations                   Federal                         State                     State

                                                                                                                    NJDEPE           NJDEPE
                                                                                       NIACStds                  Proposed GW    Proposed GW
                                              Low-Lying       RCRA          SOWA         Class          SDWA        Cleanup        Quality
          Compound         Mound B              Area          StdsW         Mas (2)     GW2(3)         MCLS<«>   Standards(S)   Standards'*)
Zinc                                208              98.6          NA          5.000      5,000             NA       5.000             5.000
Dissolved Metafc fag/ft
Aluminum                                  U         37.2 B         MA       50-200            NA            NA         NA            50-200
Antimony                         36.SB             45.8 B          NA            NA           NA            NA          20                     2
Arsenic                            1.6 B             49.4           50           50            50           NA           8              0.02
Barium                              425              797 J      1.000          2.000       1,000            NA       2,000             2,000
Cadmium                                 2U            2U            10             5           10           NA           4                     4
Chromium                                3U          4.6 BJ          50            10           50           NA         100               100
Copper                            3.5 B             15.8 B         NA            NA       1,000             NA         NA              1,000
Iron                           12,300 J            16.400          NA           300          300            NA         NA                300
Lead                           1 UNWJ               5 UNJ           50           50            50           NA          10                     5
Manganese                       2,120     J         4.590          NA            50            50           NA         NA                  50
Mercury                        0.2 UNJ              0.2 U               2          2               2        NA           2                     2
Nickel                            277 J              92.7          NA            NA           NA            NA         100               100
Sodium                      2,400,000 J       3,210,000 JE        NA             NA      50,000             NA         NA             50,000
Zinc                             15.4 B             42.8 J        NA           5,000      5.000             NA       5,000             5.000
Other Inorganics fmg/l)
Ammonia-Nitrogen                   17.3              70.1         NA             NA           0.5           NA         NA                0.5




                                                                                                                                        10.7/92 09406.F9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                            Page 4 of 4

                                                                    Table E-3
                                 KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 FEASIBILITY STUDY
   COMPARISON OF MAXIMUM CONCENTRATIONS OF CONTAMINANTS IN GROUNDWATER (BEDROCK)
                         WITH CHEMICAL-SPECIFIC ARARs AND TBCs

                                                                                       ARARs                                    TBCs
                                      Operable Unit 2
                                  Maximum Concentrations                   Federal                   State                      State

                                                                                                                       NJDEPE           NJDEPE
                                                                                             NJACStds               Proposed GW     Proposed GW
                                                     Low-Lying       RCRA        SDWA          Class       SDWA        Cleanup         Quality
          Compound                  Mound B            Area          StdstD      MCLStt)      GW2<*>      MCLS<«)   Standards!*)    Standards^)
  Nitrate-Nitrogen                           0.1             0.21          MA           10          10         NA          NA               10
  Total Dissolved Solids                  8,500            12.500          NA          NA          500         NA          NA              500
                                                                                             Nat. Back.


Motes:
  NA No Standard Available
  (1) 40 CFR Part 264.94 (Table 1 - Maximum Concentration of Constituents for Groundwater Protection)
  (2) 40 CFR Part 141.11 (Maximum Contaminant Levels for Inorganic Chemicals), 40 CFR Part 141.12 (Maximum Contaminant Levels for Organic
      Chemicals), 40 CFR Part 141.61 (Maximum Contaminant Levels for Organic Contaminants), 40 CFR Part141.62 (Maximum Contaminant Levels for
      Inorganic Contaminants), and 40 CFR Pan 143.3 (Secondary Maximum Contaminant Levels)
  (3) N J.A.C. Part 7:9-6.6 - Groundwater Quality Criteria
  (4) N.J. Safe Drinking Water Act 'A-280 Amendments" (N J.A.C. Part 7:10-16.7 - Maximum contaminant levels (MCLs) for hazardous contaminants)
  (5) 24 NJ.R. 373 (a) Cleanup Standards for Contaminated Sites -Proposed New Rules: N J.A.C. 7:26D. February 3,1992
  (6) 24 N J.R. 193 (a) Groundwater Quality Standards - Proposed Repeal and New Rules: N.J.A.C. 7:9-6, January 21,1992
              Result less than instrument detection limit (IDL).
             Result between IDL and contract required detection limited (CRDL).
             Spiked sample recovery not within control limits
             Post-digest spike recovery furnace analysis was out of 85-115 percent control limit, while sample absorbance was less than 50 percent of
             spike absorbance
              Reported value was determined by the method of standard additions (MSA).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Page 1 of 16


                                                                             Table 4
                                                      KIN-BUG OPERABLE UNIT 2 RI/FS
                                                  SUMMARY OF SEDIMENT PCB AND ORGANIC
                                                CARBON DATA, NORMALIZED DATA AND CRITERIA

LOCATION                                  M12C       M13C       M12S       M12N      M13N       M13S       MIC        M2C        M3C     MIS

TOTAL PCBs(ug/g)                               U       3.51      0.84       2.87       1.92      0.77          U         U           U       U
Total Organic Carbon (%)*                  8.00%      7.32%     6.73%      6.95%      7.85%     8.00%      6.96%     8.00%       7.18%   8.00%
NORMALIZED PCBs (ug/gOC)* •                    U         48        12         41         24        10          U         U           U       U

LOCATION-SPECIFIC FRESHWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS""
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.31       0.28      0.26       0.27       0.30      0.31       0.27      0.31       0.28    0.31
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)         1.6        1.4       1.3        1.4        1.5       1.6        1.4       1.6        1.4     1.6
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)        8.0        7.3       6.7        6.9        7.8       8.0        7.0       8.0        7.2     8.0

LOCATION-SPECIFIC SALTWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS'"
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.66       0.61      0.56       0.58       0.65      0.66       0.58      0.66       0.60    0.66
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)         3.3        3.1       2.8        2.9        3.3       3.3        2.9       3.3        3.0     3.3
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)         17         16        14         15         17        17         15        17         15      17
                                        Notes
                                             * - Total Organic Carbon (OC) values reported as >8%
                                                 are considered to be 8%
                                           * * - Total PCBs (ug/g) x Fraction OC = Normalized PCB concentration
                                                  (compare with established freshwater or saltwater criteria shown in Table 2)
                                         " *' - Criterion (ug PCBs/gOC) x Fraction OC = Total PCB equivalent
                                                  (compare with total PCBs at each location)

                                             Source: All data from Draft Final Remedial Investigation
                                             Report for Kin-Buc Landfill Operable Unit 2 (October 1990,
                                             revised May 1991) and Draft Supplemental Sediment
                                             Sampling Program for the Edmonds Creek/Marsh Area,
                                             Kin-Buc Landfill Site Operable Unit 2 (April 1991)

                                             Units: ug/g - mg/kg « parts     \million (ppm)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Page 2 of 16


                                                                 Table 1
                                                      KIN-BUG OPERABLE UNIT 2 RI/FS
                                                  SUMMARY OF SEDIMENT PCB AND ORGANIC
                                                CARBON DATA. NORMALIZED DATA AND CRITERIA

LOCATION                                   M1N        M2S       M2N        M3N        M3S       M4C        M5C        M6C        M4N     M4S

TOTAL PCBs (ug/g)                             U       1.63    0.69         1.34          1       0.94       4.6          U           U    0.89
Total Organic Carbon (%)*                 8.00%      8.00% 0.0122%        5.02%      6.30%      8.00%     8.00%      6.96%       8.00%   8.00%
NORMALIZED PCBs (ug/gOC)' *                   U         20    5656           27         16         12        58          U           U      11

LOCATION-SPECIFIC FRESHWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS' * *
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)      0.31       0.31    0.0005       0.19       0.24       0.31      0.31       0.27       0.31    0.31
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)        1.6        1.6     0.002        1.0        1.2        1.6       1.6        1.4        1.6     1.6
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)       8.0        8.0       0.01       5.0        6.3        8.0       8.0        7.0        8.0     8.0

LOCATION-SPECIFIC SALTWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS* * *
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)      0.66       0.66      0.001       0.42      0.52       0.66      0.66       0.58       0.66    0.66
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)        3.3        3.3       0.01        2.1       2.6        3.3       3.3        2.9        3.3     3.3
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)        17         17       0.03         11        13         17        17         15         17      17
                                        Notes
                                           ' - Total Organic Carbon (OC) values reported as >8%
                                                 are considered to be 8%
                                           '" - Total PCBs (ug/g) x Fraction OC = Normalized PCB concentration
                                                  (compare with established freshwater or saltwater criteria shown in Table 2)
                                         • • • - Criterion (ug PCBs/gOC) x Fraction OC = Total PCB equivalent
                                                  (compare with total PCBs at each location)

                                            Source: All data from Draft Final Remedial Investigation
                                            Report for Kin-Buc Landfill Operable Unit 2 (October 1990,
                                            revised May 1991) and Draft Supplemental Sediment
                                            Sampling Program for the Edmonds Creek/Marsh Area,
                                            Kin-Buc Landfill Site Operable Unit 2 (April 1991)

                                            Units: ug/g - mg/kg - parts      )miliion (pom)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Page 3 of 16


                                                                         Table 1
                                                      KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 RI/FS
                                                  SUMMARY OF SEDIMENT PCB AND ORGANIC
                                                CARBON DATA, NORMALIZED DATA AND CRITERIA

LOCATION                                    MSN        M5S       M6N        M6S        M7C        M8C      M9C       M10C        M11C     M7N

TOTAL PCBs (ug/g)                           0.84        1.16     2.97        1.11         U           12     1.49      11.3           U    3.46
Total Organic Carbon (%)*                  8.00%      8.00%     8.00%      8.00%     0.231%       4.76%    8.00%     8.00%       0.372%   8.00%
NORMALIZED PCBs (ug/gOQ* *                     11          15       37          14        U         252         19      141           U       43

LOCATION-SPECIFIC FRESHWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS* *•
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.31       0.31      0.31       0.31       0.01        0.18     0.31      0.31        0.01     0.31
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)          1.6        1.6       1.6        1.6             0    0.93       1.6       1.6       0.07       1.6
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)         8.0        8.0       8.0        8.0      0.23          4.8      8.0       8.0       0.37       8.0

LOCATION-SPECIFIC SALTWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS* "
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.66       0.66      0.66       0.66       0.02        0.39     0.66      0.66        0.03     0.66
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)          3.3        3.3       3.3        3.3      0.10          2.0      3.3       3.3       0.16       3.3
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)          17         17        17         17      0.49           10       17        17       0.80        17
                                        Notes
                                             * - Total Organic Carbon (OC) values reported as >8%
                                                 are considered to be 8%
                                           * * - Total PCBs (ug/g) x Fraction OC = Normalized PCB concentration
                                                  (compare with established freshwater or saltwater criteria shown in Table 2)
                                         * • * - Criterion (ug PCBs/gOC) x Fraction OC = Total PCB equivalent
                                                  (compare with total PCBs at each location)

                                             Source: All data from Draft Final Remedial Investigation
                                             Report for Kin-Buc Landfill Operable Unit 2 (October 1990,
                                             revised May 1991) and Draft Supplemental Sediment
                                             Sampling Program for the Edmonds Creek/Marsh Area,
                                             Kin-Buc Landfill Site Operable Unit 2 (April 1991)

                                             Units: ug/g « mg/kg « parts     ^million (ppm)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Page 4 of 16


                                                                        Table 1
                                                      KIN-BUG OPERABLE UNIT 2 RI/FS
                                                  SUMMARY OF SEDIMENT PCB AND ORGANIC
                                                CARBON DATA, NORMALIZED DATA AND CRITERIA

LOCATION                                    M7S       MSN        M8S        M9N       M9S       M10N      M10S      M11N         M11S      M21C

TOTAL PCBs (ug/g)                             24        4.8      0.58       0.33        2.1         U        81          U            U     17.3
Total Organic Carbon (%)*                  7.04%      6.46%     8.00%      8.00%      8.00%     8.00%     6.60%      0.25%       0.282%    1.88%
NORMALIZED PCBs (ug/gOC)"                    341         74       7.3        4.1         26         U     1227           U            U     920

LOCATION-SPECIFIC FRESHWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS' '•
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.27       0.25      0.31       0.31       0.31      0.31      0.26       0.01        0.01      0.07
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)         1.4        1.3       1.6        1.6        1.6       1.6       1.3       0.05        0.05      0.37
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)        7.0        6.5       8.0        8.0        8.0       8.0       6.6       0.25        0.28       1.9

LOCATION-SPECIFIC SALTWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS* * *
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.58       0.54      0.66       0.66       0.66      0.66      0.55       0.02        0.02 I    0.16
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)         2.9        2.7       3.3        3.3        3.3       3.3       2.8       0.10        0.12      0.79
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)         15         14        17         17         17        17        14       0.54        0.60       4.0
                                        Notes
                                             * - Total Organic Carbon (OC) values reported as >6%
                                                 are considered to be 8%
                                           • * - Total PCBs (ug/g) x Fraction OC = Normalized PCB concentration
                                                  (compare with established freshwater or saltwater criteria shown in Table 2)
                                         * • • - Criterion (ug PCBs/gOC) x Fraction OC = Total PCB equivalent
                                                  (compare with total PCBs at each location)

                                             Source: All data from Draft Final Remedial Investigation
                                             Report for Kin-Buc Landfill Operable Unit 2 (October 1990,
                                             revised May 1991) and Draft Supplemental Sediment
                                             Sampling Program for the Edmonds Creek/Marsh Area,
                                             Kin-Buc Landfill Site Operable Unit 2 (April 1991)

                                             Units: ug/g « mg/kg - parts    ) million (ppm)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Page 5 of 16


                                                                           Table 1
                                                      KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 RI/FS
                                                  SUMMARY OF SEDIMENT PCB AND ORGANIC
                                                CARBON DATA, NORMALIZED DATA AND CRITERIA

LOCATION                                  M22C       M23C       M15C        M16C       M17C      M18C      M19C      M20C         M21E     M21W

TOTAL PCBs(ug/g)                            0.44        0.31      4.36         1.71      29.7         U     0.51       2.54        2.88     3.48
Total Organic Carbon (%)'                  2.98%      8.00%      2.54%       3.33%      3.44%    3.52%     2.80%      4.35%       5.70%    5.00%
NORMAUZED PCBs (ug/gOC)"                       15         3.9       172           51       863        U        18         58          51       70

LOCATION-SPECIFIC FRESHWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS' " •
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.12       0.31       0.10        0.13       0.13     0.14      0.11       0.17        0.22     0.19
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)        0.58         1.6      0.50        0.65       0.67     0.69      0.55       0.85          1.1      1.0
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)         3.0        8.0        2.5         3.3        3.4      3.5       2.8        4.3         5.7      5.0

LOCATION-SPECIFIC SALTWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS* * *
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.25       0.66       0.21        0.28       0.29     0.29      0.23       0.36        0.47     0.41
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)          1.2        3.3        1.1         1.4        1.4      1.5       1.2        1.8         2.4      2.1
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)         6.4         17        5.4         7.1        7.4      7.5       6.0        9.3          12       11
                                        Notes
                                              * - Total Organic Carbon (OC) values reported as >8%
                                                  are considered to be 8%
                                            * * - Total PCBs (ug/g) x Fraction OC = Normalized PCB concentration
                                                   (compare with established freshwater or saltwater criteria shown in Table 2)
                                        ' • • • - Criterion (ug PCBs/gOC) x Fraction OC = Total PCB equivalent
                                                   (compare with total PCBs at each location)

                                             Source: All data from Draft Final Remedial Investigation
                                             Report for Kin-Buc Landfill Operable Unit 2 (October 1990,
                                             revised May 1991) and Draft Supplemental Sediment
                                             Sampling Program for the Edmonds Creek/Marsh Area,
                                             Kin-Buc Landfill Site Operable Unit 2 (April 1991)

                                             Units: ug/g - mg/kg • part'     j million (ppm)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Page 6 of 16


                                                                 Table 1
                                                      KIN-BUG OPERABLE UNIT 2 RI/FS
                                                  SUMMARY OF SEDIMENT PCB AND ORGANIC
                                                CARBON DATA, NORMALIZED DATA AND CRITERIA

LOCATION                                  M22E       M22W       M23E       M23W       M15E     M15W       M16E      M16W         M17E     M17W

TOTAL PCBs (ug/g)                             2.5      0.24        1.7       1.42        4.7      106       1.36        9.9         4.7       1.3
Total Organic Carbon (%)'                  6.52%      6.91%     7.34%      6.02%      5.56%     8.00%     4.20%      4.64%       3.32%     5.67%
NORMALIZED PCBs (ug/gOC)"                      38        3.5        23          24        85     1325          32      213          142        23

LOCATION-SPECIFIC FRESHWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS'"
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.25       0.27      0.28       0.23       0.22      0.31       0.16      0.18        0.13      0.22
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)          1.3        1.3       1.4        1.2        1.1       1.6      0.82      0.90        0.65        1.1
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)         6.5        6.9       7.3        6.0        5.6       8.0        4.2       4.6         3.3       5.7

LOCATION-SPECIFIC SALTWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS* •'
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.54       0.57      0.61       0.50       0.46      0.66       0.35      0.38        0.28      0.47
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)          2.7        2.9       3.1        2.5        2.3       3.3        1.8       1.9         1.4       2.4
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)          14         15        16         13         12        17        9.0        10         7.1        12
                                        Notes
                                             * - Total Organic Carbon (OC) values reported as >8%
                                                 are considered to be 8%
                                           * * - Total PCBs (ug/g) x Fraction OC = Normalized PCB concentration
                                                  (compare with established freshwater or saltwater criteria shown in Table 2)
                                         ."' - Criterion (ug PCBs/gOC) x Fraction OC = Total PCB equivalent
                                                  (compare with total PCBs at each location)

                                             Source: All data from Draft Final Remedial Investigation
                                             Report for Kin-Buc Landfill Operable Unit 2 (October 1990,
                                             revised May 1991) and Draft Supplemental Sediment
                                             Sampling Program for the Edmonds Creek/Marsh Area,
                                             Kin-Buc Landfill Site Operable Unit 2 (April 1991)

                                             Units: ug/g - mg/kg - parts     )million (ppm)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Page 7 of 16


                                                                 Table 1
                                                      KIN-BUG OPERABLE UNIT 2 RI/FS
                                                   SUMMARY OF SEDIMENT PCB AND ORGANIC
                                                 CARBON DATA, NORMALIZED DATA AND CRITERIA

LOCATION                                  M18E       M18W       M19E      M19W        M20E      M20W       SD-6       SD-7        SD-8    SD-9

TOTAL PCBs (ug/g)                           1.55        4.2       0.43       5.3       0.54       0.29       1.9          U           U        U
Total Organic Carbon (%)*                  6.04%      5.82%      5.48%     3.66%      4.80%      1.76%     1.86%      2.30%       2.16%   0.895%
NORMALIZED PCBs (ug/gOQ* *                    26         72        7.8       145         11         16       102          U           U        U

LOCATION-SPECIFIC FRESHWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS* * *
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.23       0.23       0.21      0.14       0.19       0.07      0.07       0.09       0.08     0.03
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)         1.2        1.1        1.1      0.71       0.94       0.34      0.36       0.45       0.42     0.17
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)        6.0        5.8        5.5       3.7        4.8        1.8       1.9        2.3        2.2     0.89

LOCATION-SPECIFIC SALTWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS***
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.50       0.48       0.45      0.30       0.40       0.15      0.15       0.19       0.18     0.07
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)         2.5        2.4        2.3       1.5        2.0       0.74      0.78       0.96       0.90     0.37
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)         13         12         12       7.8         10        3.8       4.0        4.9        4.6      1.9
                                        Notes
                                             * - Total Organic Carbon (OC) values reported as >8%
                                                  are considered to be 8%
                                           * * - Total PCBs (ug/g) x Fraction OC = Normalized PCB concentration
                                                   (compare with established freshwater or saltwater criteria shown in Table 2)
                                         * * * - Criterion (ug PCBs/gOC) x Fraction OC = Total PCB equivalent
                                                   (compare with total PCBs at each location)

                                             Source: All data from Draft Final Remedial Investigation
                                             Report for Kin-Buc Landfill Operable Unit 2 (October 1990.
                                             revised May 1991) and Draft Supplemental Sediment
                                             Sampling Program for the Edmonds Creek/Marsh Area,
                                             Kin-Buc Landfill Site Operable Unit 2 (April 1991)

                                             Units: ug/g » mg/kg » pans,      Villion (ppm)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Page 8 of 16


                                                                         Table 1
                                                       KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 RI/FS
                                                     SUMMARY OF SEDIMENT PCB AND ORGANIC
                                                   CARBON DATA, NORMALIZED DATA AND CRITERIA

LOCATION                                 SO- 10      SO-11       RR1        RR3       RR4        RR5       RR6        RR7         RR8     M24C

TOTAL PCBs(ug/g)                               U          U         U       1.27         U          U         U        3.3        0.57      4.1
Total Organic Carbon (%)•                 0.634%     0.386%     8.00%      3.94%     2.02%      2.22%     2.02%      1.95%       2.53%    0.88%
NORMALIZED PCBs (ug/gOC)* •                    U          U         U          32        U          U         U        169           23     466

LOCATION-SPECIFIC FRESHWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS' * •
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.02       0.01      0.31       0.15      0.08       0.09      0.08       0.08        0.10     0.03
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)        0.12       0.08        1.6      0.77      0.39       0.43      0.39       0.38        0.49     0.17
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.63       0.39        8.0        3.9       2.0        2.2       2.0        1.9         2.5    0.88

LOCATION-SPECIFIC SALTWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS* * *
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.05       0.03      0.66       0.33       0.17      0.18       0.17      0.16        0.21     0.07
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)        0.27       0.16        3.3        1.6      0.84      0.93       0.84      0.82        1.06     0.37
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)         1.4      0.83         17        8.4        4.3       4.8        4.3       4.2         5.4     1.9
                                        Notes
                                             * - Total Organic Carbon (OC) values reported as >8%
                                                 are considered to be 8%
                                           * * - Total PCBs (ug/g) x Fraction OC = Normalized PCB concentration
                                                  (compare with established freshwater or saltwater criteria shown in Table 2)
                                         * * * - Criterion (ug PCBs/gOC) x Fraction OC = Total PCB equivalent
                                                  (compare with total PCBs at each location)

                                             Source: All data from Draft Final Remedial Investigation
                                             Report for Kin-Buc Landfill Operable Unit 2 (October 1990,
                                             revised May 1991) and Draft Supplemental Sediment
                                             Sampling Program for the Edmonds Creek/Marsh Area,
                                             Kin-Buc Landfill Site Operable Unit 2 (April 1991)

                                             Units: ug/g - mg/kg » partr    T million (ppm)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Page 9 of 16


                                                                         Table 1
                                                      KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 RI/FS
                                                  SUMMARY OF SEDIMENT PCB AND ORGANIC
                                                CARBON DATA. NORMALIZED DATA AND CRITERIA

LOCATION                                  M24N       M24S     PC-01      PC-02      PC-03      PC-04     PC-05     PC-06         PC-07    PC-08

TOTAL PCBs (ug/g)                             28       2.4        2.2        290      12.4        560      3.42        730         11.1     2.26
Total Organic Cartoon (%)"                 8.00%     4.08%      7.14%      8.00%     8.00%      2.80%     8.00%      8.00%        8.00%    8.00%
NORMALIZED PCBs (ug/gOC)* •                  350        59         31      3625        155     20000         43      9125           139       28

LOCATION-SPECIFIC FRESHWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS* • *
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)      0.31       0.16       0.28       0.31      0.31       0.11      0.31       0.31        0.31     0.31
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)         1.6      0.80         1.4       1.6        1.6      0.55       1.6         1.6         1.6     1.6
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)       8.0        4.1        7.1        8.0       8.0        2.8       8.0        8.0         8.0      8.0

LOCATION-SPECIFIC SALTWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS"*
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.66      0.34       0.59       0.66      0.66       0.23      0.66       0.66        0.66     0.66
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)         3.3       1.7        3.0        3.3       3.3        1.2       3.3        3.3         3.3      3.3
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)         17       8.7         15         17        17        6.0        17         17          17       17
                                        Notes
                                           * - Total Organic Carbon (OC) values reported as >8%
                                               are considered to be 8%
                                           *' - Total PCBs (ug/g) x Fraction OC = Normalized PCB concentration
                                                  (compare with established freshwater or saltwater criteria shown in Table 2)
                                         * * * - Criterion (ug PCBs/gOC) x Fraction OC = Total PCB equivalent
                                                  (compare with total PCBs at each location)

                                            Source: All data from Draft Final Remedial Investigation
                                            Report for Kin-Buc Landfill Operable Unit 2 (October 1990,
                                            revised May 1991) and Draft Supplemental Sediment
                                            Sampling Program for the Edmonds Creek/Marsh Area,
                                            Kin-Buc Landfill Site Operable Unit 2 (April 1991)

                                            Units: ug/g - mg/kg • parts      ) million (ppm)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Page 10 of 16


                                                                         Table 1
                                                      KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 RI/FS
                                                  SUMMARY OF SEDIMENT PCB AND ORGANIC
                                                CARBON DATA, NORMALIZED DATA AND CRITERIA

LOCATION                                 PC-09      PC-10      SD-12      SD-13       M25C       CD1       CD2        CD3        UD1     UD2

TOTAL PCBs(ug/g)                            1.65        100       0.22        0.9        300        U          U         U           U       U
Total Organic Carbon (%)*                  8.00%      8.00%      5.08%      1.24%      3.98%    3.26%      3.36%     3.32%       1.24%   1.84%
NORMALIZED PCBs (ug/gOC)* *                   21      1250         4.3         73      7538         U          U         U           U       U

LOCATION-SPECIFIC FRESHWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS* ••
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.31       0.31       0.20       0.05       0.15     0.13      0.13       0.13       0.05    0.07
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)         1.6        1.6        1.0       0.24       0.78     0.64      0.66       0.65       0.24    0.36
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)        8.0        8.0        5.1        1.2        4.0      3.3       3.4        3.3        1.2     1.8

LOCATION-SPECIFIC SALTWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS* **
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.66       0.66       0.42       0.10       0.33     0.27       0.28      0.28       0.10    0.15
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)         3.3        3.3        2.1       0.52        1.7      1.4        1.4       1.4       0.52    0.77
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)         17         17         11        2.7        8.5      7.0        7.2       7.1        2.7     3.9
                                        Notes
                                             • - Total Organic Carbon (OC) values reported as >8%
                                                 are considered to be 8%
                                           * * - Total PCBs (ug/g) x Fraction OC = Normalized PCB concentration
                                                  (compare with established freshwater or saltwater criteria shown in Table 2)
                                         ' * * - Criterion (ug PCBs/gOC) x Fraction OC = Total PCB equivalent
                                                  (compare with total PCBs at each location)

                                             Source: All data from Draft Final Remedial Investigation
                                             Report for Kin-Buc Landfill Operable Unit 2 (October 1990,
                                             revised May 1991) and Draft Supplemental Sediment
                                             Sampling Program for the Edmonds Creek/Marsh Area,
                                             Kin-Buc Landfill Site Operable Unit 2 (April 1991)

                                             Units: ug/g « mg/kg <i parts n*»c million (ppm)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Page 11 of 16


                                                                 Table 1
                                                      KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 RI/FS
                                                    SUMMARY OF SEDIMENT PCB AND ORGANIC
                                                  CARBON DATA, NORMALIZED DATA AND CRITERIA

LOCATION                                   SO-1      SO-2       SO-3        SD-4     SD-5        RR9      RR10      SD-1-1 SD-1-2 SD-1-3

TOTAL PCBs (ug/g)                              U          U         U          U     0.096          U          U      0.13        0.27        U
Total Organic Carbon (%)*                  2.70%      2.81%    0.251%     0.231%     2.66%      4.55%      5.06%     8.00%       8.00%    8.00%
NORMALIZED PCBs (ug/gOC)" *                    U          U         U          U        3.6         U          U        1.6         3.4       U

LOCATION-SPECIFIC FRESHWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS* * *
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.10       0.11      0.01       0.01       0.10      0.18       0.20      0.31        0.31    0.31
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)        0.53       0.55      0.05       0.05       0.52      0.89         1.0       1.6         1.6     1.6
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)        2.7         2.8     0.25       0.23         2.7      4.5         5.1      8.0          8.0     8.0

LOCATION-SPECIFIC SALTWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS" • *
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.22       0.23      0.02       0.02       0.22      0.38       0.42      0.66        0.66    0.66
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)          1.1        1.2     0.10       0.10         1.1       1.9       2.1       3.3          3.3    3.3
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)        5.8        6.0        0.5      0.49        5.7         10         11        17          17      17
                                        Notes
                                             * - Total Organic Carbon (OC) values reported as >8%
                                                 are considered to be 8%
                                           * * - Total PCBs (ug/g) x Fraction OC = Normalized PCB concentration
                                                  (compare with established freshwater or saltwater criteria shown in Table 2)
                                         * * * - Criterion (ug PCBs/gOC) x Fraction OC = Total PCB equivalent
                                                  (compare with total PCBs at each location)

                                             Source: All data from Draft Final Remedial Investigation
                                             Report for Kin-Buc Landfill Operable Unit 2 (October 1990,
                                             revised May 1991) and Draft Supplemental Sediment
                                             Sampling Program for the Edmonds Creek/Marsh Area,
                                             Kin-Buc Landfill Site Operable Unit 2 (April 1991)

                                             Units: ug/g • mg/kg - partsr    million (pom)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Page 12 0116


                                                                         Table 1
                                                      KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 RI/FS
                                                  SUMMARY OF SEDIMENT PCB AND ORGANIC
                                                CARBON DATA. NORMALIZED DATA AND CRITERIA

LOCATION                                SD-1-4 SD-1-5 SO- 1-6 SD-1-7 SD-1-8 SD-1-9 SD-1-10 SD-2A-1 SD-2A-2

TOTAL PCBs (ug/g)                           0.25       0.29        0.2         U       0.37      0.43          0.2      0.37      0.76
Total Organic Carbon (%)'                  8.00%      8.00%     4.94%      8.00%     5.995%     8.00%       8.00%      8.00%     8.00%
NORMALIZED PCBs (ug/gOC)a *                   3.1        3.6       4.0         U         6.2       5.4         2.5        4.6        10

LOCATION-SPECIFIC FRESHWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS* * *
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.31       0.31      0.19        0.31      0.23      0.31        0.31       0.31      0.31
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)          1.6        1.6       1.0         1.6       1.2       1.6         1.6        1.6       1.6
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)         8.0        8.0       4.9         8.0       6.0      8.0          8.0        8.0       8.0

LOCATION-SPECIFIC SALTWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS* ••
         Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)         0.66       0.66      0.41        0.66       0.50     0.66        0.66       0.66      0.66
          Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)           3.3        3.3      2.1          3.3        2.5     3.3          3.3        3.3       3.3
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)          17         17       11           17         13       17          17         17        17
                                        Notes
                                             * - Total Organic Carbon (OC) values reported as >8%
                                                 are considered to be 8%
                                           ' * - Total PCBs (ug/g) x Fraction OC = Normalized PCB concentration
                                                  (compare with established freshwater or saltwater criteria shown in Table 2)
                                         ' * * - Criterion (ug PCBs/gOC) x Fraction OC = Total PCB equivalent
                                                  (compare with total PCBs at each location)

                                             Source: All data from Draft Final Remedial Investigation
                                             Report for Kin-Buc Landfill Operable Unit 2 (October 1990,
                                             revised May 1991) and Draft Supplemental Sediment
                                             Sampling Program for the Edmonds Creek/Marsh Area,
                                             Kin-Buc Landfill Site Operable Unit 2 (April 1991)

                                             Units: ug/g » mg/kg » parts p     pillion (ppm)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Page 13 of 16


                                                                              Table 1
                                                           KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 RI/FS
                                                       SUMMARY OF SEDIMENT PCB AND ORGANIC
                                                     CARBON DATA, NORMALIZED DATA AND CRITERIA

LOCATION                                SD-2A-3 SD-2A-4 SD-2A-5 SD-2A-6 SD-2A-7 SD-2A-8 SD-2A-9 A-9DUP SD-2B-1

TOTAL PCBs (ug/g)                            0.32        0.41        0.72          0.24          0.28      0.35     0.57          2.19    0.044
Total Organic Carbon (%)'                   8.00%       8.00%       8.00%         8.00%        6.915%    7.656%    8.00%         8.00%    8.00%
NORMALIZED PCBs (ug/gOC)' *                    4.0         5.1         9.0           3.0           4.0       4.6      7.1            27      0.6

LOCATION-SPECIFIC FRESHWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS* • •
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)        0.31        0.31        0.31          0.31          0.27      0.30     0.31          0.31     0.31
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)           1.6         1.6         1.6           1.6           1.3       1.5      1.6           1.6      1.6
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)          8.0         8.0         8.0           8.0           6.9       7.6      8.0           8.0      8.0

LOCATION-SPECIFIC SALTWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS*"
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)        0.66        0.66        0.66          0.66          0.57      0.63     0.66          0.66     0.66
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)           3.3         3.3         3.3           3.3           2.9       3.2      3.3           3.3      3.3
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)           17          17          17            17            15        16       17            17       17
                                        Notes
                                             • - Total Organic Carbon (OC) values reported as >8%
                                                 are considered to be 8%
                                           * * - Total PCBs (ug/g) x Fraction OC = Normalized PCB concentration
                                                  (compare with established freshwater or saltwater criteria shown in Table 2)
                                         ' • * - Criterion (ug PCBs/gOC) x Fraction OC = Total PCB equivalent
                                                  (compare with total PCBs at each location)

                                             Source: All data from Draft Final Remedial Investigation
                                             Report for Kin-Buc Landfill Operable Unit 2 (October 1990,
                                             revised May 1991) and Draft Supplemental Sediment
                                             Sampling Program for the Edmonds Creek/Marsh Area,
                                             Kin-Buc Landfill Site Operable Unit 2 (April 1991)

                                             Units: ug/g « mg/kg - part      j million (ppm)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Page 14 of 16


                                                                      Table 1
                                                           KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 RI/FS
                                                       SUMMARY OF SEDIMENT PCB AND ORGANIC '
                                                     CARBON DATA, NORMALIZED DATA AND CRITERIA

LOCATION                                SD-2B-2 SD-2B-3 SO-2B-4 SD-2B-5 SD-2B-6 SD-2B-7 SO-2B-8 SO-2B-9 SD-2B-10

TOTAL PCBs (ug/g)                            1.58        0.34          2.7         0.08          0.48   0.097       0.25         0.133     0.86
Total Organic Carbon (%)*                   8.00%       6.65%       8.00%         8.00%         4.91%   8.00%      8.00%         8.00%    8.00%
NORMALIZED PCBs (ug/gOC)' *                    20         5.1           34           1.0           10      1.2        3.1           1.7      11

LOCATION-SPECIFIC FRESHWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS' • •
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)        0.31        0.26        0.31          0.31         0.19     0.31       0.31          0.31    0.31
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)          1.6          1.3         1.6           1.6          1.0      1.6        1.6           1.6     1.6
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)         8.0         6.6         8.0           8.0          4.9      8.0        8.0           8.0     8.0

LOCATION-SPECIFIC SALTWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS' •"
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)        0.66        0.55        0.66          0.66         0.41     0.66       0.66          0.66    0.66
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)          3.3         2.8         3.3           3.3          2.1      3.3        3.3           3.3     3.3
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)          17          14          17            17           11       17         17            17      17
                                        Notes
                                             * - Total Organic Carbon (OC) values reported as >8%
                                                 are considered to be 8%
                                           * * - Total PCBs (ug/g) x Fraction OC = Normalized PCB Concentration
                                                  (compare with established freshwater or saltwater criteria shown in Table 2)
                                         ' * * - Criterion (ug PCBs/gOC) x Fraction OC = Total PCB equivalent
                                                  (compare with total PCBs at each location)

                                             Source: All data from Draft Final Remedial Investigation
                                             Report for Kin-Buc Landfill Operable Unit 2 (October 1990,
                                             revised May 1991) and Draft Supplemental Sediment
                                             Sampling Program for the Edmonds Creek/Marsh Area,
                                             Kin-Buc Landfill Site Operable Unit 2 (April 1991)

                                             Units: ug/g » mg/kg » par?      jt million (ppm)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Page 15 of 16


                                                                             Table 1
                                                           KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 RI/FS
                                                     SUMMARY OF SEDIMENT PCB AND ORGANIC
                                                   CARBON DATA. NORMAUZED DATA AND CRITERIA

LOCATION                                SD-2B-11 SD-3-1 SD-3-2 SD-3-3 SO-3-4 3-4-DUP SD-3-5 SD-3-6 SO-4-1

TOTAL PCBs (ug/g)                             0.16          0.59         U         U       0.16         U      0.32       0.31      0.63
Total Organic Carbon (%)*                    8.00%         8.00%    0.963%    0.235%     7.065%     8.00%     5.26%      4.66%    6.335%
NORMALIZED PCBs (ug/gOC)* *                     2.0           7.4        U         U         2.3        U        6.1        6.7        10

LOCATION-SPECIFIC FRESHWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS* * *
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)         0.31          0.31     0.04       0.01       0.27      0.31      0.20       0.18     0.25
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)            1.6           1.6    0.19       0.05         1.4       1.6       1.0      0.91       1.2
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)           8.0           8.0      1.0      0.23         7.1       8.0       5.3        4.7      6.3

LOCATION-SPECIFIC SALTWATER
                                                       -
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS* * *
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)          0.66         0.66     0.08       0.02       0.59      0.66      0.44       0.39      0.53
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)             3.3          3.3    0.40       0.10         3.0       3.3       2.2        1.9       2.6
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)             17           17      2.1      0.50          15        17        11         10        14
                                        Notes
                                             ' - Total Organic Carbon (OC) values reported as >8%
                                                 are considered to be 8%
                                           * * - Total PCBs (ug/g) x Fraction OC = Normalized PCB concentration
                                                  (compare with established freshwater or saltwater criteria shown in Table 2)
                                         * * * - Criterion (ug PCBs/gOC) x Fraction OC = Total PCB equivalent
                                                  (compare with total PCBs at each location)

                                             Source: All data from Draft Final Remedial Investigation
                                             Report for Kin-Buc Landfill Operable Unit 2 (October 1990,
                                             revised May 1991) and Draft Supplemental Sediment
                                             Sampling Program for the Edmonds Creek/Marsh Area,
                                             Kin-Buc Landfill Site Operable Unit 2 (April 1991)

                                             Units: ug/g « mg/kg • par       sr million (pom)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Page 16 of 16


                                                                         Table 1
                                                       KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 Rl/FS
                                                  SUMMARY OF SEDIMENT PCB AND ORGANIC
                                                CARBON DATA. NORMALIZED DATA AND CRITERIA

LOCATION                                4-1 DUP SD-4-2 SD-4-3 SD-4-4 SD-4-5 SD-4-6

TOTAL PCBs(ug/g)                            0.43       0.34       U            U       0.12       0.37
Total Organic Carbon (%)•                  8.00%      4.19% 0.2705%        8.00%      2.99%      4.39%
NORMALIZED PCBs (ug/gOC)* *                  5.4         8.1      U            U         4.0        8.4

LOCATION-SPECIFIC FRESHWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS'"
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.31       0.16       0.01      0.31       0.12       0.17
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)          1.6      0.82       0.05       1.6       0.58       0.86
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)        8.0        4.2       0.27       8.0        3.0        4.4

LOCATION-SPECIFIC SALTWATER
CRITERIA EQUIVALENTS'"
           Lower (ug PCBs/g sediment)       0.66       0.35       0.02      0.66       0.25       0.36
           Mean (ug PCBs/g sediment)         3.3        1.8       0.11       3.3         1.2        1.8
           Upper (ug PCBs/g sediment)         17        9.0       0.58        17        6.4        9.4
                                        Notes
                                             ' - Total Organic Carbon (OC) values reported as >8%
                                                  are considered to be 8%
                                           * * - Total PCBs (ug/g) x Fraction OC « Normalized PCB concentration
                                                   (compare with established freshwater or saltwater criteria shown in Table 2)
                                         * *" - Criterion (ug PCBs/gOC) x Fraction OC » Total PCB equivalent
                                                   (compare with total PCBs at each location)

                                             Source: All data from Draft Final Remedial Investigation
                                             Report for Kin-Buc Landfill Operable Unit 2 (October 1990,
                                             revised May 1991) and Draft Supplemental Sediment
                                             Sampling Program for the Edmonds Creek/Marsh Area,
                                             Kin-Buc Landfill Site Operable Unit 2 (April 1991)

                                             Units: ug/g « mg/kg » part      j million (ppm)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

               Table 2
    KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 Rl/FS
SUMMARY OF USEPA PCB SEDIMENT CRITERIA

FRESHWATER
                Lower      3.87 ug PCBs/g OC
                Mean       19.5ugPCBs/gOC
                Upper      99.9 ug PCBs/gOC

SALTWATER
                Lower      8.29 ug PCBs/g OC
                Mean       41.8ugPCBs/gOC
                Upper      214 ug PCBs/g OC
Notes

  OC « Organic carbon

  Source: USEPA, 1988. Interim Sediment Criteria
  Values for Nonpolar Hydrophobia Organic
  Contaminants. Office of Water Regulations and
  Standards, Criteria and Standards Division.
  Washington, D.C.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                            Ta(
     1AUE    1-7a.   Compounds Ootactad In Biota at Kln-Buc II Sit* (data fro* Wehran IWu>.
                                     A.     EOMONOS CREEK • IIDAL                B.    MAR t INS CREEK               C.    Milt BROOK

                OrtanlM/            FREQUENCY     CEO.     MAXIMUM   FREQUENCY        CEO.    MAXIMUM    FREQUENCY        CEO.    MAXIMUM
                Coajwund                          MEAN                                MEAN                                MEAN



     NuMlchof
       KB't: (••/kf)
          Aroclor-1241                      6/6    2.070     2.900        3/3         0.400    0.4SO         2/2          0.640    0.080
            Aroclor-1254                    6/6    0.890     1.200        3/3         0.640    0.780         3/3          0.580    0.910
            total KBa                       6/6    2.970     4.100        3/3         1.040    1.?00         2/2          1.380    1.J90
       Netata: (•*/••>
            CadolM                          0/6                          0/3                                  1/3            HC    0.180
            Chroalut                        6/6    0.970     2.300       3/3          0.500    O.ttO          3/3         0.490    0.740
            laad                            0/6                          1/3             NC    0.500          1/3            NC    0.580


     Hddttr crab
       KOtt C*B/kB>
            Aroclor 1240                  12/12     .490    1.600
            Aroclor 1254                  12/12     .330    0.570
          Votal KBa                       12/12     .830    2.090
       Natal •! (a»/ka)
         Cadolua                          12/12     .300    0.360
            ttwoalua                      12/12     .040    1.300
            Load                          12/12     .510    1.000
ro
01
     Nuakrat
       K8ai C«|/kf> (Hvor)
          Aroclor 1254                     4/7     0.06      0.20
       Natal a i |o«/kf) (kldnty)
                                           3/7    0.200     1.000        3/3          0.620    2.300
            CKraalua                              0.200     0.450        3/3          0.240    0.440
            Load                           0/7                           1/3             NC    0.500


     •or nay rat
       KOtt CNOj/fcf) (llvtr)
          Aroclor 1260                      3/3   0.230     0.370
       Natal at («B/ko) (kldnty)
          Cadoiua                           2/3   0.100     0.110
          ChroBluM)                         3/3   0.200     0.340
          Load                              3/3   1.300     2.000


     Noutt AVUM (llvor)
       KOt: (*B/kB)                         1/1      NC     0.067
         Aroclor 1260

     •C - Hot calculated

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                      ie 6


table l-7b. CoMpawfi detected In (UfcMw crab* at Kin-Sue II (fro*            •t •!. 1990).
             Saaplaa M*r« coapoaltta af a»lM only.


                                   A.   EDMQNOS CREEK                        R.   NARIINS CREEK                   C.    REfERENCE
                                        (tlOAL)                                                               (RARIIAN RIVER 3 NJ IIMNPIKE)

        Coapoml                fREOUENCT    CEO . MEAN    NAMINUN     fREOUENCT     CEO. MEAN     NAMINUN     fRCOIICNCV     CEO. WFAN   NAMIMM

 PCtts lav/kg)
    Arocler 1248                  2/2             0.64       0.990       0/2                                      0/1
       ultnaut carapace           I/I                NC       14.00
    Areclor 1254                  0/2                                    0/2
    Areclor 1260                  0/2                                    1/1           NC             0.1?

 Natal •: (a«/ka)
    cadaiuB                                                                                                       1/1           NC            0.60
    cHraarfiai                    2/2             S.11       12.15                                                1/1           NC             1.20
    COfHMT
    »^T •»                        2/2            12.20       i7.ro        1/1          NC            42.60        1/1           NC            47.90
    line                          2/2            29.65       12.60        1/1          NC             26.50       1/1           NC            29.10




•C • Hot CaleuUtad

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      1                                                                                      2                                                                                                                 t
     0                                                                                                                                                  Ik*                          *'                    u
     —o o                           "                      *              «-             i-«to    u... , . .                     2                   ;.;
     s< rt rt                       3                      3              Z              8        ooo» - .;"5'i» 'J1— • yto !f s.2 v ;,- \ i,- '••••• w
                                    "                     <o              a              S"       mo-<o «^ a a « a. o. o --5 r. o o                              ooooooo "                                 1
     i ~* °                                                *                             5                  »auMo2^totoB2n                                    ".on " o o o .                               11
     » o —•                                                                                                     f    c         c   3
     a on                                >•>»«— c_i»>>«_t,                    fc»t-t^^^"                   5- ". ^J . Q^,~S^-5                                oooooooo
                                         £ £ < 5 2 § £ S S i*R55 ^                                         2.3-..-*^^ -ffSS" •» i -«•»-• i •» ^                                                       H*
     MIC         ££S|
          r* —                           F.5.5 J " E.E.J i E.-S • >                                        ° •: * 3 * oSS o     ->-^^^^..£ o                                              y           t/» 1 1
                  rt rt* 3               rtr»33                rtr>33         rtr»33        «                              O           "*               'S"    J^rarar«»rals»ci.—         c           O II
     • Or*
                                                                                                                                                                                          a
     3g&           1
                  l *^                   3 —* *                S —* *         S t* *                        S                  ~                        ""
     rt O
                                                                                                           Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      y
                                                                                                                                                                                                      -'o
                                                                                                                                                                                                           c
                 8                       ;*s'- .r*?^                                                                                                ~                                                 < M
                                         S I.  S §• -'"f^
                                                     S 2j                                                  "                   *«
                                                                                                                                                                                                      T n
                                                   M               U             M                                                                                                                     -» rt
                     "!*8
                                                                                                                                                                                           ti
          r»                                                                                                                                                                               Al         2S
       1  2
          n
                 0.0.0.0.                u.o.a.01              0.0.001        0.0.0.01                                     j-j-j-j..^,^,,,                    ooooooo                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                          C      f
                 0*0*0.01
          2                                                                                                                                                                               -jc
                                                                                                                                                                                          rt          a
                                                                                                                                                                                          -*    r»i   n M
          3                                                                                                                                                                                     n
                                                                                   •                                                                                                            |
          M                                                                                                                                                                                           -t(n
          n                                                                                                                                                                                     O     T
          9                                                                                                                                                                                c          3 —
                 O» to to to                                                                                                                                                              rn    ri
          |                             f\.rijo«f\.            OOO^        Ot O* 4k O.                                                                                                                r. S
                 001 10 1-              O.OI1P14O              toU*O.to    4O*s.»«tJt
                                                                                                                                                                                                /«£   1 to
          1                                                                                                                                                                                           rt rl
                                                                                                                                                                                                 i    «
          M
                                                                                                                                                                                                      "i /*
                                                                                                                                                                                                  i   M —
                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
          I                                                                                                                                                                               >•    o     !•   1
                                                                                                                                                                                          **    >»    n o>
                                                                                                                                                                                                           c
          *                                                                                                                oooooooo                                                                   to O
o>        C
                                                                                                                           oooooooo                                                       i           •    ~
                                                                                                                           r\>ooooo»-o
                                                                                                                           n   to Crf *»J ^J Ut ^t to

                                                                                                                                                                                                      «o -•
                                                                                                                                                                                                      »— rt
                                                                                                                                                                                                      —— <•

                                                                                                                                                                                          AJ               3
                                                                                                 »—       >-*                                                                                              a
                 0» to«- fe             atto^-to               oito^-to    ot^^*fc               o»--»— o^*»-M>                                               cjoooi^iou                  O
                                                                                                                                                                                          c
                 Ottoi- to                                                                                                                                                                m
                                                                                                 Ot Ot Ol O* Ol OJ O%                                         Ol Ot ^K Ol Ot Ot Ol



                                                                                                                                                                                                UJ


                                                                                                 to t~* riA Ol O. Ol •"*                                                                  C     l'i
                 •— fv»       IX.                                                                C3Olto^O»Or^                                                                             ^     c:
                 u»o          oj        ^^ *•"•         *1— Ck C3      w> ^«*fl.       O.        fl ^1 ^1 fl fl fl fl                                                                     3C    -4
                     IMZIM              ^-ICM^-J               fvtlMZ^'    «<*>X»'               OOOOOOO
                 8   O»OCJ1
                                                                                                                                                                                                «
                                                                                                                                                                                          £.    JU


                                                                                                 ^.-.-W^.ra*.                                                                             fi
                                                                                                                                                                                          X                         tt>
                          E                       rs,              o             to              mr^rSSmrS^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    cr
                          O                       to               •—            O               OOOOOOO
                          0                       o                a             O               to torvtuit- »>ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   •K. i

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                   Table 8
21-F«6-92                                                   .         •                                                                 °

                                                                  TABLE 1-7
                                               CHByllCALS OF CONCERN CHOSEN FOR EACH MEDIA
                                                       AT THE KIN-BUC SUPERFUNO SITE
                                                                    OPERABLE UNIT 2

                                 COMPOUND                SEDIMENTS             SURFACE WATER     GROUND WATER


            VOCS:
                      BENZENE                                                         X                  X
                      CARBON DISULFIDE
                      CHLOROBEN2ENE                                                   X                  X
                      12-DICHLOROETHENE                                                    '             X
                      VINYL CHLORIDE                                                                     X
                      XYLENE

            PAHS:
                      NAPHTHALENE                                                     X                  X

            PHTHALATES:
                   BIS(2-ETHYLHEXYL}PHTHALATE                   X

            PESTlCIDES/PCto:
                      4.4'-DDT                                                        X
                      PCB4                                      X                     X                  (1)

            METALS:
                      ANTIMONY                                  X          X          X
                      ARSENIC                                   X          X          X
                      BARIUM                                                          X                   X
                      BERYLLIUM                                                       X                   X
                      CADMIUM                                   X                                         X
                      MANGANESE                                 X          X          X
 ^^                   NICKEL                                    X                      X
                      VANADIUM                                  X          X          X

             NOTE
                       This tabta peasants tha contaminants of oonoam for tw human haarth avaluafen of tha Kin-Buc RA.
                      Not* thai al of th« contaminants satactad abov* wM ba avakiaiad for ail of tha patfiways in which Vtay wan
                      dataoad. For axampla: cadmium was salaoad for ground watar and for aadimants aNhough it wtfl also ba avaluatad
                      for surtaoa watar. Bacausa tha air pathway invotvM voiatilMflon, cadmium wM not ba avaiuatad for air.
                      (1) • Although PCBs wara not datacsad in sand and gravri wals during tha Rl, thay war* datactad in tha ratusa
                      layar monrtoring wads. Dua to thair potanbai for advaraa haaNh •ffacts, thay wara ratainad for analysis during
                      tha Rl at OP-2.




                                                                                                         '• BC

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                Table 9
                               GROUND-WATER DATA'sTATlSTICAL SUMMARY

                  15-Jan-92     MAXIMUM        ARITHMETIC    SSX UPPER     FREQUENCY
                                                  MEAN    CONFIDENCE LIMIT

         VOCs (mg/L)
Vinyl Chlorida                    4.60E-02       7 87E-03        l.ZOE-OZ    2/23
Chloroathana                      Z.70E-OZ       S.96E-03        7. JOE-03   Z/23
Acetona                           2.30E-01       2.67E-OZ        5.15E-02    4/23
:»rbon Oliulflde                  Z.90E-02       5.26E-03        8.47E-03    5/23
l,:-0»cnloroatnana                1.80E-02       3.57E-03        5.19E-03    2/23
1.2-Dichloroetnana (total)        1.60E-01       1.32E-02        Z.89E-02 4/23
Tncnloroetnana                    S.50E-02       6.24E-03        1.1ZE-02 4/23
Btnzana                           Z.80E-01       3.80E-02        7.12E-02 15/Z3
4-Hathyl -Z-pantanona             1.40E-01       1.07E-OZ        2.26E-02 3/23
Tetncnlproatnana                  8.60E-02       6.93E-03        l.UE-02 2/23
"oluana                           5.70E-01       4.06E-02        9.22E-02 16/23
ChloroPanzana                     1.30E»00       8.22E-02        1.98E-01 10/23
Ethyl banzana                     8.20E-02       1.43E-OZ        2.S3E-02    7/23
Total Xylana*                     2.90E-01       2.71E-02        S.47E-02    12/23
         BNAt (mg/L)
Phtnol                            3.10E»00       1.9BE-01        1.99E-01 1/16
Z-Chloroonanpl                    5.00E-03       4.81E-03        4.81E-03    1/16
1.3-Oichlorobanzena               9.00E-03       5.20E-03        S.20E-03    1/20
 1 . 4-Ot chl prpbanzane          1 . 10E-02     5.30E-03        S.30E-03    1/20
1 ,2-Dichlorobanzana              S.OOE-03       4.49E-03        4.49E-03    3/20
2-*athylphanol                    1.10E*00       7.58E-02        7.S9E-02    2/16
i-Mathylphanol                    1.30E-HH3      8.63E-OZ        8.64E-02    2/16
2.4-Dlmathylphanol                3.60E-OZ       7.94E-03        7.94E-03    3/16
Banzoic Acid                      1.50E*01       9.S9E-01        9.60E-01    3/16
4 -Chl orp-3-«athy 1 phano '      7.50E-02       1.31E-02        1.31E-02    3/16
N-NHrosocipnanylannna (1)         S.OOE-03       4.S5E-03        4.55E-03    2/20
         PAHa (mg/L)
Naphtha 1 ana                     1.30E-01       1.13E-OZ        1.13E-02    4/19
Z-Mathylnaphthalana               1.40E-02       S.4SE-03        S.4SE-03    1/20
Acanapnthana                      l.OOE-02       5.2SE-03        S.25E-03    1/20
Fluorana                          S.OOE-03       S.OOE-03        S.OOE-03    1/20
Phananthrana                      9.00E-04       4.80E-03        4.80E-03    1/20
Flourantnana                      3. DOE-04      4.SOE-03        4.SOE-03    2/19
Pyrana                            l.OOE-03       4. 09 E -03     4.09E-03    4/20
    Phthalatas (mg/L)
OiathylpnthaUte                   4.00E-03       4.B1E-03        4.61E-03    3/21
D1-n-outylphth*l«ta               S.OOE-03       3.S3E-03        3.S3E-03    11/21
Butyl banzylphthalata             S.OOE-04       3. 67 E- 03     3.67E-03    6/20
bistz-Ethylhiuyl )Phthalata       2.00E-01       1.79E-02        1.79E-02    4/20
Dl-n-Octylphthalata               5.00E-03       4.ME-03         4.38E-03    3/21
    Total Matala (wg/L)
Al <M\ nut                        6.0ZE-H)l      9.80E*00        1.70E-HU 18/18
Antimony                          S.37E-02       2.9SE-02        3.S4E-02 19/22
Arsanic                           4.0SE-OZ       1.Z6E-02        1.70E-02 21/22
Bariv*                            1.62E«00       S.SSE-01        7.14E-01 23/23
Baryllija                         4.40E-03       l.UE-03         1.S9E-03 8/23
CadHw                             2. ME -03      1.19E-03        1.40E-03 3/23
Caleita                           Z.ME*02        1.2I£*02        l.S7E«C2 22/22
Chr«Bit«                          8.85E-02       1.S8E-02        2.ME-02 8/23
Cobalt                            S.07C-02       1.15E-02        1.67E-02 11/23
COBBV                             Z.60E-01       4.94E-02        8.29E-02 14/19
f ^^^^                            2 33E»02       5.07E*01        7.Z7E*01 23/23
LMtf                              5.27E-02       1.06E-02        i.ME-02 17/23
MaflvaiuB                         4.S4E-42       2.30E*02        2.88E*02 23/23
NMBHWn                            l.04E*01       2.9«E-»00       4.12E*00 23/23
H\eU\                             1.09E-01       3.14E-OZ        4.S4E-02 15/23
•etasaiua                         1.23E*OZ       6.81E-HJ1       8.12£*01 23/23
Salarn*                           2.SOE-03       7.I3C-04         1.04E-03 2/23
Sodl«                             4.00E*03        1.8SE-HJ3      2.»E*03 23/23
Vanadii*                          1.76E-01       3. HE-02        6.0SE-02 18/23
Zinc                              4.ME-01        7. ME -02        l.m-01 14/20




                                                   -9-               KBC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                               Table 10
                                   SURFACE WATER DATA STATISTICAL SUMHART
                       21-Jan-92 1I MAXIMUM ARITHMETIC
                                                  MEAN
                                                               95X UPPER
                                                           ::NFIDENCE LIMIT
                                                                               ^EOUENCY


         VOC» (mg/L)
"•thy lent Chlonot                  2.00E-03     2.46E-03         2.54E-03      :/i3
1,2-Oicnlrotthent (total)           2.00E-03     2.46E-03         2.54E-03      :/i3
2-3utanon«                          1.20E-02     5.S6E-03         6.BOE-03      :/iz
Bcnztni                             S.70E-02     6.S1E-03         1.S3E-02      3/13
*ttracnloroetn«ne                   2.00E-03     2.46E-03         2.54E-03      1/13
"oluint                             l.OOE-03     2.13E-03         2.S4E-03      2/13
Chlorootnztnt                       3.10E-01     2.62E-02         7.57E-02      1/13
ithylbenztnt                        5.30E-02     6.27E-03         1.44E-02      2/13
Styrtnt                             6.00E-04     2.35E-03         2.66E-03      1/13
Xyltnt (total)                      6.00E-01     4.B4E-02         1.4SE-01      3/13
            BNAi (mg/L)
'htnol                              B.OOE-03     5.30E-03         5.92E-03       1/10
N-Ni trotodl phcnyl ami n«          4.00E-03     4.90E-03         5.UE-03        1/10
         PAH» (mg/L)
Kaohthaltnt                         1.30E-02     5.BOE-03         7.4SE-03       1/10
2-Htthyl naphtha lent               l.OOE-03     4.60E-03         5.43C-03       1/10
       Phthalatts (mg/L)
D i -n-Duty 1 phtna 1 at*           l.OOE-03     4.60E-03          5.43E-03      1/10
   Ptftiddts/PCSs (mg/L)
Aldrin                              4.90E-05     2.6BE-OS          3.07E-05      1/13
*.4'-OOT                            1.60E-04     5.8SE-OS          7.B2E-05      1/13
Aroclor 1254       •                3.30E-04     4.B7E-04          S.14E-04      1/13
          Metal* (ffig/L)
AltfRiniA                           2.47E*01     3.03E-M30         6.88E*00      13/13
Antimony                            4.82E-02     1.99E-02          2.98E-02      6/13
Arjtnic                             7.00E-03     2.1BE-03          3.17E-03      7/13
Barlim                              3.46E-01     9.71E-02          1.59E-01      13/13
Barylltiai                          1.90E-03     8.00E-04          1.09E-03      4/13
CalcivJi                            l.S4E*02     7.0SE*01          9.ME»C1       13/13
ChroiitM                            1.20E-01     1.19E-02          3.08E-02      5/13
Cobalt                              2.20E-01     4.97E-02          9.0SC-02      6/13
Cooper                              1.33E-01     S.25E-02          B.4SE-02      11/11
Iron                                5.41E*01     8.0BE*00          1.74E-M51     13/13
Ltad                                4.72E-02     6.61E-03          1.40E-02      10/13
Magntsitai                          4.S5E+02     1.47E*02          2.40£*02      13/13
Manganast                           7.90E-01     2.94E-01          4.48E-01      13/13
Mtrcury                             1.10E-04     6.23E-OS          7.60E-05      1/13
Mickil                              4.07C-01     9.10E-02          1.66E-01      12/13
Potasnw                             1.43W2       5.77E*01          8.45E*01      13/13
Sodiui                              4.19E+03     1.26E-03          2.12E»03      13/13
Vanadi in                           1.52E-01     1.49E-02          3.ME-02       5/13
Zinc                                3.97E-01     8.BOE-02           1.61E-01     6/13
C/arnd*                             2.22E-02     6.B2E-03          9.70E-03      2/13




                                               -10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 Table 11                               <:N- auc OPERABL

                                    SEDIMENT DATA STATISTICAL SUMMARY
             Ccmoouno           ' MAXIMUM ARITHMETIC -:SX UPPER r*EOUENCY
                                             HEAN ::NFIOE.NCE LIMIT
           VOCs (mg/kg)         1
  icfiont
  Caroon Olsulfida                   9.20E-01      4.70E-02      3.55E-02
                                     1.50E-02                                    3/53
  2-3uUnona                                        3.09E-03      3.76E-03        5/53
  Htnztit                            1.30E-H30     6.86E-02      1.36E-01
                                     1.20E-01                                   15/52
  ";!utnt                                          7.62E-03      1.30E-02        7/53
                                     4.00E-02      3.73E-03      5.30E-03        4/53
  O.lcrootnztna                      3.10E-01
  Ethyl btnztna                                    1.76E-02      3.20E-02        7/53
  Xyltnt (total)                     1.60E»01      3.07E-01      3.08E-01
                                     1.60E-H51                                   3/53
                                                   3.33E-01      9.34E-01       13/53
          BNAi (mg/kg)
  ..4-Oicftloroetnztni               1.90E-01
  Stnzbic acid                                    1.38E-02       2.3SE-02       6/52
                                     8.80E*00     6.40E-01       1.14E*00      29/49
  Dibanzofuran                       1.60E-01
  N>NitrosoaiphtnylMin«                           1.23E-02       1.98E-02       6/52
                                     1.20E*01     2.52E-01       7.11E-01
  2-Chloroprnnol                     1.40E-02                                   7/52
                                                  1.53E-01       1.65E-01       4/52
           PAHt (mg/kg)
  NaDrtthaltnc                       l.SOE*00     3.22E-01
  2-^thylnaphthattnt                                             3.87E-01      13/96
                                    3.90E*00      3.67E-01       4.66E-01      24/96
 Acenapnthyltnt                     1.3SE«00      1.87E-01       2.35E-01      14/97
 Aciniontrttnt
  r                                 2.60E+00      3.77E-01
   luortna                                                       4.54E-01      25/96
                                    1.50E»00      3.14E-01       3.7SE-01
 ?hananthrtna                       1.40E»01                                   10/96
 Anthraetna                                       5.76E-01       8.BSE-01      13/97
                                    1.20MO        1.75E-01       2.20E-01      32/97
 Fluoranthtnt                       2.90E-H31     9.72E-01
 Pyrtne                                                          1.63E»00      26/97
                                    2.50E*01      9.29E-01       1.47E*00      47/96
 B«flZb(a)anthracent                1.20E-H50     2.71E-01
 Chryjena                                                        3.19E-01      46/97
                                    1.30E»00      3.04E-01       3.5SE-01      14/97
 Stnzotb fluoranthtrta              1.60E*00      3.77E-01
 Banzotk fluoranthcn*                                            4.41E-01      16/96
                                    9.00E-01      1.92E-01      2.31E-01       28/97
 Banzofa pyrtnt                     1.50E*CO
 Indeno(1.2.3-cd)pyrtrw
                                                  2.77E-01      3.2SE-01       18/97
                                    1.50£*00      2.26E-01      2.73E-01       22/97
 Banzo(g.h.i)paryl«n*               1.50E-KK3     2.53E-01      3.07E-01       16/96
                  TOTAL PAHS:       S.40E«01      3.38E-H30     4.SOEHK)       93/97
      PhthalatM (n/kg)
 Oletbylphthalatt   *               l.SOE-01      1.30E-01
 Butylbanzylphthalata                                           1.46E-01       15/52
                                    4.20E*01      1.22E*00      2.89E-HM
 &i»(2-£thy1htxyl) P htha1att       3.50E*03                                   10/52
 Oi-n-octylphthalata                              5.5SE*01      1.31£*02       36/94
                                    8.70£*00      3.46E-01      6.94E-01       24/50
  Ptstlcidcs/PCBs (rng/kg)
Aroclor-1242                        6.00E-HJ2    1.16£«01
Aroclor-1248                                                    2.49£*01     13/129
                                    2.90EH32     5.37E*00       1.02E*01
Aroclor-1254                        1.30E+02                                 56/129
Aroclor-1260                                     1.78E«00       3.6SE+00     81/146
                                    3.60E«00     1.93E-01       2.S8E-01     10/130
                  TOTAL PCB:        7.30E-H52    l.M£*01        3.02E*01     111/147
        Nttals (a-g/kg)
Altaintai                       2.98E*04         l.SSE*04
Anttaony                                                        1.79E*04      51/51
                                2.53E*Ol         6.26EHX)       7.16E-HX)
ArMnte                          2.S7E*02                                       8/93
B*ft«                                            S.30E*01       6.37E*fll     37/78
                                2.76E-H32        7.33E*01       B.S6E*01
torylKia                        2.20E*00                                      50/51
CaaW«                                            1.19E*00       1.33E*00      47/51
                                2.94E*01         1.49E*00       2.10E*00
Calelut                         1.71£«04         2.41E*C3
                                                                               6/93
Chr«t«                          1.17E*02         5.M£*01
                                                                3.12E*C3      48/48
Cotelt                                                          6.5i£*01 .    51/93
                                5.78EH31         1.76£*01       2.0«£*01
Capwr                           4.4l£»02         1.26£*02
                                                                              49/51
Iron                            S.9SE*04                        1.45E*02      SI/93
Laad                                             2.82E*04       3.17E*04      SI/SI
                                3.72E-H52        1.0«E*02       1.28E*02
Magntsiun                       8.93/1*03                                     51/80
Manganttt                                        5.42E*03      6.0«E*03       49/49
                                7.04£*02         l.«£*02       2.17£*02
Mtrcury                         3.40£*00                                      51/51
                                                 7.95E-01      9.54E-01       30/93
Ntckal                          1.76E*02         4.36E*01
Potamm                                                         4.»5£*01       51/93
                                7.M£*03          3.04£*03      3.43E+03
StltniM                         1.38£*01                                      51/51
SUvtr                                            1.45E*00      2.05£*00       21/51
                                7.50£*00         1.41C+00      1.72£*00       23/76
Sodiui                          1.69£*04         3.37£*03
VanadiM                         9.76E-H)!                      4.41£*03       48/48
Zinc                                             4.78£*01      S.29E«01       50/51
                                6  (9EW12        2.18£*02
                                W* Wfcfc^Vfc
                                                               2.46£*02       35/77
                                                -11.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     2t-Jan-92
                                                                                                                                                    12
                                                                                 TAtLE 4-1
                                               CRITICAL TOXICI1Y VALUES FOR ORAL AND INHALATION MUTES

                                       —————————— 5?aT                                                                Inhalation
                  CHEMICAL                 RfO •                        Sf ••                              RfC •                      Sf ••
                                         (•g/kg-day)               1/<»g/kg-day)                        (•g/kg-day)                1/(*g/kg-day)

                 lenient (C)                            NA                   2.90E-02 (1)                                    NA          2.90E-02
         Carbon Oleutflde (NC)                 1.00E-01 (1)                           NA                           3.00E-03             NA
           Chlorobsniene (NC)                  2.00E-02 (1)                           NA                           6.00E-03 (1)         NA
         1.2-Dlchloroetnene (NC)               9.00E-03 (1)                           NA                                     NA         NA
           Vinyl Chloride (C)                           NA                   2.30E«00 (1)                                    NA          2.94E-01
               Kylene (NC)                     2.00E+00 (1)                           NA                           9.00E-02             NA
            Nafftthalene (NC)                  4.00E-03                               NA                                     NA         NA
     bls(2-Ethylhe«yl)pnthalete (NC)           2.00E-02 (1)                           NA                                     NA         NA
     bls(2-Ethylheiiyl>phthalate (C)                    NA                   1.40E-02 (1)                                    NA         NA

                   •CIS (C)                             NA                   7.70E«00 (1)                                    NA         NA

                 4,4' -OOt (NC)                S.OOE-04 (1)                           NA                                     NA         NA

                 4.4' -OOf (C)                          NA                   3.40E-01 (1)                                    NA          3.40E-01
-I
09               Antlaony (NC)                 4.00E-04 (1)                           NA                                     NA         NA
                 Arsenic (NC)                  1.00E-03                               NA                                     NA         NA

                 Arsenic (C)                            NA                           NA                                      NA          5.00E«01
                 ••HUB (NC)                    7.00E-02 (t)                          NA                                      NA         NA

            •erylllus (NC)                     5.00E-03 (t)                          •NA                                     NA         NA

              taryllluB (C)                             NA                   4.30E«00 (1)                                 NA             8.40E«00

                 CsdsluB (NC)                  S.OOE-04 (1)                          NA                                      NA         NA

            MtnQftnMt CMC)                     1.00E-01 (1)                          NA                                   NA            NA

                  Nickel (NC)                  2.00E-02 (1)                          NA                                   NA            NA

              Venadlua (NC)                    7.00E-03                              NA                                   NA            NA
     (C) - Carcinogen
     (NC) • Noncarclnofcn
                                                                                                     aj— * a\.*&   £ 1 &kl ^
                                          HH     t«V»   Wltvi ^ftVUf   eWl   •^f* I ».•••*» Wg   w   w^«*   w v « * -——,--

                                           • Reference Dose/Reference Concentration
                                          •• Carcinogenic Slope factor                                   fM     ^..,. ...««
                                          (1) Values obtained free) IRIS (1990). All other values obtained fro* HEASf rY90.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  Table 13



                 SUMMARY OF RISKS BY EXPOSURE PATHWAY

          RouM                  NoncaYcinoQtnic     C«reinog«nic
            Of                      Hazard              RM
         Exposure                    Max
RESCEKTIAL
 ADULT
       Ground water
                   Inhalation           3.77E-02         6.S4E-06
                    Ingwtfon           5.37E+00          6.39E-04
                  Absorptton           •.42E-03          1.98E-05

                    TOTAL              5.42E+00          6.6SE-04

CHLD
       Ground water
                Inhalation              1.08E-01          94BE-06
                 (notation             6.01 E+00          2.15E-04
               Abtorptton               1.UE-02           I.46E-06

                    TOTAL              6.13E+00           229E-04

RECREATIONAL
ADULT
        SadiinanB
                 Inoaation              2.91 E-03         2.KE-06
                Absorption              S66E-03           345E-09

                    TOTAL               a.ME-03           3.73E-05

       SurfaoaWatar
                 Ingaation              1.43E-03          S36E-06
               Abaorpoon                4.37E-04          4.03E-07

                    TOTAL               1.S7E-03          4.57E-07
TOTAL RECREATIONAL                      1.06E-02          3.79E-05

CHILD
        Sadimanti
                Ingaatfon               4J0E-02           1.42E-05
              AFMOI ptton               2.7SE-02          5.01 E-OS

                    TOTAL               7.ME-02           •.43E-05

       SurtaoaWaiar
                 Ingaaaon               2.41 E-02         2.70E-07
               Abaorpaon                374E-03           1.04E-06

                    TOTAL               iTIE-02           1J1E-06
TOTAL RECREATIONAL:                      1.04E-01         • ME-09

FBHtGESTDN
 ADULT                                  M»E«00            1J1E41

CHILD                                   2.01 E*01         1.11E-01

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                Page 1 of 2
                                           Table 14


           KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 FEASIBILITY STUDY
POTENTIAL LOCATION/ACTION SPECIFIC ARARs FOR REMEDIAL ACTIVITIES

       Potential Regulatory
     Compliance Requirement                                  Regulatory Citations
•   Facility Closure Requirements         New Jersey Solid Waste Management Act
    (Solid and hazardous waste)           N.J.S.A. 13:1 E-let seq.
                                          New jersey Solid and Hazardous Waste Management
                                          Regulations N.J.A.C. 7:26-1 et seq.
•   Disruption of Solid Waste             New Jersey Solid Waste Management Act
                                          N JS.A. 13:IE 1 etseq.
                                          New Jersey Solid and Hazardous Waste Regulations
                                          N.JA.C.7:26-2A.8J
                                          Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA),
                                          Land Disposal Restrictions
                                          40 CFR 268.1      268 SO
                                          Federal Toxic Substances Control Act
                                          40 CFR Part 76 let seq
•   Stream Encroachment                 • New Jersey Flood Hazard Area Control Act
                                          N.JSA 58;16A-50etseq.
                                        • New Jersey Flood Hazard Area Control Regulations
                                          N.J.A.C7:13-1etseq.
•   Waterfront Development                New Jersey Waterfront Development Law
                                          N.J.S.A. 12:5-3
                                          New Jersey Division of Coastal Resources Coastal Permit
                                          Program Rules N.J.A.C. 7:7-1 etseq.
                                          Coastal Area Facility Review Act (CAFRA)
                                          NJ.S A 13:19-1 etseq.
•   Wetlands                            • Water Pollution Control Act (Clean Water Act)
                                          33 U.S C. 12S1 et seq. (section 404)
                                        • Army Corps of Engineers Permit Program Regulations
                                          33 CFR 320-330
                                        • EPA Regulation for Disposal of Dredge and Fill Materials
                                          40 CFR 230
                                        • Migratory Bird Treaty Act SO CFR 10
                                        • New Jersey Wetlands Act (of 1970)
                                          N.J.S.A. 13:9 A-let seq.
                                        • Coastal Area Facility Review Act (CAFRA)
                                          N.J.S.A. 13:19-1 etseq.
                                        • New Jersey Division of Coastal Resources Coastal Permit
                                          Program Rules N.J.A.C. 7:7-1 et seq.
•   Air Quality                         • New Jersey Air Pollution Control Act
                                          N.J.A.C 26:2 C-9.2 etseq.
                                        • New Jersey Bureau of Air Pollution Control Regulations
                                          N.J.A.C 7:27-1 «t seq.
•   Soil Erosion and Sediment Control     New Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act
                                          N.J.S.A. 4:24-1 etseq.


                                                                                 KBC   OO3    O037

                                                                                             10 7 92 09406 f9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 2
                                              Table 14 cont'd

               KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 FEASIBILITY STUDY
     POTENTIAL LOCATION/ACTION SPECIFIC ARARs FOR REMEDIAL ACTIVITIES

           Potential Regulatory
         Compliance Requirement                                 Regulatory Citations
    •   Cultural Resource                  • National Historic Perservation Act
        Identification/Coordination          16 U.S. C, Section 470 etseq.
                                           • Protection of Historic and Cultural Properties
                                              36 CFR Part 800
    •   Rare and Endangered Species        • Endangered Species Act (of 1973)
        Coordination                         16 U S C , Section 1531 et teq. (SO CFR Part 402)
                                           • New Jersey Division of Fish. Game and Wildlife Regulations
                                             N.J.A.C. 7:25-let seq
    •   Wildlife Coordination              • Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act (of 1934)
                                             16 U.S.C. Section 661 et seq. (40 CFR Pan 122.49)
                                           • New Jersey Division of Fish. Game and Wildlife Regulations
                                             N.J.A.C. 7:25- let seq
    •   Hazardous Waste Accumulation and • Federal Toxic Substances Control Act
        Management                         40 CFR Part 76 let seq
                                         • Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA),
                                           Land Disposal Restrictions
                                           40 CFR 268 1-268 50
                                         • New Jersey Solid Waste Managment Act
                                           N.J.S.A 13: IE etseq
                                         • New Jersey Solid and Hazardous Waste Management
                                           Regulations NJ.A.C 7.26-9 et seq.
                                         • DOT Rules for the Transportation of Hazardous Materials,
                                           49 CFR Parts 107,171.172 and 178




The following ARARs have also been identified for remedial activity
at the Kin-Buc site:

1   The Coastal Zone Management Act
    16 USC 1451 Section 307 (c) (1).

2   The National Ambient Air Quality Standard
    for PM 10 of 150 >*g/m3 (24 hour average)




                                                                                               10 7 •? 09406 F9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                             T>ble 15


         KIN-BUC OPERABLE UNIT 2 FEASIBILITY STUDY
                            EDMONDS CREEK AND MARSH
                           SUMMARY OF COST ESTIMATES

                                                             Annual O&M             Present Value
                                        Capital Cost            Cost                    Cost*
          Alternative                       ($000)                ($000)               ($000)

1.   No Further Action                            --                       17              261
3A. Sediment Removal and                      3.537              23yr1-5                 3.637
    Consolidation in On-Site
3B. Sediment Removal and Off-                 5.168              2 3 y r 1 -5            5,268
    Site Disposal
3C. Sediment Removal and                      6.225              23yr1-5                 6,325
    On-Site Treatment
4.   Sediment Capping with                    4,956                      70yr1            5,230
     Stream Relocation                                                   60yr2
                                                                     52yr3-5
                                                                     Syr 6- 10
                                                                    2yr11-30
5.   Sediment Consolidation and               4.706                      66 yr 1          5.009
     Containment in Vicinity of                                          59yr2
     PoolC                                                           52yr3-5
                                                                     6yr6-10
                                                                    5 yr 1 1 - 30

Using present worth factors for 5% before taxes and after inflation for 30 years




                                                                                                  10 7 92 09406 F9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        APPENDIX III

ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 08/31/92                                    Index Document Number Order                                    Page: 1
                                          KIN-BUC LAHOFILL, OPERABLE UNIT 2 Documents




 Oocunent Number: KBC-001-0001 To 0002                                                  Date: 01/08/91

 Title: (Letter forwarding the attached final Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study Uork Plan Addendum
           for Sediment Sampling in the Edmonds Creek/Marsh Area of the Kin-Sue Landfill *1te, Operable
           Unit 2)

         Type: CORRESPONDENCE
       Author: Burger, Kevin M.: Wehran Engineering
 Recipient: O'Connell, Kimberly: US EPA
  Attached: KBC-001-0003

 Document Number: KBC-001-0003 To 0018                        Parent: KBC-001-0001      Date: 01/01/91

 Title: Final Remedial Investigation Work Plan Addendum for Supplemental Sediment Sampling in the
           Edmonds Creek/Harsh Area at the Kin-Buc Landfill Site. Operable Unit 2

         Type: PLAN
       Author: none: Wehran Engineering
 Recipient: none: Kin Buc, Inc.
               none: SCA Services, Inc.


       ;ument Number: KBC-001-0019 To 0173                                              Date: 04/01/89
>_»-
 Title: Briefing Report to the EPA Science Advisory Board on the Equilibriun Partitioning Approach
           to Generating Sediment Quality Criteria

         Type: REPORT
       Author: none: US EPA
 Recipient: none: US EPA


 Docunent Number: KBC-001-0174 To 0174                                                  Date: 09/16/91

 Title: (Handwritten note forwarding the attached copy of the Department of the Interior's Section
           7 - Endangered Species letter for the Kin-Buc Landfill »ite)

         Type: CORRESPONDENCE
       Author: Burr, Robin: US Fish I Wildlife Service
 Recipient: Barry, Alison: US EPA
  Attached: KBC-001-0175

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 M/31/92                                Index Document Nimber Order                                        Page: 2
                                     KIN-BUG LANDFILL. OPERABLE UNIT 2 Documents




 OocuKnt Number: KBC-001-0175 To 0176                    Parent: KBC-001-0174        Date: 06/09/89

 Title: (Letter stating that no federally listed or proposed threatened or endangered flora or fauna
        are known to exist within the study area of the Kfn-Buc Landfill site)

       Type: CORRESPONDENCE
    Author: Day, Clifford C.: US Fish & Uildlife Service
 lee i pi ent: Hargrove, Robert U.: US EPA


 Document Number: KBC-001-0177 To 0180                                               Date: 01/29/91

 Title: (Letter detailing visits to the Kin-Buc Landfill site on January 16 and 17, 1991, to oversee
        activities and respond to questions about surface soil and sediment samples)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Day, Clifford G.: US Fish t Uildlife Service
lecipient: O'Connell, Kinberly: US EPA


"feculent Number: KBC-001-0181 To 0182                                               Date: 01/04/91
•
Title: (Letter forwarding a technical Memorandum prepared on behalf of the respondents to Administrative
       Order Index No. CERCLA-11-0014 for review and requesting that a Meeting be scheduled to discuss
       the Memo)

      Type: CORRESPONDENCE
    Author: Burger, Kevin M.: Uehran Engineering
 Recipient: Basso, Raymond: US EPA
  Attached: KBC-001-0183

Document Number: KBC-001-0183 To 0188                    Parent: KBC-001-0181        Date: 01/04/91

Title: (Memo forwarding the Biota Sampling Program and providing an impartial opinion concerning
       additional sampling proposed by EPA)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Cura, Jerttne J.: Henzie-Cura Associates, Inc.
Recipient: Burger, Kevin M.: Wehran Engineering

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 06/31/92                               Index Docunent Nunber Order                                      Page: 3
                                        KIN-BUC LANDFILL, OPERABLE UNIT 2 Documents




 Document Nunber: KBC-001-0189 To 0192                                                Date: 12/20/90

 Title: (Letter requesting that EPA re-evaluate the technical «erit» of the required Scope of Work
        for additional toil and sediment sampling at the Kin-Buc Landfill site)

      Type: CORRESPONDENCE
 Condition: MISSING ATTACHMENT
    Author: Burger, Kevin H.: Uehran Engineering
 Recipient: Basso, Raymond: US EPA


 Document Number: KBC-001-0193 To 0199                                                Date: 09/17/91

 Title: (Letter stating that the revised draft Remedial Investigation Report for the Kin-Buc Landfill
       site does not specifically address EPA's comnents and Bust be resubnitted)

      Type: CORRESPONDENCE
    Author: Basso, Raymond: US EPA
 Recipient: Burger, Kevin M.: Uehran Engineering


document Nunber: KBC-001-0200 To 0202                                                 Date: 05/06/91
*-
  Title: (Letter containing EPA's comnents on the draft Remedial Investigation Report for the Kin-Buc
         Landfill site, Operable Unit 2)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
Condition: MISSING ATTACHMENT
   Author: Basso, Raymond: US EPA
Recipient: Burger, Kevin M.: Uehran Engineering


Docunent Nunber: KBC-001-0203 To 0204                                                 Date: 04/08/91

Title: (Letter forwarding attached comnents on the draft Remedial Investigation Report for the Kin-Buc
       Landfill site, Operable Unit 2)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Basso, Raymond: US EPA
Recipient: Burger, Kevin M.: Uehran Engineering
 Attached: KBC-001-0205

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     "V31/92                                 Index Document Nunber Order                                         Page: 4
                                             KIN-BUC LANDFILL, OPERABLE UNIT 2 Documents



     Document Nuaber: KBC-001-0205 To 0238                    Parent: KBC-001-0203         Date: 05/06/91

     Title: (Conwnts on the draft Remedial Investigation Report for the Kin-Buc Landfill site, Operable
            Unit 2)

          Type: CORRESPONDENCE
        Author: none: US EPA
     Recipient: none: none


     Document Nunber: KBC-001-0239 To 0243                                                 Date: 01/24/91

     Title: (Letter responding to points raised in a December 20, 1990, letter requesting that EPA re-evaluate
            the technical merits of the marsh sampling program)

          Type: CORRESPONDENCE
        Author: Basso, Raymond: US EPA
     Recipient: Burger, Kevin M.: Uehran Engineering


     Document Hitter: KBC-001-0244 To 0246                                                 Date: 12/27/90
<s
 -r1tle: (Letter conditionally approving the Remedial Investigation Uork Plan Addendum for the Kin-Buc
            Landfill site)

          Type: CORRESPONDENCE
        Author: Basso, Raymond: US EPA
     Recipient: Burger, Kevin M.: Uehran Engineering


     Document NuBber: KBC-001-0247 To 0274                                                 Date: 01/20/92

     Title: (Letter submitting the attached tables and figures containing normalized sediment PCB data
            for the Kin-Buc Landfill site)

          Type: CORRESPONDENCE
        Author: Burger, Kevin M.: Uehran Engineering
     Recipient: Barry, Alison: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

08/31/92                                Index Document Number Order                                        Page: 5
                                        KIN-BUC LANDFILL, OPERABLE UNIT 2 Documents




Document Number: KBC-001-0275 To 0275                                                 Date: 03/12/92

Title: (Letter forwarding information requested for the development of effluent Hants related to
       the discharge of leachate/groundwater from the Kin-Buc Landfill site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Burger, Kevin N.:   Wehran Engineering
Recipient: Barry, Alison: US EPA
 Attached: KBC-001-0276

Document Number: KBC-001-0276 To 0441                    Parent: KBC- 00 1-0275       Date: 03/01/92

Title: Background Information for Development of Effluent Limits for Kin-Buc Landfill, Operable Unit
       1, Remedial Design/Remedial Action

     Type: PLAN
   Author: none: Uehran Engineering
Recipient: none: Kin Buc, Inc.
           none: SCA Services, Inc.


Document Number: KBC-001-0442 To 0550                                                 Date: 02/01/90

Title: Draft Preliminary Assessment of Sediment Chemistry Data and Recommendations for Chemical Analysis
       in Biological Tissue at Kin-Buc, Operable Unit 2

     Type: PLAN
Condition: DRAFT
   Author: none: Wehran Engineering
Recipient: none: Kin Buc, Inc.
           none: SCA Services, Inc.


Document Hunter: KBC-001-0551 To 0551                                                 Date: 04/22/91

Title: (Letter submitting the "Draft Supplemental Sediment Sampling Report for the Edmonds Creek/Marsh
       Area, Kin-Buc Landfill Site. Operable Unit 2" for review)

    Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Burger, Kevin M.: Wehran Engineering
Recipient: Barry, Alison: US EPA
 Attached: KBC-001-0552

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 08/31/92                               Index Document Number Order                                       Page: 6
                                        KIN-BUG LANDFILL, OPERABLE UNIT 2 Documents



 Document Number: KBC-001-0552 To 0866                   Parent: KBC-001-0551         Date: 04/01/91

 Title: Draft Supplemental Sediment Sampling Report for the Edmonds Creek/Marsh Area, Kin-Buc Landfill
        Site, Operable Unit 2

      Type: REPORT
 Condition: DRAFT
    Author: none: Uehran Engineering
 Recipient: none: Kin Buc, Inc.
            none: SCA Services, Inc.


 Document Number: KBC-001-0867 To 0867                                                Date: (K/03/90

 Title: (Letter forwarding the Final Work Plan for the Kin-Buc Landfill site, Operable Unit 2, Remedial
        Investigation/Feasibility Study and Appendices)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Miller, Robert T.: Wehran Engineering
Recipient: Schmidtberger, James: US EPA
 Attached: KBC-001-0868 KBC-001-1002 KBC-001-1133

^ocument Number: KBC-001-0868 To 1001                    Parent: KBC-001-0867         Date: 10/01/89

Title: Final Uork Plan for Kin-Buc Landfill, Operable Unit 2, Remedial Investigation/Feasibility
       Study

     Type: PLAN
   Author: none: Wehran Engineering
Recipient: none: Kin Buc, Inc.
           none: SCA Services, Inc.


Document Number: KBC-001-1002 To 1132                    Parent: KBC-001-0867         Date: 10/01/89

Title: Appendices for the Final Work Plan for Operable Unit 2, Remedial Investigation/Feasibility
       Study, Kin-Buc Landfill, Volume I

     Type: PLAN
   Author: none: Wehran Engineering
Recipient: none: Kin Buc, Inc.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 08/31/92                               Index Document Number Order                                    Page: 7
                                        KIN-BUC LANDFILL, OPERABLE UNIT 2 Documents



 Document Number: KBC-001-1133 To U99                    Parent: KBC-001-0867         Date: 10/01/89

 Title: Appendices for the Final Work Plan for Operable Unit 2 Remedial Investigation/Feasibility
        Study. Kin-Buc Landfill, Volume 2

      Type: PLAN
    Author: none: Uehran Engineering
 Recipient: none: Kin Buc, Inc.


Document Number: KBC-001-1500 To 1503                                                 Date: 05/11/90

Title: (Letter containing a summary of rationales used in selecting biota samples collected at the
       Kin-Buc Landfill site for analysis)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
Condition: HISSING ATTACHMENT
   Author: Miller, Robert T.: Uehran Engineering
Recipient: Schmidtberger, James: US EPA


  •Kument Number: KBC-001-15M To 1514                                                 Date: 06/18/90
•^
 Title: (Letter forwarding the revised Tables 1 and 2 listing the specific biological organisms or
        tissues to be analyzed for the Kin-Buc Landfill site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Miller, Robert T.: Uehran Engineering
Recipient: Schmidtberger, James: US EPA


Document Number: KBC-001-1515 To 1520                                                 Date: 06/29/90

Title: (Letter forwarding the information requested concerning biological sampling extraction dates
       and discussing sampling procedures)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Miller. Robert T.:   Uehran Engineering
Recipient: O'Connell, Kimberly:   US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 08/31/92                                Index Docunent Number Order                                     Page: 8
                                         KIN-BUC LANDFILL, OPERABLE UNIT 2 Documents



 Document Number: KBC-001-1521 To 1524                                                 Date: 05/03/90

 Title: (Letter confirming issues raised during an April 25, 1990, conference call about the Kin-Buc
        Landfill site Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study)

      Type: CORRESPONDENCE
    Author: Basso, Raymond: US EPA
 Recipient: Sundstrom, Ralph E.: Kin Buc, Inc.


 Docunent Number: KBC-001-1525 To 1527                                                 Date: 06/15/90

 Title: (Letter requesting that a report detailing all sampling and analysis procedures employed and
        the rationale for biota sampling at the Kin-Buc Landfill site be submitted)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Basso, Raymond: US EPA
Recipient: Sundstrom, Ralph E.: Kin Buc, Inc.


Document Nuifcer: KBC-001-1528 To 1531                                                 Date: 08/27/90

^itle: (Letter discussing data validation of Kin-Buc sampling data and denying an extension of time
       for the subnittal of the Operable Unit 2 Remedial Investigation Report)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Basso, Raymond: US EPA
Recipient: Sundstrom, Ralph E.: Kin Buc, Inc.


Document Number: KBC-001-1532 To 1536                                                  Date: 05/07/90

Title: (Letter expressing concern about Uehran's perfonnance of the Remedial Investigation/Feasibility
       Study and objecting to deviation from EPA's sampling and analysis procedures)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Basso, Raymond: US EPA
Recipient: Sundstrom, Ralph E.: Kin Buc, Inc.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 08/31/92                                Index Document Number Order                                            Page: 9
                                         KIN-BUC LANDFILL, OPERABLE UNIT 2 Documents



 Document Number: KBC-001-1537 To 1543                                                  Date: 10/15/90

 Title: (Letter detailing the numerous delays in the implementation of the Reawdial Investigation/Feasibility
        Study and Remedial Design/Remedial Action at the Kin-Buc Landfill site)

        Type: CORRESPONDENCE
      Author: Basso, Raymond: US EPA
Recipient: Sundstrom, Ralph E.: Kin Buc, Inc.


Document Number: KBC-001-1544 To 1548                                                   Date: 10/29/90

Title: (Letter directing that additional sampling for the Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
          be conducted at the Kin-Buc Landfill site. Operable Unit 2)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Basso, Raymond: US EPA
Recipient: Burger, Kevin H.: Uehran Engineering


Document Number: KBC-001-1549 To 1553                                                   Date: 11/09/90

     'tie: (Letter containing determinations regarding the biota sampling program conducted as part of
-"        the Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study for the Kin-Buc Landfill site. Operable Unit 2)

        Type: CORRESPONDENCE
      Author: Basso. Raymond: US EPA
Recipient: Burger, Kevin H.: Uehran Engineering


Document Number: KBC-001-1554 To 1560                                                   Date: 05/11/90

Title: (Letter summarizing the rationales used in selecting biota samples collected at the Kin-Buc
       Landfill site for analysis and forwarding tables of sampling results)

        Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Miller, Robert T.: Uehran Engineering
Recipient: Schmidtberger, James: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 08/31/92                                   Index Document Number Order                                   Page: 10
                                        K1N-BUC LAMDFILL, OPERABLE UNIT 2 Documents




 Document Number: KBC-001-1581 To 1584                                                Date: 04/18/90

 Title: (Letter responding to EPA's comnents on the Draft Preliminary Assessment of Sediment Chemistry
        Data and Recommendations for Chemical Analysis in Biological Tissue at the Kin-Buc Landfill
        site. Operable Unit 2)

        Type: CORRESPONDENCE
    Author: Kapp, Raymond N.: Kin Buc, Inc.
            Miller, Robert T.: Wehran Engineering
 Recipient: Schmidtberger, James: US EPA


Document Nunber: K8C-001-1585 To 1594                                                 Date: 08/30/89

 Title: (Letter forwarding the attached proposed modification to the Remedial Investigation/Feasibility
          Study Work Plan for the Kin-Buc Landfill site. Operable Unit 2)

        Type: CORRESPONDENCE
      Author: Miller, Robert T.: Uehran Engineering
Recipient: Schmidtberger, James: US EPA


     >cument Number: KBC-001-1595 To 1596                                             Date: 07/24/89
•^
Title: (Letter submitting a revised list of PCB/pesticide sampling locations which will supply more
       representative information than previous locations)

        Type: CORRESPONDENCE
      Author: Milter, Robert T.: Uehran Engineering
Recipient: Schmidtberger, James: US EPA


Document Nunber: KBC-001-1597 To 1597                                                 Date: 07/13/89

Title: (Letter containing the well locations and sampling intervals for PCS and pesticide groundwater
       sampling at the Kin-Buc Landfill site)

        Type: CORRESPONDENCE
      Author: Miller, Robert T.: Uehran Engineering
Recipient: Schmidtberger, James: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

08/31/92                             Index Document Number Order                                          Page: 11
                                     KIN-BUC LANDFILL, OPERABLE UNIT 2 Documents




Document Number: KBC-001-1598 To 1636                                               Date: 04/14/89

Title: (Letter submitting for review and approval, a partial Sampling and Analysis Plan for the Kin-Buc
       Landfill site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
Condition: MARGINALIA
   Author: Fern, Dennis G.: Wehran Engineering
           Kapp, Raymond M.: Uehran Engineering
           Miller, Robert T.: Uehran Engineering
Recipient: Katz, Perry: US EPA


Document Number: KBC-001-1639 To 1639                                               Date: 02/02/89

Title: (Letter requesting EPA's approval for Transtech to provide the Risk Assessment for the Kin-Buc
       Landfill site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Sundstrom, Ralph E.: Kin Buc, Inc.
Recipient: Katz, Perry: US EPA


Document Nuofcer: KBC-001-1640 To 1644                                              Date: 10/06/88

Title: (Letter forwarding, for review, preliminary outlines of the proposed scope of work for the
       Remedial Investigation for Operable Unit 2, and the Supplemental RI in support of the Remedial
       Design for Operable Unit 1 at the Kin-Buc Landfill site)

    Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Batholomeu, Dawn R.: Wehran Engineering
           Fern, Dennis G.: Wehran Engineering
           Miller, Robert T.: Wehran Engineering
Recipient: Katz, Perry: US EPA


Document Winter: KBC-001-1645 To 1646                                               Date: 04/06/90

Title: (Letter discussing water sampling procedures and the need for resampling at the Kin-Buc Landfill
       site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Basso, Raymond: US EPA
Recipient: Sundstrom, Ralph E.: Kin Buc, Inc.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

08/31/92                                Index Docunent Number Order                                    Page: 12
                                        KIN-BUC LANDFILL, OPERABLE UNIT 2 Oocunents




Document Number: KBC-001-1647 To 1649                                                 Date: 03/26/90

Title: (Letter containing EPA's comments on the "Draft Preliminary Assessment of Sediment Chemistry
       Data and Recommendations for Chemical Analysis In Biological Tissue at Kin-Buc Operable Unit
       2")

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Basso, Raymond: US EPA
Recipient: Sundstrom, Ralph E.: Kin Buc, Inc.


Docunent Number: KBC-001-1650 To 1653                                                 Date: 03/09/90

Title: (Letter confirming the discussions held on March 1, 1990, for the Kin-Buc Landfill site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Schmidtberger, James: US EPA
Recipient: Sundstrom, Ralph E.: Kin Buc, Inc.


DoctJMnt Number: KBC-001-1654 To 1655                                                 Date: 02/23/90

  tie: (Letter discussing procedural issues regarding the biota sampling conducted for the Remedial
       Investigation/Feasibility Study for the Kin-Buc Landfill site, Operable Unit 2)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Basso, Raymond: US EPA
Recipient: Sundstrom, Ralph E.: Kin Buc, Inc.


Document Number: KBC-001-1656 To 1658                                                 Date: 10/24/89

Title: (Letter conditionally approving the Sampling and Analysis Plan, with the exception of the
       biological analyses, and stating that field work My proceed)

    Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Basso, Raymond: US EPA
Recipient: Sundstrom, Ralph E.: Kin Buc, Inc.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    08/31/92                             Index Document Number Order                                        Page: 13
                                         KIN-BUC LANDFILL, OPERABLE UNIT 2 Documents




    Document Number: KBC-001-1659 To 1661                                               Date: 09/29/89

    Title: (Letter confirming discussions held at the September 26, 1989, Kin-Buc Landfill site Meeting)

          Type: CORRESPONDENCE
        Author: Schmidtberger, James: US EPA
    Recipient: Sundstrom, Ralph E.: Kin Buc, Inc.


    Document Number: KBC-001-1662 To 1664 •                                             Date: 09/22/89

    Title: (Letter conditionally approving the July 1989 Draft Work Plan for the Kin-Buc Landfill site,
           Operable Unit 2, Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study)

          Type: CORRESPONDENCE
        Author: Basso, Raymond: US EPA
    Recipient: Sundstrom, Ralph E.: Kin Buc, Inc.
    »



Document Number: KBC-001-1665 To 1667                                                   Date: 09/22/89

    Title: (Letter, with handwritten comments, conditionally approving the July 1989 Draft Uork Plan
^          for the Kin-Buc Landfill site, Operable Unit 2, Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study)

         Type: CORRESPONDENCE
    Condition: MARGINALIA
       Author: Basso, Raymond: US EPA
    Recipient: Sundstrom, Ralph E.: Kin Buc, Inc.


Document Number: KBC-001-1668 To 1680                                                   Date: 08/18/89

    Title: (Letter forwarding EPA's comments on the Draft Sampling and Analysis Plan for Operable Unit
           I Remedial Design/Remedial Action and Operable unit 2 Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
           for the Kin-Buc Landfill site)

         Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Basso, Raymond: US EPA
Recipient: Sundstrom, Ralph E.: Kin Buc, Inc.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

08/31/92                                Index Document Number Order                                             Page: 14
                                        K1N-BUC LANDFILL, OPERABLE UNIT 2 Documents




Document Number: KBC-001-1681 To 1697                                                 Date: 04/01/87

Title: Section E • Quality Assurance/Quality Control Requirements

     Type: PUN
Condition: ILLEGIBLE
   Author: none: US EPA
Recipient: none: none


Document Number: KBC-001-1698 To 1703                                                 Date: 06/15/89

Title: (Letter forwarding EPA's and the US Fish and Wildlife Service's comnents on the April 1989
       Draft Work Plan for the Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study for the Kin-Buc Landfill site,
       Operable Unit 2}

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
Condition: MARGINALIA
   Author: Basso, Raymond: US EPA
Recipient: Sundstrom, Ralph E.:   Kin Buc, Inc.


document Number: KBC-001:1704 To 1704                                                 Date: 06/02/89

Title: Kin-Buc Meeting (June 2. 1989,   Attendance list)

     Type: OTHER
   Author: various: various
Recipient: none: none


Document Number: KBC-001-1705 To 1713                                                 Date: 05/22/89

Title: (Letter forwarding EPA's comnents on sections of the Sampling and Analysis Plan concerning
       the biological and sediment sampling activities for the Kin-Buc Landfill site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE -->
   Author: Katz, Perry: US EPA
Recipient: Sundstrom, Ralph E.: Kin Buc, Inc.




                                                                                        KBC    003       0054

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

08/31/92                                Index Document Number Order                                          Page: 15
                                        KIN-BUC LANDFILL, OPERABLE UNIT 2 Documents



Document Number: KBC-001-1714 To 1717                                                 Date: 04/07/89

Title: (Letter confirming agreements and discussions of the April 4, 1989, Meting for the Kin-Buc
       Landfill site)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Katz, Perry: US EPA
Recipient: Sundstrom, Ralph E.: Kin Buc, Inc.


Document Number: ICBC-001-1718 To 1728                                                Date: 03/29/89

Title: (Letter forwarding EPA's conments on the Draft Work Plan prepared by Wehran for the Remedial
       Investigation/Feasibility Study for the Kin-Buc Landfill site. Operable Unit 2)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
Condition: MARGINALIA
   Author: Katz, Perry: US EPA
Recipient: Sundstrom, Ralph E.: Kin Buc, Inc.


Document Number: KBC-001-1729 To 1738                                                 Date: 03/29/89

Title: (Letter forwarding EPA's conments on the Draft Work Plan submitted by Wehran for the Remedial
       Investigation/Feasibility Study for the Kin-Buc Landfill site, Operable Unit 2)

    Type: CORRESPONDENCE
  Author: Katz, Perry: US EPA
Recipient: Sundstrom, Ralph E.: Kin Buc, Inc.


Document Number: KBC-001-1739 To 1741                                                 Date: 02/22/89

Title: (Letter stating that EPA will prepare an Endangement Assessment for the Remedial Investigation/Feasibility
      Study for the Kin-Buc Landfill site. Operable Unit 2)

    Type: CORRESPONDENCE
  Author: Katz, Perry: US EPA
Recipient: Sundstrom, Ralph E.: Kin Buc, Inc.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 08/31/92                                Index Document Member Order           •                             Page: 16
                                        K1N-BUC LANDFILL, OPERABLE UNIT 2 Documents



 Document Number: KBC-001-1742 To 1753                                                Date: 01/06/89

 Tftle: (Letter containing EPA's comments on Outline I for Operable Unit 1. Remedial Design/Remedial
        Action, and Outline II for Operable Unit 2, Remedial Investlgation/Feacibility Study, as presented
        in Uehran Engineering's October 6, 1988, letter)

      Type: CORRESPONDENCE
    Author: Katz. Perry: US EPA
 Recipient: Sundstrom, Ralph E.: Kin Buc, Inc.


 Document Number: KBC-001-1754 To 1754                                                Date: 01/29/92

 Title: (Memo forwarding the final report on biological sampling conducted at the Kin-Buc Landfill
        site)

      Type: CORRESPONDENCE
    Author: Adams, Darvene: US EPA
 Recipient: Barry, Alison: US EPA
  Attached: KBC-001-1755

 ^ocuaent Number: KBC-001-1755 To 1807                  Parent: KBC-001-1754          Date: 01/01/92
<^
 Title: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Kin-Buc Landfill Biological Sampling

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Adams, Darvene: US EPA
Recipient: none: US EPA


Bocunent Number: KBC-001-1808 To 1861                                                 Date: 08/01/91

 Title: Final Report for Kin Buc Landfill, Edison, New Jersey

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Charters, David U.: US EPA
Recipient: none: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 18/31/92                               Index Document Number Order                                      Page: 17
                                        KIN-BUC LANDFILL, OPERABLE UNIT 2 Documents




 Document Umber: KBC-001-1862 To 2330                                                 Date: 10/01/91

 Title: Draft Final Remedial Investigation for Kin-Buc Landfill. Operable Unit 2

      Type: REPORT
 Condition: DRAFT
   Author: none: Wehran Engineering
Recipient: none: Kin-Buc, Inc.
            none: SCA Services, Inc.


Document Number: KBC-002-0001 To 0495                                                 Date: 10/01/90

Title: Draft Remedial Investigation Report for Kin-Buc Landfill, Operable Unit 2, Volume 2, Appendices
       A-H

     Type: REPORT
Condition: DRAFT
   Author: none: Wehran Engineering
Recipient: none: Kin-Buc, Inc.
            none: SCA Services, Inc.

^
...........-...........................
                                      ...
                                        ...
                                          ...
                                            ...
                                              ...
                                                ...
                                                  ...
                                                    ...
                                                      ...
                                                        ...
                                                          ...
                                                            ...
                                                              ...
                                                                ...
                                                                  ...
                                                                    ....
                                                                       ............ .
                                                                                    ..
Document Number: KBC-002-0496 To 0847                                Date: 10/01/90

Title: Draft Remedial Investigation Report for Kin-Buc Landfill, Operable Unit 2, Volume 3, Appendices
       I-J

     Type: REPORT
Condition: DRAFT
   Author: none: Wehran Engineering
Recipient: none: Kin-Buc, Inc.
            none: SCA Services, Inc.


Document Number: KBC-002-084B To 1244                                                 Date: 10/01/90

Title: Draft Remedial Investigation Report for Kin-Buc Landfill, Operable Unit 2, Volume 4, Appendices
       J (continued) -L

     Type: REPORT
Condition: DRAFT
   Author: none: Wenran Engineering
Recipient: none: Kin-Buc, Inc.
            none: SCA Services, Inc.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

18/31/92                              Index Document Number Order                                     Page: 18
                                      KIN-BUC LANDFILL, OPERABLE UNIT 2 Documents



Document Nutter: KBC-002-1245 To 1399                                               Date: 02/27/92

Title: Final Risk Assessment, Part I - Hunan Health Assessment, Part II • Environmental Assessment,
       Kin Buc Landfill Operable Unit II, Edison, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Litwin, Jearme: COM Federal Programs Corporation
Recipient: Barry, Alison: US EPA


Document Nunber: KBC-002-UOO To 1501                                                Date: 02/27/92

Title: Final Risk Assessment, Part II - Environmental Assessment, Kin Buc Landfill Operable Unit
       II, Edison, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Li twin, Jeanne: COM Federal Programs Corporation
Recipient: Barry, Alison: US EPA


Document Number: KBC-002-1502 To 1622                                               Date: 05/01/91

     : Appendix A, Appendix B, Appendix D, and Appendix J

     Type: DATA
Condition: INCOMPLETE; MISSING ATTACHMENT
  Author: none: none
Recipient: none: none


Document Number: KBC-002-1623 To 1753                                               Date: 07/01/92

Title: Kin-Buc Landfill, Operable Unit 2, Draft Final Feasibility Study Report, Volune I • Report

     Type: REPORT
Condition: DRAFT
   Author: none: Uehran Engineering
Recipient: none: Kin-Buc, Inc.
           none: SCA Services, Inc.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 V31/92                                 Index Document Number Order                                      Page: 19
                                        KIN-BUC LANDFILL, OPERABLE UNIT 2 Documents



Oocument Number: KBC-002-1754 To 2085                                                 Date: 07/01/92

Title: Kin-Buc Landfill, Operable Unit 2, Draft Final Feasibility Study Report, Volume II • Appendices
       A through D

     Type: REPORT
Condition: DRAFT
   Author: none: Uehran Engineering
Recipient: none: Kin-Buc, Inc.
           none: SCA Services, Inc.


Document Number: KBC-002-2086 To 2441                                                 Date: 07/01/92

Title: Kih-Buc Landfill, Operable Unit 2, Draft Final Feasibility Study Report. Volume III • Appendix
       E through H

     Type: REPORT
Condition: DRAFT
   Author: none: Uehran Engineering
Recipient: none: Kin-Buc, Inc.
           none: SCA Services, Inc.


Document Nunber: KBC-002-2442 To 2454                                                 Date: 07/01/92

Title: Superfund Proposed Plan, Kin-Buc Landfill, Edison Township, Middlesex County, New Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: none: US EPA
Recipient: none: none

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

               Addendum to Administrative Record
1.   Transcript of the Public Meeting for Operable Unit 2 of the
     Kin-Buc landfill Site, held August 4, 1992, at the
     Edison Municipal Building, Edison, New Jersey.
2.   Written comments submitted by New Jersey State Senator
     Joe Kyrillos, dated August 10, 1992.
3.   Written comments submitted by Robert Spiegel, President
     of the Edison Wetlands Association, dated August 14,
     1992.
4.   Written comments submitted by John Grun, Director of
     the Edison Township Department of Health and Human
     Resources, dated August 10, 1992.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 108 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        APPENDIX IV

STATE LETTER OF CONCURRENCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 109 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

09.   23.      92       06   : 34   AM       * D E P T.           OF       K N V . y ROT          PO 2




                                              State of New fertey
                              Department of Environmental Protection and Energy
                                           Office of the Commissioner
                                                      CN402
                                            Trenton, NJ 08625-0402
                                              Tel. « 609-292-2885
Scott A, Wdner                                Tax. « 609-984-3962

                                                                                   SEP 1 8 1992
         Mr. Constantine Sidamon-Eristoff
         USEPA - Region H
         26 Federal Plaza
         New York, NY 10278
         Dear Mr. Sidamon-Eristoff:
         Re:        Record Of Decision
                    Kin-Buc Landfill
                    Edison Township, Middlesex County
         The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy (NJDEPE) has
         reviewed the Record of Decision for the Kin-Buc Landfill Super-fund Site, Operable Unit
         n. The NJDEPE concurs with the selected remedy which includes removal of PCB
         contaminated sediments in adjacent wetlands, long term monitoring of ground and surface
         waters, and restoration of wetland areas disturbed in conducting the sediment removal.
         A ROD for Operable Unit I was signed in 1988 and addressed the extensive contamination
         found in the landfill proper. The Operable Unit I ROD included a landfill containment
         system (including a circumferential slurry wall), extension of the existing cap and a leachate
         collection and treatment system. The Operable Unit II ROD implements remediation of
         areas outside of the first Operable Unit.



                                                                 Sincerely,


                                                                   rtt A, Weiner
                                                                 Commissioner

         SAW:irc



                                       Ntwjmnuy It *n bjutl Opportunity Employer
                                                    Retyclaa P*ptr

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 110 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      APPENDIX V

RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 111 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

                                KIN-BUG LANDFILL SITE

                                   OPERABLE UNIT 2

This community relations responsiveness summary is divided into the following
sections:

Overview:            This section discusses the U.S. Environmental Protection
                     Agency's (EPA's) preferred alternative for remedial action.

Background:          This section briefly describes community relations activities related
                     to the second operable unit at the Kin-Buc site.

Summary of
Comments:           This section provides a summary of commentators' major issues
                    and concerns, and expressly acknowledges and responds to all
                    significant comments raised by the local community. The local
                    community includes residents, businesses, the municipality, and
                    the potentially responsible parties (PRPs).

OVERVIEW

At the initiation of the public comment period on July 15, 1992, EPA presented its
preferred alternative for the second operable unit at the Kin-Buc Landfill site, located in
Edison Township, New Jersey. The first operable unit remedy consists of a landfill
containment system (cap, slurry wall, and leachate collection and treatment) which will
prevent the migration of landfill leachate into the surrounding environment, including
ground water, surface water, and sediments. The second operable unit remedy was
developed to remediate contaminated sediments found outside the boundary of the
first operable unit's slurry wall.

The selected remedy for the second operable unit includes the excavation of
sediments contaminated by polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) from the Edmonds
Creek wetlands adjacent to the landfill, the consolidation of these sediments within the
Operable Unit 1 containment system, and the active restoration of the wetlands areas
disturbed by the remediation. In addition, long-term monitoring of ground water
quality outside of the Operable Unit 1 containment system, and the Raritan River water
quality will be implemented to ensure that the preferred alternative is protective of
human health and the environment.

The principal threat for the second operable unit is the contaminated wetlands
sediment from which PCBs and some metals are being taken up into the local aquatic
food chain, thereby posing a threat to resident wildlife and to human health via
consumption. Upon removal of the most contaminated sediments, in which PCBs

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 112 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

exceed EPA's action level of 5 parts per million (ppm), the majority of these
contaminants will no longer be available to local fish and crabs, thereby greatly
reducing threats to human health and the environment. Although ground water and
surface water (the Raritan River) do not currently pose risks to either human health or
the environment, these media will continue to be monitored in order to ensure that
both the Operable Unit 1 and 2 remedies are protective.


COMMUNITY RELATIONS BACKGROUND

The Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study (RI/FS) Report and the Proposed
Plan for the Kin-Buc Landfill Operable Unit 2 were released to the public on July 15,
1992. These two documents were made available to the public in the administrative
record file, located at the information repositories maintained at the EPA Superfund
Records Center at EPA's Region II office in New York City and at the Edison Free
Public Library, 340 Plainfield Avenue, Edison, New Jersey. The notice of availability for
these documents was published in the Home News on July 15, 1992. The public
comment period on the preferred alternative was held between July 15,1992 and
August 14, 1992. In addition, a public meeting was held on August 4, 1992, at the
Edison Municipal Building. At this meeting, representatives from EPA answered
questions concerning the site and the remedial alternatives under consideration.
Responses to the comments received during the comment period, including the public
meeting, are provided in this Responsiveness Summary.

COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY AND RESPONSES TO SIGNIFICANT COMMENTS

This section provides a comprehensive response to all significant comments and
summarizes the major issues and concerns raised by the local community. The
questions and comments raised during the public meeting and received during the
public comment period can be grouped into several categories, as follows:

      A.     Operable Unit 1-Source Control Remedy for the Kin-Buc
             Landfill

       B.    Risks and Contamination Associated with Operable Unit 2

      C.     General Comments

A summary of these comments and EPA's response to them is provided in the
following section.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 113 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         3
A.   Operable Unit 1-Source Control Remedy

1.   A representative of the Middlesex County Environmental Coalition asked
     at the meeting whether saltwater from the Raritan River could erode the
     slurry wall material.

     ERA response: Wehran Engineering, working on behalf of the Potentially
     Responsible Parties, with EPA oversight, is conducting long-term testing
     as part of the Operable Unit 1 design to determine the reaction of various
     mixtures of slurry with leachate and contaminated ground water from the
     site. The Raritan River flows under estuarine conditions in the vicinity of
     Kin-Buc, and its water is more saline than typical of a freshwater stream.
     However, river water will not directly contact the slurry wall. Net
     discharge of ground water from Kin-Buc is to the river, although some
     river water may temporarily recharge the refuse and sand-and-gravel
     layers during the tidal cycle. Therefore, only ground water or leachate
     will come into direct contact with the subsurface slurry wall. Data from
     the compatibility testing, which is not yet completed, indicates that the
     performance of the slurry mixture is not compromised by representative
     samples of contaminated ground water taken from the site. On the basis
     of this testing, EPA is confident that the reaction of slurry with ground
     water will not weaken the slurry wall after installation.

2.   A representative of the Middlesex County Environmental Coalition asked
     about the dimensions of the slurry wall, and the effectiveness of the
     leachate treatment facility.

     EPA response: The slurry wall will extend around the perimeter of Kin-
     Buc I and II and Pool C, as well as the portion of the Low-Lying Area
     adjacent to Kin-Buc I. The total perimeter of the wall, which will be
     several feet thick, will measure approximately 6900 feet. The average
     depth of the wall is approximately 30 feet, with a maximum depth of 54
     feet and a minimum depth of six feet. Variations in depth reflect the
     northwest dip of the underlying bedrock, which is present at shallower
     depths on the north side of the landfill. The wall will not be located
     immediately adjacent to the Raritan River, since Mound B is located in
     between Kin-Buc I and the river. A distance of approximately 500 feet
     separates Kin-Buc I from the river bank. The slurry wall is designed to
     be virtually impermeable to leakage, and will be maintained in perpetuity
     by the PRPs under EPA oversight.

     The leachate treatment facility is being designed to remove contaminants
     from leachate and contaminated ground water down to levels required by
     Federal and State water quality regulations. Organic contaminants will be

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 114 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     removed completely, while metals will be removed to levels that will not
     cause degradation of river water quality. The treatment system will be
     designed to ensure that discharged water will not negatively impact the
     quality of the Raritan River.

3.   A representative of the Edison Wetlands Association expressed concern
     about potential hazards associated with construction of the cap and slurry
     wall, due to buried wastes with ignitable or flammable characteristics, and
     inquired about EPA's precautions to protect site workers and area
     residents.

     ERA response: While ERA acknowledges that there are risks, primarily to
     on-site workers, associated with construction activities at hazardous
     waste sites, precautions are taken at all sites to minimize these risks. A
     site-specific Health and Safety Plan is developed for the construction of
     all remedies; this plan is designed to ensure the safety of all persons
     working on site, as well as the surrounding community. The Health and
     Safety Plan addresses such issues as protective equipment and clothing
     for workers, monitoring and control of dust and other emissions,
     coordination with local emergency and health officials, and establishment
     of technical protocols for site-specjfic conditions. The Kin-Buc Health
     and Safety Plan will be discussed with the public during the presentation
     of the final design prior to construction.

     At Kin-Buc, both remedial investigations and extensive pre-design
     investigations have involved subsurface work, such as soil borings and
     monitoring well installation. These activities have not resulted in any
     physical hazards to workers or the community. In addition, the first
     operable unit remedy will involve installation of a slurry wall around the
     perimeter of the landfill, not excavation of hazardous materials disposed
     in the landfill. Installation of a cap on the currently uncapped portions of
     Operable Unit 1 will also not involve excavation of buried wastes,
     although some grading of the surface will be necessary. Therefore,
     construction of the Operable Unit 1 remedy will be less hazardous to
     workers and the community than excavation of the waste materials
     deposited in the landfill. Finally, EPA will continue to work with the
     Township of Edison during all stages of site work.

4.   Assemblyman Warsh and a representative of the Middlesex County
     Environmental Coalition expressed concern about the role of the
     meadow mat as a semi-confining layer in both the Operable Unit 1
     and Operable Unit 2 selected remedies.

     EPA Response: During the remedial investigations for both Operable

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 115 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Units 1 and 2, Wehran Engineering observed a layer of organic-rich
     sediment in between the refuse layer and the sand-and-gravel unit. This
     organic-rich layer, known as "meadow mat," represents a former marsh
     environment similar to the current Edmonds Creek marsh. The physical
     properties of these layers vary somewhat, depending on their exact
     composition, but the fine-grained, organic matrix generally exhibits very
     low permeability. At Kin-Buc, the meadow mat layer varies in thickness
     as well as in the percentage of sand and clay particles. However,
     because of its low permeability, and the distinct decrease in levels of
     ground water contamination between the refuse and the sand-and-gravel
     units, the Kin-Buc meadow mat appears to retard the vertical migration of
     contaminants. For this reason, it has been described as semi-confining.
     However, ERA has not relied upon the presence of this unit in its remedy
     selection for either Operable Unit 1 or 2. The Operable Unit 1 slurry wall
     will be keyed into the deeper bedrock unit, not the meadow mat, which
     will provide for complete containment of the landfill.

5.   A representative of the Edison Wetlands Association asked about
     the collection and disposal of gas generated by the landfill.

     ERA Response: The Operable Unit 1 containment system includes a gas
     collection system which will ensure that gas pressures within the
     enclosed landfill will not encourage the migration of landfill gases through
     the cover system and into the atmosphere. The gas will be drawn off,
     the condensate fraction will be routed to the leachate treatment facility,
     and the remaining gas will be treated in an enclosed flare system
     designed to remove all landfill gas constituents.

B.   Risks and Contamination Associated with Operable Unit 2

1.   A representative of the Edison Wetlands Association asked whether
     EPA had investigated off-site areas of contamination. He stated that
     he was aware of extensive dumping of wastes in the vicinity of the
     Kin-Buc site.

     EPA response: On the basis of the first operable unit investigation, EPA
     divided the site into two operable units. The first operable unit consists
     of the landfill mounds, Kin-Buc I and II, Pool C, and the portion of the
     Low-Lying Area adjacent to Kin-Buc I. This area, in which disposal of
     hazardous wastes has been documented, was considered to be a
     source of contamination observed in the surrounding environment. A
     containment remedy was selected to prevent the further release of
     contaminants into the surrounding area, including the wetlands, the
     Raritan River, and the ground water. However, the Operable Unit 1


                                                                    KBC

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 116 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     investigation indicated that contaminants had already migrated into the
     surrounding environment. Therefore, the second operable unit
     investigation focused on "off-site" contamination in the wetlands, ground
     water, Edmonds Creek, and Mill Brook/Martins Creek.

     EPA's determination of the site boundaries was based on the results of
     these two investigations, as well as Kin-Buc Inc. company records, and
     interviews with people who had worked on site or as haulers and
     transporters. ERA has no information, either technical or documentary,
     which indicates that there are other areas of contamination related to
     Kin-Buc. Historical evidence, such as aerial photographs from the 1940s,
     1950s, and 1960s, does indicate that a large part of this wetlands area at
     the end of Meadow Road was filled in with refuse. However, ERA has no
     evidence to suggest that this refuse was associated with the hazardous
     waste operations at Kin-Buc. Therefore, the Agency is confident that the
     areas which comprise Operable Units 1 and 2 represent the full extent of
     Kin-Buc-related contamination.

2.   A representative of the Edison Wetlands Association expressed
     concern that recreational use of the Raritan River in the Kin-Buc
     vicinity was unrestricted.

     ERA response: ERA conducted a risk assessment, using data collected
     as part of the second operable unit remedial investigation, which
     evaluated eight exposure scenarios for the Kin-Buc site, including
     exposure to surface water during recreational activities. ERA concluded
     that recreational use of the site, which would include boating and
     swimming, would not pose unacceptable risks to human health.
     However, as discussed below in more detail, ERA did find that
     consumption of fish caught on or near the site presented an
     unacceptable risk to human health.

3.   A representative of the Edison Department of Health and Human
     Resources expressed concern in writing and at the meeting about
     the conclusion of the Risk Assessment that fish consumption poses
     unacceptable risks to human health. He requested that EPA make
     more specific recommendations about the species of fish affected
     and the geographical extent of the problem. Further, he asked that
     EPA determine the most effective mechanism for issuing an
     advisory and notifying the public of the issue. Similar views were
     expressed by representatives of the Edison Wetlands Association
     and the Middlesex County Environmental Coalition.

     EPA Response: EPA is currently pursuing this issue in conjunction with

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 117 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     the Township of Edison, and has requested that the State of New Jersey
     Toxics and Biota Committee (composed of representatives from the New
     Jersey Department of Health and the New Jersey Department of
     Environmental Protection and Energy (NJDEPE)) review the data and the
     risk assessment to determine whether such an advisory is necessary,
     what form it should take, and how it will be enforced. ERA will
     coordinate the efforts of these state agencies and the Township of
     Edison in order to ensure that appropriate advisories and/or restrictions
     are established.

4.   A representative of the Middlesex County Environmental Coalition
     asked whether the sand-and-gravel unit was part of the Farrington
     Sand regional aquifer.

     EPA Response: While the sand-and-gravel unit observed at the Kin-Buc
     site is a water-bearing stratigraphic unit, and can be called an aquifer, it
     is not part of the Farrington Sand Formation. The Farrington Sand
     Formation is a Cretaceous formation which overlies the bedrock
     formations regionally. Although the Farrington has been observed
     locally, the sand-and-gravel unit, which represents Quaternary channel
     deposits laid down by the Rarrtan River, is unrelated. The conclusion
     reached during the remedial investigations for Operable Units 1 and 2 is
     that the Raritan may have eroded the Farrington Sand in the site area,
     leaving the sand-and-gravel unit in contact with the underlying bedrock,
     which is comprised of the Brunswick and Lockatong Formations.

5.   A representative of the Middlesex County Environmental Coalition
     asked whether there were any surface water intakes in the vicinity
     of Kin-Buc.

     EPA Response: Wehran Engineering conducted a search of the
     NJDEPE Bureau of Water Allocation records and found that seven
     withdrawal points for ground or surface water exist within a two-mile
     radius of the Kin-Buc site. No drinking water supply wells were identified.
     The only surface water intake for drinking water within this radius serves
     the City of New Brunswick, and is located on the Lawrence Brook,
     approximately 1.5 miles west and upstream of the site.

6.   A member of the Middlesex County Environmental Coalition
     inquired whether there were any impacts to the sole source aquifer
     from the site.

     EPA Response: The Kin-Buc Landfill is located within the boundaries of
     the New Jersey Coastal Plain Sole Source Aquifer, a protective

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 118 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                            8
     designation for ground water authorized by Section 1424 (e) of the Safe
     Drinking Water Act. However, the site has minimal impact on regional
     ground water quality, despite the contamination observed directly below
     the landfill. Hydrologic studies performed during the remedial
     investigation indicate that the net movement of ground water from the
     bedrock formation in the Kin-Buc vicinity is upwards, into the sand-and-
     gravel unit, which in turn discharges to the river. In addition, bedrock
     water quality is currently at acceptable levels. After implementation of the
     first operable unit containment system, ground water quality at Kin-Buc
     will gradually improve in all three stratigraphic units.

7.   A representative of the Edison Wetlands Association inquired about the
     current status of a previously Identified drainage feature from which
     leachate drained Into Mill Brook.

     ERA Response: The Operable Unit 1 Remedial Investigation Report
     described two man-made drainage features, designed for precipitation
     runoff, which discharged into Mill Brook. Historically, leachate seeps
     from the Kin-Buc site have been documented as discharging into Mill
     Brook. However, no leachate seeps are currently observed entering Mill
     Brook/Martins Creek from the Kin-Buc site. The primary leachate seeps
     occurred on the eastern side of Kin-Buc I, in the Pool C area, as
     subsurface oily liquids pooled and drained out of the landfill. This
     material has been collected and taken off site since 1981 as part of an
     on-going removal action. Volumes of oily wastes have dropped
     significantly, and little, if any, such waste is currently seeping into Pool C.
     Mill Brook/Martins Creek receives significant urban stormwater runoff
     from the Township of Edison, as well as from local industries and the
     nearby New Jersey Turnpike, all of which contribute significantly to the
     levels of polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and metals observed in
     channel sediments. The Operable Unit 2 Remedial Investigation Report
     concluded that the observed levels of these contaminants may be
     partially attributable to both stormwater runoff and anthropogenic sources
     other than Kin-Buc. Any contributions from Kin-Buc will be eliminated by
     construction of the Operable Unit 1 slurry wall and cap.


8.   A representative of the Edison Wetlands Association described the
     presence of a day care center in immediate proximity to the Kin-Buc site,
     and requested that EPA evaluate risks to this facility posed by the site.

     EPA Response: The John F. Kennedy Day Care Center is located at 225
     Mill Road, in the Heller Industrial Park, approximately one-half mile from
     the Kin-Buc Landfill. The location of this facility is well beyond the area of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 119 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      off-site contamination as determined by ERA during both remedial
      investigations, and the direction of ground water flow is to the south-
      south west, towards the Raritan River. ERA has no evidence to suggest
      that children using the day care center would be impacted by the Kin-
      Buc site in its current state. In addition, during construction of the landfill
      containment system, dusts and other possible emissions will be carefully
      monitored and controlled to eliminate risks to the surrounding
      community.

9.    A representative of the Middlesex County Environmental Coalition asked
      what score Kin-Buc had received from the original Hazard Ranking
      System, and whether a listing site inspection had been done.

      ERA Response: The Kin-Buc site received an MRS score of 50.6 in 1982,
      upon completion of the Site Investigation. The Preliminary Assessment
      was completed in January 1980. The site was added to the National
      Priorities List in October 1981.

10.   A resident of Woodbridge Township asked whether the time frames given
      in the Proposed Plan for each alternative included the design phase.
                                                    >
      ERA Response: The times frames provided for each alternative do
      include the design period.

11.   A resident from Woodbridge Township asked EPA to explain the term
      "functional wetlands."

      EPA Response: EPA used the term "functional wetlands" to refer to the
      relative abundance of plant and animal life observed in the Edmonds
      Creek Marsh and the adjacent Low-Lying Area, which indicates that this
      area has a moderate to high ecological value.

12.   A representative from the Edison Wetlands Association inquired about the
      migration of contaminants from the landfill into the Raritan River. This
      concern was also expressed by representatives from the Middlesex
      County Environmental Coalition.

      EPA Response: EPA conducted an eight-week river water sampling
      program as part of the design of the Operable Unit 1 leachate treatment
      facility. The purpose of the sampling was to evaluate ambient river water
      quality in order to develop discharge limits for the treatment plant. While
      several metals (aluminum, iron, copper and lead) were found in excess of
      the federal Ambient Water Quality Criteria (AWQC), the levels detected
      only slightly exceeded the criteria. No organics were detected in the river

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 120 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                          10
      water. Because the Raritan is a major waterway, there are numerous
      point sources and non-point sources of pollutants which discharge into
      the river. In the vicinity of Kin-Buc, there are several major sources of
      contaminants such as other landfills and industries. In addition, this
      stretch of the river is estuarine; because of tidal fluctuations, upstream
      and downstream sampling points cannot be determined locally. For
      these reasons, ERA determined that it would not be possible to
      determine the contribution of the Kin-Buc Landfill to pollution in the
      Raritan River. Since no significant levels of contaminants were detected,
      and those few inorganics which were observed in exceedance of criteria
      could not be attributed solely to Kin-Buc, EPA concluded that surface
      water quality had not been impacted significantly by the landfill.
      However, to confirm this conclusion and to ensure that both selected
      remedies remain effective, the Agency plans to implement a ground
      water and surface water monitoring program.

      EPA also evaluated sediment samples in the Edmonds Creek marsh and
      channel, as well as Mill Brook/Martins Creek. No specific patterns for
      PAHs could be determined, although PCB distribution patterns clearly
      pointed to Pool C as the source of these contaminants. Generally,
      inorganic compounds and some nonvolatile organics tend to attach or
      sorb to fine-grained particles or organic carbon, whereas volatile
      organics will volatilize from surface water, or otherwise degrade.
      However, inorganics were found in higher levels in the mouths of both
      Edmonds Creek and Martins Creek, where sediments are coarser-
      grained and low in organic carbon, suggesting that these concentrations
      reflect river influences rather than site-related sources. Sediment
      samples from the Raritan River channel were not evaluated for the
      reasons described in the discussion of surface water sampling.
      However, data from literature indicates generally high levels of inorganics
      throughout this portion of the Raritan basin.

13.   A representative of the Edison Wetlands Association asked whether there
      had been any screening or testing for radioactive substances.

      EPA Response: EPA does not routinely test for radioactive materials
      unless circumstantial evidence suggests that such materials may be
      present. EPA currently has no evidence to suggest that radioactive
      substances were disposed in the Kin-Buc Landfill, although that
      possibility exists at Kin-Buc, as at all such landfills. However, the
      Operable Unit 1 remedial action is designed to prevent the migration of
      all hazardous substances by containing all waste materials deposited in
      the landfill.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 121 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                          11
14.   A representative from the Middlesex County Environmental Coalition and a
      representative of the Edison Wetlands Association expressed interest in
      whether the Agency for Toxics Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR)
      had prepared a health assessment for the Kin-Buc site. The Edison
      Wetlands Association representative requested that a second ATSDR
      health assessment be performed, which would incorporate the most
      recent site data.

      EPA Response: ATSDR was required to perform a health assessment
      for all National Priorities List sites in the mid-1980s. The Kin-Buc Health
      Assessment was completed in June 1987. EPA and the Township of
      Edison have requested that the New Jersey Department of Health, in
      conjunction with ATSDR, review the Operable Unit 2 data for Kin-Buc and
      prepare a supplemental health assessment. However, the ATSDR
      assessments provide a general evaluation of past, current, and future
      potential site risks, and are intended for use earlier in the Super-fund
      process. The ATSDR health assessment is a qualitative evaluation of
      potential hazards, whereas EPA's Risk Assessment utilizes site-specific
      data to quantitatively evaluate health risks. EPA's evaluation uses the
      most recent toxicity information from human and animal studies in
      combination with conservative exposure assumptions. For these
      reasons, EPA believes that the two Risk Assessments conducted by EPA
      (for Operable Units 1 and 2) provide a conservative and thorough
      evaluation of human health risks associated with the Kin-Buc site.


C.    General Comments
1.    Assemblyman Warsh, Assemblywoman Berman, and State Senator Kyrillos
      (written comment), as well as the representatives of the Edison Wetlands
      Association and the Middlesex County Environmental Coalition expressed
      concerns about the credibility of EPA, due to perceived problems with
      other waste sites in Middlesex County, such as Edgeboro Landfill,
      Chemical Insecticide and Renora. These community representatives
      urged a coordinated effort to address all such waste sites as part of a
      regional plan, rather than as individual sites.

      EPA Response: EPA appreciates the desire of the community to
      participate in and resolve Middlesex County's environmental issues, and
      EPA agrees that, from a technical perspective, addressing the restoration
      of the area can be achieved by a coordinated approach to addressing all
      sources of pollution. However, the Superfund regulatory framework
      mandates that EPA conduct investigations and select remedies for each
      NPL site. In the case of the Edgeboro Landfill, EPA concluded after

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 122 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    12

careful evaluation that Edgeboro was not eligible for inclusion on the
 NPL Therefore, the operation and closure of that landfill remains under
the authority of the NJDEPE. However, Superfund Records of Decision
have been signed for the Kin-Buc, Chemical Insecticide, and Renora
sites. Although technical and administrative issues have delayed
implementation of remedial action at Renora and Chemical Insecticide,
 EPA is actively working to resolve these issues expeditiously and ensure
protection of public health and the environment. The individual remedies
at each of these three sites will serve to eliminate or reduce migration of
hazardous substances from the sites, and EPA will continue to
investigate off-site contamination related to each site, as appropriate. For
example, this second Record of Decision for the Kin-Buc site addresses
the off-site contamination of wetland areas from the Kin-Buc Landfill, and
its implementation will contribute to the protection of the regional wetland
environment. EPA will continue to maintain open communications with
the communities of Middlesex County and local officials with respect to
activities at each Superfund site.
