LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: Record of Decision - MONTGOMERY TOWNSHIP HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/58320
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: ec175086e8a8dd6630b8ca24d3cd8f846328d14bf1dca29703a25b790910414d
Source PDF pages: 205
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    DECLARATION STATEMENT
                                         RECORD OF DECISION
                Montgomery Township Housing Development


SITE NAME AND LOCATION
Montgomery Township Housing Development, Montgomery Township,
Somerset County, New Jersey
STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
This decision document presents the selected remedial action
for the Montgomery Township Housing Development site, developed
in accordance with the comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, as amended by the
Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, and to the
extent applicable, the National Oil and Hazardous Substances
Pollution Contingency Plan, 40 CFR Part 300.
Montgomery Township Housing Development and Rocky Hill Municipal
Wellfield are two; Superfund sites in southern Somerset County.
Because of the close proximity of the sites, and the similarity
of the contaminant^: present, both sites were addressed in a
single remedial investigation and feasibility study. Similarly,
the attached Decision Summary and Responsiveness Summary cover
both sites.
STATEMENT OF BASIS                 :
I am basing my decision primarily on the following documents,
which are contained 'in the administrative record, and that
characterize. the nature and extent of contamination and evaluate
remedial alternatives for the Montgomery Township Housing
Development site:
- pperjibjLe Unit Remedial Investigation Report, Montgomery
" Township Housing peWSspment , prepared by Woodward-Clyde                                                   .
  consultants,
      _.-. ' • -••             •           ..,              -        .
                                                                                 ''
                                                                           -....., .     •.   .. ,   ....
  Operable Unit Feasibility Study Report, Montgomery Township
  Housing Development, prepared by Woodward-Clyde Consultants,
       ''           "" '"••••'•    •''• •'•        •'
   Record of Decisiciks(for* first operable unit), Montgomery                                                    flM
 < Township.Hou$ingyp(lvjBlopmenti
          -.'•'- ';'' ^^i'\^-:j2' •"
                                                             September
                                     . - • • • • • - • . ± '..j ,    ,
                                                                       1987;                                      .
                                                                                                                    "_(w*
                  "'"   ' ";7>X- ,'(v :, '., - ''   .   "       .'•'•'••   .-•••''• .'         '        O
  Remedial' Ihvestlga^fbnr-R^xyft, Montgomery Township Housing                                                        ^
  Development and Rqclcy Hill Mxinicipal Wellfield, prepared "by
itWobdward-Clyde cbiiSaitantsj April ••*•*•*           ,, .^                                                         o
                                                                                                                     Ni
                                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                            n



                                                                                               *58320*
                                                                                                     58320

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -2-

- Feasibility Study Report, Montgomery Township Housing
  Development and Rocky Hill Municipal Wellfield, prepared by
  Woodward-Clyde Consultants, April 1988;
- Proposed Remedial Action Plan, Montgomery Township Housing
  Development and Rocky Hill Municipal Wellfield, May 1988;
- The attached Decision Summary for the Montgomery Township
  Housing Development and Rocky Hill Municipal Wellfield sites;
- The attached Responsiveness Summary for the sites, which
  incorporates public comments received; and
- Staff summaries and recommendations.
DESCRIPTION OF SELECTED REMEDY

The remedial alternative presented in this document represents
a final remedial solution for the Montgomery Township Housing
Development site. It addresses ground water contamination in
the underlying aquifer. A previous Record of Decision, signed
in September 1987, provided for the connection of residences
with impacted or threatened wells to a public water supply and
the sealing of those private wells.
The specific components of the remedial action are as follows:
- Extraction of contaminated ground water from the primary
  source area followed by on-site treatment and reinjection
  of the treated water back into the underlying aquifer. The
  ground water will be treated to achieve federal and state
  cleanup standards;
- Connecting any remaining affected residences to the public
  water supply;
- Sealing of remaining private water supply and monitoring wells
  within the contaminant plume; and
- Implementation of a ground water sampling program to monitor
  the effectiveness of the cleanup.
DECLARATIONS
Consistent with the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Comp-    ^
ensation and Liability Act, as amended, and the National Oil       &
and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan, 40 CFR Part
300, I have determined that the selected remedy is protective      0
of human health and the environment, attains federal and state     o
requirements that are applicable or relevant and appropriate       ^
for this action, and is cost-effective.                            o
                                                                   \1
                                                                   \l
                                                                   05

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -3-

Furthermore, this remedy satisfies the preference for treatment
that reduces the toxicity, mobility or volume as a principal
element. Finally, I have determined that this remedy utilizes
permanent solutions and treatment technologies to the maximum
extent practicable.
The State of New Jersey has been consulted and agrees with the
selected remedy for the Rocky Hill Municipal Wellfield site.



    Datfe
                                      -JL
                               Christopher vCT. Daggett
                               Regional Administrator




                                                                  2
                                                                  O


                                                                  O
                                                                  O


                                                                  O
                                                                  NJ
                                                                  Nl

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       DECLARATION STATEMENT
                         RECORD OF DECISION
                 Rocky Hill Municipal Wellfield


SITE NAME AND LOCATION
Rocky Hill Municipal Wellfield, Montgomery Township, Somerset
County, New Jersey.
STATEMENT OF PURPOSE

This decision document presents the selected remedial action for
the Rocky Hill Municipal Wellfield site, developed in accordance
with the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act of 1980, as amended by the Superfund Amendments
and Reauthorization Act of 1986, and to the extent applicable,
the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency
Plan, 40 CFR Part 300.
                              •
Rocky Hill Municipal Wellfield and Montgomery Township Housing
Development are two Superfund sites in southern Somerset County.
Because of the close proximity of the sites, and the similarity
of the contaminants present, both sites were addressed in a
single remedial investigation and feasibility study. Similarly,
the attached Decision Summary and Responsiveness Summary cover
both sites.
STATEMENT OF BASIS
I am basing my decision primarily on the following documents,
which are contained in the administrative record, and that
characterize the nature and extent of contamination and evaluate
remedial alternatives for the Rocky Hill Municipal Wellfield
site:
- Operable Unit Remedial Investigation Report, Montgomery
  Township Housing Development, prepared by Woodward-Clyde
  Consultants, July 1987;
- Operable Unit Feasibility Study Report, Montgomery Township       ^
  Housing Development, prepared by Woodward-Clyde Consultants,     K
                                                                    Q
  July 1987;
- Record of Decision (for first operable unit), Montgomery         §
  Township Housing Development, September 1987;                    ^
- Remedial Investigation Report, Montgomery Township Housing       °
  Development and Rocky Hill Municipal Wellfield, prepared by      oo
  Woodward-Clyde Consultants, April 1988;                          °

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -3-

Furthermore, this remedy satisfies the preference for treatment
that reduces the toxicity, mobility or volume as a principal
element. Finally, I have determined that this remedy utilizes
permanent solutions and treatment technologies to the maximum
extent practicable.
The State of New Jersey has been consulted and agrees with the
selected remedy for the Montgomery Township Housing Development
site.



   Date I
            (ft?                Christopher 'Jj/tfaggett
                                Regional Administrator




                                                                  o
                                                                  o

                                                                  o
                                                                  Nl
                                                                  00

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -2-

- Feasibility Study Report, Montgomery Township Housing
  Development and Rocky Hill Municipal Wellfield, prepared by
  Woodward-Clyde Consultants, April 1988;
- Proposed Remedial Action Plan, Montgomery Township Housing
  Development and Rocky Hill Municipal Wellfield, May 1988;
- The attached Decision Summary for the Montgomery Township
  Housing Development and Rocky Hill Municipal Wellfield sites;
- The attached Responsiveness Summary for the sites, which
  incorporates public comments received; and
- Staff summaries and recommendations.
DESCRIPTION OF SELECTED REMEDY
The remedial alternative presented in this document represents
a final remedial solution for the Rocky Hill Municipal Wellfield
site. It addresses ground water contamination in the underlying
aquifer.
The specific components of the remedial action are as follows:
- Extraction of contaminated ground water from the primary
  source area followed by on-site treatment and reinjection
  of the treated water back into the underlying aquifer. The
  ground water will be treated to achieve federal and state
  cleanup standards;
- Connection of any remaining affected residences to the public
  water supply;
- Sealing of private water supply and monitoring wells within
  the contaminant plume; and
- Implementation of a ground water sampling program to monitor
  the effectiveness of the cleanup.
DECLARATIONS
Consistent with the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Comp-
ensation and Liability Act, as amended, and the National Oil
and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan, 40 CFR Part
300, I have determined that the selected remedy is protective      ~z-
of human health and the environment, attains federal and state     5.
requirements that are applicable or relevant and appropriate
for this action, and is cost-effective.                             o
                                                                    o


                                                                     CO
                                                                     Kf

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                Decision Summary
                Montgomery Township Housing Development Site
                     Rocky Hill Municipal Wellfield Site


SITE LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION

     The Montgomery Township Housing Development (MTHD) and Rocky Hill
Municipal Wellfield (RHMW) sites are located in Somerset County, Mew Jersey,
in the vicinity of the intersection of U.S. Route 206 and N.J. Route 518.
The MTHD includes approximately 72 acres located cast of Route 206 and north
of Route 518. The development and surrounding area include 77 private
homes. The RHMW is a 2 acre tract of land in the Borough of Rocky Rill,
which services the residents of Rocky Hill.     The RHMW is located east of
Route 206, south of Route 518, and south of the MTHD. Figure 1 shows the
study area.
     Properties along Montgomery Road, the northern border of the MTHD site,
are wooded, residential or agricultural lots. To the southwest are two
shopping centers and an office center. To the south is a residential area
of Rocky Hill. The homes on the and of Cleveland Circle within MTHD are
bordered to the east by the Millstone River, which parallels the Delaware
and Raritan Canal.
     The MTHD/RHMW sites lie within the Piedmont Physiographic Province and
are underlain by bedrock of the Brunswick Formation covered vith a
relatively thin veneer of unconsolidated sediments (up to about 30 feet
thick). Regionally, the Brunswick Formation primarily consists of varying
thicknesses of red shale and mudstone, and is the principle aquifer in the
area. Ground water exists in a number of water-bearing zones which are
generally under unconfined to semi-confined conditions.          Intersecting
vertical and horizontal fractures have resulted from jointing and provide
the principal means of storage and movement of ground water in the formation.
     Drinking water for the MTHD is supplied by private residential wells
and by the privately-owned Elizabethtown Water Company. Thirty-eight of the
71 residences of MTHD are currently connected to Elizabethtown's system.
The remaining 33 residences of MTHD and 6 residences outside of MTHD
continue to use private wells but will be connected pursuant to the Record
of Decision signed for the MTHD site in September 1987. Individual septic
tanks are used to dispose of wastewatar. The residential wells in the
affected area are at an average depth of 125 feet.
     The RHMW which supplies public water to the Borough of Rocky Hill
extends to a depth of 278 ft. An air stripping treatment unit on the well         ^
was installed by the Borough in 1983 as a response to the presence of            -<
contamination, and consists of two cylindrical towers operating in series
with a capacity of 250 gallons per minute.                                       o
                                                                                »-»
     The RHMW is located in the Rocky Hill Historic District and is listed
on both the State and National Register of Historic Places. The corridor        o
adjacent to the Millstone River has a potential for archaeological              ^
                                                                                CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   -2-


signlficance, according to the State Historic Preservation Officer.
SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES

     Maps indicate that until 1961, the MTHD site was used for farming.
Construction of the homes began in 1961 and the area was divided into 71
lots with private veils and septic tanks.          -     i
     RHMW wells numbered 1 and 2 were cousL*.b^ced in 1936. Iheue tvo wells
provided a source of potable water to the Borough of Rocky Hill. Veil
number 1 was abandoned and sealed between 1976 and 1978. In 1978, a study
by Rutgers University on the RHMW revealed trichloroethene (TCE)
contamination levels of about 25 parts per billion (ppb). Continued testing
of this well by Rocky Hill from 1978 to 1983 indicated that the TCE
concentration ranged from about 50 ppb to 200 ppb. Due to the elevated
levels of TCE in the water, well number 2 was closed in November 1979.
Levels of TCE in the well water eventually declined, and the well was
subsequently reopened. Levels of TCE, however, increased, and the well was
closed for a second time in January 1982. During the shutdown of well
number 2, the Borough of Rocky Hill obtained potable water from
Elizabethtown Water Company. After the Installation of two air stripping
units by the borough for well number 2, the well reopened as a potable
source of water in July 1983.
     Concern over the ground water contamination in Rocky Hill spurred the
initial sampling of commercial and domestic wells in Montgomery Township
from December 1979 to January 1980. Figure 2 shows the results of potable
well samples prior to the initiation of the remedial investigation and
feasibility study (RI/FS) for the MTHD site. Data shown are averages of TCE
concentrations found in domestic wells between 1979 and 1985. Residences at
the ends of Robin Drive, Oxford Circle and Cleveland Circle were found to
have the highest TCE concentrations whereas lower TCE concentrations were
found in wells along Sycamore Lane. TCE was not detected in any domestic
wells proximate to the northern portion of Montgomery Road. The historical
results were Insufficient to adequately delineate a plume of contaminated
ground water.
     In March 1981, Elizabethtown Water Company water lines were installed
in MTHD, and residents were advised not to use well water. Twenty homes
initially elected to connect to the municipal supply. At the present time,
38 residences have hooked up. In January 1986, the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP), Division of Water Resources placed a
restriction on future well drilling for water supply wells in the area. In
September 1987, an operable unit Record of Decision (ROD) was signed by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), with the concurrence
of NJDEP. The September 1987 ROD provided for the supply of alternate water    Q
through the permanent hookup of all MTHD residences and 6 residences outside   -<
of MTHD to the available public water supply system.
                                                                               o
     Field investigative activities were Initiated by NJDEP and USEPA to       >->
Identify the source(s) of contamination for both sites.       Soil borings,
septic samples, site inspections, and continued ground water monitoring have   o
been used to Identify 13 possible sources of contamination. Figure 3 shows     ,%
these facilities.     At the present time, investigatory measures are          -^

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   -3-


incomplete. Requests for information are being sent to current owijers, past
owners, and past tenants. No notice letters have been sent to potentially
responsible parties; and determination of enforcement actions, if any, will
be made upon review of all relevant information.
COMMUNITY RELATIONS

     Community Relations activities for the MTHD/RHMW sites \were initiated
by the NJDEP in 198.- <rlth the development of a Community Relations Plan.
     An initial public meeting was held in January 1986 to present NJDEP's
plans for the Rl/FS for the MTHD/RHMW sites.
     In September 1987, a ROD was Issued in which the USEPA and NJDEP agreed
to provide connections to an available public water supply.           Public
participation was solicited as part of this ROD's development through a
public notice, public meeting, and public comment process similar to the one
discussed below.
     On April 25, 1988 the completed draft RI/FS and the Proposed Remedial
Action Flan (PRAP) addressing the overall ground water problem were made
available for public review and comment at five public information
repositories.    The FRAP defines NJDEP's and USEPA's preferred remedial
alternative for the sites. Notices regarding the PRAP, public meeting and
public comment period were sent to all contacts Identified in the Community
Relations Flan and to the news media. The 30-day public comment period was
extended through May 31, 1988 at the request of a commentor.
     A public meeting was held in May 1988 to discuss the results of the
RI/FS and the FRAP for the MTHD/RHMW sites.
     The primary concerns of the affected residents involve the location of
equipment and possible associated air and noise pollution. The owners of
one property, identified as a primary source of the contamination, expressed
concern regarding the necessity of remediating the aquifer, and proposed
that natural attenuation be relied upon for the entire remediation. A
Responslveness Summary, which addresses the comments and questions raised,
is attached to this ROD.
     The officials from Montgomery Township and the Borough of Rocky Hill
have requested continued involvement through the design and construction.
This interest is based on their concerns about equipment placement, noise,
and air emissions. NJDEP noted that continued updates would be provided.
SCOPE AND ROLE OF OPERABLE UNIT

      This ROD addresses the second of two planned operable units for the      ^
sites. The first operable unit addressed the provision of an alternate         ^
water supply to MTHD residents. A water connection and well sealing program
is currently being Implemented as identified in the ROD signed in September    o
1987.                                                                          o
                                                                               >-»
     The second operable unit RI/FS addresses identification of the            o
source(s) of contamination, determination of the nature and extent of          \j
                                                                               03

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   -4-


contaminatlon, and evaluation of alternatives for the remediation of ground
water. Upon completion -of this operable unit the concentrations of the site
contaminants are expected to be significantly reduced, such that they comply
with all applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs) as
required by Section 121 of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorizatlon Act
(SARA), and no longer pose a threat to the public or the environment.
Therefore, no further operable units are anticipated.         •
SITE CHARACTERISTICS

     In 1984, the NJDEP entered into two Cooperative Agreements with the
USEPA under which it would perform the RI/FSs for the MTHD and the RHMW
sites. Because of the proximity of the two sites and the similarity of
contaminants found, a single RI/FS for the two sites was performed under one
professional contract.
     Investigative activities under this project were developed to identify
possible sources of contamination in an attempt to eliminate continued
discharges, and to determine the nature and extent of the ground water
contamination. These activities included a file search; ground water flow
studies; along with ground water, septic tank, surface water, sediment, and
soil boring sampling. In addition to information collected directly under
this program, results from other sources (such as RHMW water analysis and
site investigations conducted outside this program) provided information.
     Once the ground water data were compiled under this program, the
feasibility of supplying several alternative drinking water sources was
evaluated in an Interim RI/FS Report in July 1987. The associated risk
assessment Indicated that many of those residents using their private wells
as a water supply were being exposed to increased health risks, and in
September 1987, the USEPA issued the previously mentioned ROD with the
concurrence of NJDEP.
     The Brunswick Formation in this area was observed to strike N40° to
N50°E and dip gently to the NW about 10 to 15°. Most of the fractures in
the bedrock were not bedding plane joints, but rather sets of near vertical
fractures at an acute angle to the bedding. The predominant trend of
fractures was found to average N60°E. Nevertheless, the geophysical survey
also identified some near-horizontal fracture zones, which may be associated
with the bedding planes.
     Nearly all of the porosity in the Brunswick Formation occurs in the
fractures. Although the distribution of fractures decreases with depth in
the Brunswick Formation, site data suggests that water-bearing zones persist
to a depth of at least 500 ft. The slug test data suggests that locally,
most of the fractures intercepted by an individual well are limited in
extent with respect to their ability to transmit water. However, more          ^
extensive water-bearing fractures which persist laterally in excess of 1,500   -<
ft. are evidenced by the results of the pumping test.
                                                                               o
     Depth to ground water in the shallow wells (screened in the weathered   ^
top of bedrock) was found to range from approximately 5 to 54 fjt. below
ground surface.    Deeper wells (to depths of 100 to 250 ft.) uniformly        o
exhibited lower piezometrlc heads than the paired shallow well, Indicating a ^

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   -5-


potential for downward vertical flow of ground water.
     Contours of ground water elevations and plezometric head appear
concordant with the topographic contours in the MTHD. That is, the ground
water table is a subdued expression of the land surface.               Static
ground-water flow in both shallow and deep aquifers appears to be toward the
Millstone River (eastern region) and Beden Brook (western and northern
regions). The shallow aquifer intersects and discharges to*the Millstone
River and Beden Brook and to several small streams w'alcb .re tributariep >f
the Millstone River and Beden Brook. Figures 4, 5 and 6 present the ground
water contours for the shallow ground water, deep ground water under static
conditions, and deep ground water during the pumping test, respectively.
     Although the potential for downward vertical flow exists, hydrologic
and geochemical evidence suggests that cones of high vertical permeability
may be discontinuous and limited in extent. This is exemplified by the fact
that the RHMW pump test caused drawdowns in the deep wells, but none of the
shallow wells appeared to be affected during the period of pumping.
     On 19 occasions between November 1979 and July 1987, ground water
samples were collected and analyzed for either volatile organics or for TCE
only. The ground water samples collected during the Rl in 1986 were also
analyzed for other organics and inorganics. Table 1 lists the contaminants
detected in the ground water during the RI sampling events. This table
presents the maximum and mean concentrations of compounds which were
detected.
     The RI ground water results are further summarized in Table 2 by
comparing the results for the indicator chemicals identified in the risk
assessment with the remedial response objectives (see the "Description of
Alternatives" section of this ROD and Table 3 for the discussion of the
response objectives). This comparison presents two significant issues. The
first item to note is that TCE is the most predominant aite contaminant,
both with respect to concentration and areal extent.
     The second item noted from Table 2 is that several compounds are only
sporadically present. Chlordane, for example, was present only in 2 samples
out of 86.      Examination of the locations of these findings found no
relationship to the TCE contamination, nor was any other evidence of a
separate plume of chlordane found. Similar findings were noted for arsenic,
barium, beryllium, chromium, lead, nickel, and silver. These compounds were
not considered to be related to the TCE contamination, and were not
considered when the effectiveness of remedial alternatives were evaluated.
1,1-dichloroethene was found in only one sample, but the coincidental
presence of significant levels of other compounds related to the plume (eg:
TCE) prevented the elimination of this compound from consideration.
     Results of these sampling programs have revealed that a plume of TCE       a
contamination roughly extends from Route 206 east to the Millstone River        ^
north to Sycamore Lane and south to Route 518. Concentrations of TCE within
the plume range from below the detection limit, 5 ppb, to 650 ppb in            §
monitoring wells. A TCE concentration as high as 950 ppb was detected in a      ^
domestic well on Robin Drive on one occasion in 1982, prior to the Rl/FS.
Figure 7 shows the areal extent of the contaminant plume by graphically         ^
                                                                                03
                                                                                -si

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      -6-


 depicting the distribution of TCE.
     Neither the surface water nor the sediment samples from the Millstone
River or Beden Brook Identified the presence of contamination. The septic
tank sampling found some compounds in low concentration but TCE was not
detected.
      The following compounds were present In the soils In \excess of the
 NJDEP action levels; xylenes, PCBg, srsenlc, copper, and mercury. Xylenes,  /
 PCBs, arsenic, and copper were identified at the location of 1377 RoutA *S
_J06. This contamination is currently being addressed as part of other NJDEP
 actions (Administrative Order with property owners)* and will not be
 addressed as part of this remedial action. Mercury was identified in a
 septic field boring in concentrations only slightly above the action level
 (3.7 parts per million (ppm) vs. 1 ppm), and at a depth of 16 feet. Mercury
 was not identified in the ground water. Due to the low concentration and
 depth of this compound, it will not be addressed in the remedial action
 alternatives. None of the compounds found to be of concern in the ground
 water were identified in excess of action levels in the soils. Identified
 soil contamination is therefore not a concern for the MTHD/RHMW sites
 because links to ground water contamination have not been made, and the
 presence of those compounds is being addressed further by appropriate NJDEP
 programs. If any additional sampling identifies other contaminated areas,
 those areas would have to be addressed accordingly.
     An investigation at the Princeton Gamma Tech property located on Route T
518 was conducted under NJDEP's Environmental Cleanup Responsibility Act
program (ECRA). ECRA is designed to resolve environmental problems prior to
the sale or closure of certain industrial properties. The investigation
found TCE in the shallow ground water beneath the Princeton Gamma Tech
property at concentrations of 5,000 ppb. This information combined with
findings of shallow TCE contamination in an onsite RI/FS well, and the •
property location with respect to the upgradient edge of the ground water |
plume led to the conclusion that this property was a primary source of TCE 1
contamination in the area.
     Vhile an earlier septic tank sample at this property identified the
presence of TCE, a recent sample found only residual TCE in the septic
tank. The RI reported results for 28 soil samples at the property, none of
which showed TCE contamination. The property owner is currently involved in
Independent soil sampling activities under the guidance of NJDEP. The above
Information indicates the likelihood that some past discharge was the source
of contamination presently found in the shallow ground water.
     As Indicated above, TCE is currently detected in the ground water. No
TCE has been found in any surface water samples. Thus, the major transport
of TCE is via ground water. The direction of ground water flow is generally
to the northeast in the eastern part of the MTHD/RHMW sites and to the          :z
northwest in the northwestern part of the sites (See Figures 4, 5).               5
         t_
     The primary impact of the TCE contamination is on the quality and          o
potential use of the ground water. In addition, ground water discharge to       o
the Millstone River is likely; however, as previously noted TCE has not yet
been detected in surface water samples.                                         o
                                                                                Nl
                                                                                CO
                                                                                0)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       -7-


SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS

      A public health assessment was conducted for the altes in accordance
with the Superfund Public Health Evaluation Manual (1986). Since the site
characterization noted that soils and surface waters are not currently being
impacted by the site related contamination present in the ground water,
exposure to soils and surface waters was not included £n the health
•Pses*Ri*nt of the MTHD/RHMW sites.          Thus, the risk assessment only
cuiisidi.-id exposure to contaminated ground waters.
     A comparison of calculated total dose levels for indicator chemicals
with reference dose levels (RfD) and acceptable daily intake levels (ADI)
shows that the estimated maximum dose exceeds the cited threshold level in
seven of the eleven cases of total adult dose levels investigated, and
eleven of the eleven child dose levels calculated. This indicates that
exposure to contaminants at the maximum concentration detected, over a
lifetime, may lead to noncarcinogenic adverse health effects. The hazard
index from an adult exposure to plume contamination is 13.21 and 175.07, for
mean and maximum exposures respectively. The background hazard index is
0.60 for mean dose and 4.03 for maximum doses of indicator chemicals. A
hazard index in excess of 1.0 is indicative of the presence of a
noncarcinogenic health concerns.
     Dose calculations for the MTHD/RHMW sites Indicate that the largest
estimated dose for organic compounds occurs from inhalation (caused by
volatilization of • compounds from ground water used for cooking or
showering), followed by ingestion and dermal adsorption.        All of the
increased lifetime cancer risks associated with exposure to organics and
metals in the ground water are larger than one in one hundred thousand (1 x
10 ). The total upper, bound risk level is between four in one hundred and
six in ten (A. 14 x 10" to 5.47 x 10~ ). Increased lifetime cancer risks
from exposure to background levels of indicator chemicals at the sites are a
maximum of two in one thousand (2.52 x 10 ).
     The data collected for the RI indicates that many of the compounds used
in estimating the risk were sporadically detected, and are not site related
(inorganics and chlordane).      Negating these compounds inclusion when
estimating the risks of the sites, the increased.lifetime cancer risk ranges
from a mean of eight la. ten thousand (8.6 x 10 ) to a maximum of seven in
one thousand (7.0 x 10~ 1, as compared to a maximum background risk of four
in one million (3.8 x 10 ).
DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES

     The PRAP presented the preferred remedy illustrated In the following
excerpt:                                                                       3:
                                                                               CD
                                                                               -<
          "NJDEP and USEPA recommend that an aquifer treatment system
          consisting of pumping at the source area, air stripping units and    o
          upgradient reinjectlon be selected as the most appropriate site      2
          remedy (Alternative 7 with consideration to combine some air
          strippers as discussed in Alternative SB). This system would         o
          protect public health and the environment in the most cost           ^
          effective and implementable fashion, and best meet all applicable    ^

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   -8-


          or relevant and appropriate regulations (as required by the
          Superfund Amendments and Reauthorizatlon Act). Implementation of
          this system would Include connection of the residence in the
          southwest section of the site to public water, sealing of affected
          private wells, and flushing the source area by extracting,
          treating (air stripping) and reinjecting the treated ground water."
                                                             *
     No significant changes have been made to this preferred remedy as a
       of the public comment period.                       *
DESCRIPTION OF ALTERNATIVES

     A total of IS alternatives were developed and evaluated In the Rl/FS
(seven alternatives plus several sub-alteratives). These alternatives were
developed In a three stage process consisting of response objective
development, technology review and screening, and assembly of technologies
into a variety of feasible alternatives.
     Remedial response objectives generally Include the protection of human
health and the environment from existing or potential threats posed by
contaminated materials. The objectives are used to focus the development
and evaluation of remedial alternatives possible for the site. Response
objectives are selected in consideration of the site-specific data generated
during the in-field Investigations, ARARs, and other response guidance. The
objectives are consistent with NJDEP and USEPA requirements/policies. Since
contamination was generally limited to the ground water, the response
objectives specifically focus on ground water issues.
     No single set of federal or state criteria applies to allowable
concentrations in drinking water for all of the contaminants detected in
ground water at the sites. For this reason, all ARARs and criteria to be
considered have been reviewed and summarized in the final three columns of
Table 3. These columns present the most stringent site-specific ARARs, the
selected site-specific health based goals to be considered, and the
site-specific remedial response objectives.
     The area of contamination within the aquifer Includes approximately 200
acres and is 100 to 200 feet thick. The area of contamination is further
described by dividing it into a primary plume (TCE concentrations greater
than 100 ppb), and a secondary plume (TCE detected at less than 100 ppb)
(See Figure 7). The maximum TCE concentration detected in the primary plume
is 5,900 ppb (at Frlnceton Gamma Tech); the mean TCE concentration in this
primary plume is 200 ppb. The secondary plume has a mean concentration of
50 ppb. The objective of the remediation alternatives is to reduce the <
entire ground water concentration of TCE to one (1) ppb. One ppb is a New '
Jersey maximum concentration limit (MCL) for TCE which is currently
proposed, and is expected to be promulgated in the near future. This level
is being used at these sites in place of the federal MCL of 5 ppb.
Tetrachloroethene and 1,1-dichloroethene will also have a remedial objective ^
of reducing such concentrations to below 1 ppb and 2 ppb, respectively.        -<
     In addition to the remediation of the aquifer, short term actions must     o
be performed to protect the public health during remediation. Residences        2
currently using private wells should be provided with an alternate public
                                                                                o
                                                                                xi
                                                                                xO
                                                                                o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    -9-


water supply. While approximately 40 residences are on private veils, all
but one are already part of a water line connection program (September 1987
ROD).  The remaining residences should be connected under this program.
     In order to prevent future uncontrolled contacts with the ground water,
affected private wells and unused monitor wells should be sealed. The 1987
ROD included sealing of the potable wells for those residences being
connected to the public water supply. Other residences have previously
connected to the public supply, these should be sealed. Approximately 60
wells would be affected.
     The possibility of secondary TCE contamination sources down gradient of
Princeton Gamma Tech still remains, but ground water contamination up
gradient or side gradient of these properties makes any determination
extremely difficult. A monitoring program should be Instituted to observe
whether these locations begin to exhibit evidence of contamination as
regional ground water conditions Improve. As a final consideration, the
water treatment prior to distribution currently being employed by RHMW
should continue.
     A variety of remedial technologies were evaluated in the FS to
determine the most feasible methods of remediating the ground water at the
sites. The technologies were screened and refined through a preliminary
evaluation.   The only technology class eliminated during this preliminary
evaluation was the in-situ treatment. Concern regarding the implementation
of the in-situ treatment technology in the fractured rock aquifer of the
MTHD/RHMW sites was the primary reason for eliminating this technology.
Several variations within the flushing technologies were retained for
further consideration. These variations either allowed for site remediation
in different time periods or offered different treatment methods.
     Seven remedial alternatives with several sub-alternatives were
identified to protect human health and the environment from the
contamination at these sites. Table 4 lists these alternatives, and they
are described below:
Alternative 1 - No Action consists of. providing no control measures to
mitigate the contamination or isolate the remaining residence(s) from the
contaminated ground water. Natural attenuation would be the only method
used to reduce the levels of contamination.         Contaminant levels and
distribution would be monitored on a regular basis to observe possible
changes that may warrant additional measures (such as delineating secondary
sources or notifying residents). Since contamination would remain
essentially unremediated, reevaluation of the no action response would be
performed at five-year intervals (as prescribed by SARA) to address whether
changes in site characteristics and to evaluate whether the remedy is          :?
protective of human health and the environment.                                ^
Alternative 2 - Aquifer Isolation. The September 1987 Record of Decision o
for the MTHD site provides for the connection of all affected residences to o
public water, and the sealing of their wells.         The aquifer isolation
alternative expands upon this past decision by incorporating site knowledgi o i
gained during Phase II sampling. This alternative requires that presen \t ^
private wells be sealed and future well Installations be prohibited in orde £ •"

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    -10-


to isolate the aquifer from uncontrolled potable water usage. In addition,
residences within the contaminant plume would be provided with public
water.    The Phase II results have identified one additional residence
affected by the contamination plume, located on the eastern edge of Rocky
Hill. This residence was not included under the September 1987 ROD, but
would be addressed in this alternative.        The monitoring elements from
Alternative 1 would also be performed as part of the aquifer Isolation.
AlSarnaiive -• - " - ..> and Air Strip in the Entire Plume represents an
aggressive aquifer remediation strategy designed to minimize the time
required to clean up the site. In addition to the public water connection
and well sealing components identified in Alternative 2, an aquifer
remediation system would be employed using an estimated 13 extraction wells
consisting of 4 wells within the primary plume and 9 wells located in the
secondary plume within the eastern residential areas. Extracted ground
water would be treated by air stripping. The alternative is further divided
into 3 sub-alternatives, which differ in the possible discharge locations
for the treated ground water (3A - combination of surface water and ground
water discharge; 3B - ground water injection; 3C - use as a potable water
supply).
Alternative 4 - Pump and Treat with Carbon Adsorption in the Entire Plume is
identical to Alternative 3 and its sub-alternatives except that activated
carbon adsorption would be the central unit process (4A, 4B and AC
correspond to 3A, 3B and 3C).
Alternative 5 - Pump and Air Strip in the Source Area represents an aqulfier
remediation strategy which is designed to focus active remedial efforts In
the most contaminated regions of the aquifer. The ground water secondary
plume would be allowed to remediate itself via natural attenuation, while
isolation and cleanup of the primary plume is achieved by extraction wells
within the source region. Although extraction wells would not be installed
in the secondary plume, cleanup of this area would be enhanced because any
contribution from the source area would be arrested. Additional enhancement
(i.e. reduction in time to remediate) can also be achieved by reinjection of
the treated water up gradient of this area, which would accelerate the
natural attenuation of the ground water.
     Alternative 5 includes the public water connection and well sealing
components of Alternative 2 and an aquifer flushing system using an
estimated 3 extraction wells located in the primary plume within the
commercial areas of Montgomery Township. Extracted ground water would be
treated by air stripping.     The alternative is further divided Into 3
sub-alternatives, which differ in the possible discharge locations for the
treated ground water, but incorporate all other elements of Alternative 5
(5A - ground water Injection downgradient; 5B - ground water Injection         3
upgradlent; 5C - use as a potable water supply).                               en
Alternative 6 - Pump and Treat with Carbon Adsorption in the Source Area is
identical to Alternative 5 and its sub-alternatives, except that carbon        o
adsorption would be the central unit process (6A, 6B and 6C correspond to      ^
5A, 56 and 5C).
                                                                               o
                                                                               Nl
Alternative 7 - Pump and Air Stripping in the Source Area with Vicinity        ^>
                                                                    —

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    -11-

Injection - During the development of the equipment and piping layout and
costs for Alternative 5, it became evident that another alternative
warranted evaluation.    This alternative uses the same 3 primary plume
extraction veils outlined in Alternatives 5 and 6; however, instead of
Incorporating a single centralized treatment unit, individual air strippers
are installed at each pumping location. Discharge from each unit would be
to two Injection wells located at nearby points, selected to enhance
flushing vithin both the primary and secondary plumes.    As vith the other
flushing alternatives, Alternative 7 includes the public water connections
and well sealings of Alternative 2.
SUMMARY OF THE COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES

     The site remediation alternatives described above are evaluated below.
The evaluation discusses the relative advantages/disadvantages of the
alternatives in relation to each of 9 remedial evaluation criteria utilized
in current USEPA guidance (Draft RI/FS Guidance, 3/88; Draft Proposed Plan
and ROD Guidance, 3/88).       Table 5 summarizes these criteria.       The
evaluations are typically presented in comparison to either Alternative 5B
or Alternative 7, which comprise the elements of the selected remedy.
     The Short Term Effectiveness criteria evaluates alternatives in light
of potential impacts during construction, potential impacts to workers and
the community, potential Impacts to the environment during Implementation,
and time until protection is achieved.
     Except for Alternative 1, all alternatives equally protect human health
by connecting affected residences to public water supply.
     While all alternatives are expected to eventually result in the ground
water contamination being reduced to acceptable levels, the time for this
cleanup is estimated to vary several fold between the alternatives.
Alternatives that reinject the treated ground water performed significantly<
better than the others, with minimum cleanup time estimates being reduced! \^
from 40 years (Alternatives 1, 2, 3C, 4C, 5C, 6C) to less than 7 years)
(Alternatives 3A, 3B, 4A, 4B, 5A, 5B. 6A, 6B, 7). Estimated cleanup time
for Alternatives 5A, B and 6A, B are five years, and seven years for
Alternative 7. Those alternatives which do not include reinjection, have
estimated cleanup times of 40 years minimum. In summary the short term
effectiveness evaluation Indicates a preference for Alternatives 3A, 3B, 4A,
4B, 5A, 5B, 6A, 6B, 7 mainly because of the shorter time frames for
achievement of ARARs, and notes shortcomings for Alternatives 1, 2, 3C, 4C,
5C, 6C, because of the longer time frames.
     Evaluation of Long Term Effectiveness and Permanence yields no
significant variations between the alternatives.            The long term
effectiveness and permanence criteria evaluates the magnitude of total          g
residual risks of untreated waste, adequacy of controls used to manage this     -<
waste and reliability of controls over time.          As previously noted.
Implementation of all alternatives would result in the eventual reduction of   o
contaminant levels to the site specific clean-up goals and/or applicable or    2
relevant and appropriate requirements.
                                                                               o
     In a similar manner the evaluation of the Reduction of Toxicity,          ^
                                                                               CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    -12-


Mobillty, and Volume did not note major differences between the various
alternatives since all should eventually reduce contaminants to acceptable
levels
     The Implementability criteria addresses technical and administrative
feasibility as veil as the availability of goods and services. Differences
between    alternatives   only   exist/ when considering f administrative
feasibility. The evaluation of the ftmplementability of alternatives notes
that undeveloped land is limited 'across the sil^s. oud ouch of the
development is for single family homes. The evaluation further notes that
construction in the eastern region of the sites would potentially impact
both a designated historic district (Rocky Hill), and the flood plain for
the Millstone River, which would necessitate a flood plain assessment.
Added agency coordination would be expected because of these factors.
Alternatives 3A, 3B, 3C, 4A, 4B, and 4C all require the construction of
wells and treatment units within both the residential areas and eastern
region of the sites. Alternatives 5A, 5B, SC, 6A, 6B, 6C, and 7 all limit
construction of extraction wells and treatment systems to undeveloped or
commercially developed areas; although minor impact by subsurface piping and
injection wells located In residential areas would occur.             Although
Alternative 7 necessitates the siting x>f 13 treatment systems as opposed to 1
unit for Alternatives 5 and 6, a less extensive piping network would be
used. Alternatives 1 and 2 have no major construction and are therefore
relatively implementable with respect to land use.
     Other factors regarding implementability (i.e. technical feasibility
and availability of goods) do not note significant differences between the
alternatives.    In summary, the implementability evaluation indicates a
preference for Alternatives 1, 2, 5A, 5B, 5C, 6A, 6B, 6C and 7 which rated
favorably under the administrative feasibility criteria, and notes
shortcoming for alternatives 3A, 3B, 3C, 4A, 4B, and 4C, because of the need
to construct wells within residential/historical/flood plain areas.
     Comparative Costs are summarized in Table 4. Review of this table
shows that alternatives incorporating carbon adsorption as the unit process
are significantly more expensive than those that utilize air stripping.
Lacking major differences in effectiveness or implementability these cost
differences favor the air stripping alternatives. In summary the evaluation
of costs notes a preference for alternatives 1, 2, 3A, 3B, 3C, 5A, 5B, 5C
and 7 as compared to 4A, 4B, 4C, 6A, 6B, 6C.
     Compliance with ARARs has been evaluated by reviewing chemical, action
and location specific ARARs related to the sites or actions. Chemical
specific ARARs, developed in reference to present and potential potable
water usage including the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act and New Jersey
Water Pollution Control Act as amended by Assembly Bill A280 and are             ^
summarized in Table 3. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act and New           -<
Jersey Surface Water Quality Standards are applicable to discharges to the
Millstone River. Action specific ARARs were reviewed typically in reference      'g
to air or- noise concerns and include the Federal Clean Air Act, New Jersey      *->
Air Quality Standards and New Jersey Noise Control Act. Location specific
ARARs were developed specifically in relation to the cultural sensitivity of      o
the eastern regions of the sites. The National Historic Preservation Act is       ^
applicable since this area encompasses a historic district, potential             ^

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    -13-


archeologlcal sites and historic canal regions. In addition, Executive
Order 1198 and 111990, which pertain to floodplains also applies, since the
area includes a floodplain.
     With the exception of Alternative 1, all alternatives are expected to
be in compliance with the ARARs. Review of the location specific ARARs has
resulted in a preference for alternatives which do not call for construction
in the sensitive eastern rtgtor. though this preference is yiot considered
overwhelming «nuugh ,o alj.. _^_^ _.i< altfti-i-.t:. :s fioo consideration (3A,
3B, 3C, AA, AB, AC).
     Evaluation of Overall Protection summarizes bow the alternative
eliminates, reduces or controls existing and potential risks to human health
and the environment through treatment, engineering controls and/or
institutional controls. Other than Alternatives 1 and 2 all alternatives
would provide protection to human health and the environment. As discussed
under the short-term effectiveness, the remedies differ in the overall time
for remediation. Alternatives 3C, AC, 5C, 6C may involve institutional-
controls over a longer period of time since their estimated cleanup times. -; . .
are longer than for Alternatives 3A, 3B, 4A, AB, 5A, SB, 6A, 6B, 7. Under
all alternatives except Alternative 1, the existing risk to human health
would be mitigated by providing an alternate water supply to all affected ! ,-,
residences. (Note: Following implementation of the September 1987 ROD, all
residences within the MTHD site will be connected to available alternative i
water supplies).        ^ ....               . . ; _ . , -—
     This summary evaluation results in a preference for Alternatives JJA,
3B, AA, AB, 5A, 5B, 6A, 6B, 2 since overall protection to human health would
be achieved with a shorter time period for institutional controls (i.e.
alternate water supply) necessary than for 1, 2, 3C, AC, 5C, 6C.
     State Acceptance has been noted for the preferred alternative
(Alternative 7 with acceptability of combining some treatment units if
overwhelming land use concerns arise). The ground water is considered by
the state to be unsuitable as a private potable water supply, and as such
Alternative 1 is opposed.   A preference for a timely and effective aquifer
remediation results in a general reservation for Alternatives 2, 3C, AC, 5C,
6C which all have excessive cleanup times.
     Community Acceptance has been noted for the preferred alternative
provided that concerns regarding the prevention of air and noise pollution
associated with air stripping units be addressed.       The community has
identified this concern as the inadvertent trading of one pollution type
(ground water) for others (air and noise). A responsiveness summary is
attached to address and respond to community concerns.
THE SELECTED REMEDY                                                     i'^

     After careful review and evaluation of the alternatives presented in         Q
the feasibility study to achieve the best balance of all ^evaluation              •<
criteria, NJDEP and USEPA presented a composite of Alternatives 5B and.7 to
the public as the preferred remedy for the Montgomery Township Housing            §
Development and Rocky Hill Municipal Veil Field sites. Alternative 5B and 7       «-
best satisfy the evaluation criteria in that they have relatively short
                                                                                  o
                                                                                  \i
                                                                                  ^£>
                                                                                  tn

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   -14-


remedlatlon time frames to achieve ARARs and are most administratively
feasible and cost effective when compared to the remaining alternatives.
     The input received during the public comment period, consisting
primarily of questions and statements transmitted at the public meeting held
on May 12, 1988, is presented in the attached Responsiveness Summary.
Public comments received encompassed a vide range of issues but did not
necessitate .my major changes in the remedial approach taken at the site.
Accordiugly, the prefaced alternative was selected as a permanent solution
for the site. Some activities will be performed during the Initial phases
of the remedial design process and prior to implementation of the selected
remedial alternative. Components of the selected alternative are described
as follows:

1)   Extraction of the contaminated ground water through pumping followed by
     on-site treatment and reinjection of the treated water back into the
     underlying aquifer.    The ground water will be treated to achieve
     federal and state cleanup standards;
     An aquifer remediation system will be installed to actively flush the
     primary plume. The less contaminated ground water in the secondary
     plume limits will be permitted to attenuate through natural means,
     although enhanced flushing will accelerate the remediation process.
     The conceptualized system consists of three extraction wells, each
     pumping at 350 gpm, individual air stripping units to reduce
     contaminant levels from 200 ppb to 1.0 ppb, and two reinjection wells
     per extraction well. Figure 8 shows the conceptualized locations of
     these wells. As previously noted, this system will be refined and
     modified, if necessary, during design.
2)   Connection of any remaining affected residences to the public water
     supply;
.     Provision of public water would be made to residences within the
     contamination area, not already connected as part of the September 1987
     ROD. This is believed to Involve one residence, though a questionnaire
     would be distributed to potentially affected residents prior to
     implementation. Implementation of this activity would occur separately
     from other remedial activities, so as not to cause unnecessary delay.
3)   Sealing of private water supply and monitoring wells within the
     contaminant plume;
.    An estimated 60 private water supply wells and monitor wells would be
     sealed in the site area. Well sealing is being conducted to assure
     that the contaminated aquifer is not being utilized for potable
     purposes during remediation.
                                                                               o
                                                                               o
A)   Implementation of a ground water sampling program to monitor the
     effectiveness of the cleanup;                                             o
                                                                               sj
     It will be necessary to sample and analyze the raw water from each        £

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   -15-


     extraction vail and the treated affluent several times during the year
     to monitor the treatment efficiency of the system and to monitor the
     extracted groundvatar quality. Details of the monitoring program will
     be developed during the design.
     Prior to implementation of the selected remedy, a design would be
conducted which would Include: a pump test with analytical Sampling of the
pumped water, a bench scale treatability study of tha :>l?;>>«d •' • sr ^er
system, and a ground water model of the planned extraction and injection
system.    The goals of these activities include the determination of
extraction well number locations and capacities, injection well number
locations and capacities, air stripper sizing, pretreatment or post \ ^
treatment requirements (if any), and the possible need for short term carbon ] ;
adsorption on the exhaust from some air strippers.
STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

     The selected remedy provides for restoring the contaminated ground
water to acceptable levels, and assuring that contact with the ground water
is limited while remediation is underway. This remedy has baen additionally
determined in the RI/FS to be a cost effective means of achieving the
necessary remedial objectives. This remedy is therefore protective of human
health and the environment, attains federal and state requirements that are
applicable or relevant and appropriate for this action, and is cost
effective and utilizes alternatives treatment technologies to the maximum
extent practicable. The preference for treatment to reduce the mobility,
toxicity or volume of the hazardous substance is also met by the selected
alternative.    The selected alternative is therefore in compliance with
Section 121 of SARA.
     Protectiveness is being attained by providing well sealing and water
connections to eliminate present risks, and restoring the aquifer to
eliminate future risks. ARARs are all being met by the selected remedy,
both with respect to present and future site conditions. The identification
of ARARs was done as part of the comparative analysis of the alternatives,
and will, therefore not be repeated here.
     Since the selected remedy utilizes air stripping versus carbon
adsorption, and natural attenuation to the greatest extent practical, it Is
the most cost effective means of achieving the site objectives. The remedy
provides the best balance among the 9 evaluation criteria by utilizing an
alternative treatment technology to remediate the contaminant plume in a
reasonable tine frame.      There are no short-term effects during the
remediation. Institutional controls will be in place during the restoration
period and all affected residences will be hooked up to an alternative water   3
supply to eliminate the existing risks at the site.                            o .
     The selected remedy results in the attainment of remedial response
objectives through treatment and natural attenuation. The remedy therefore         o
satisfies the preference for the reduction of toxicity, mobility and volume        ^
of site contaminants.
                                                                                   o
                                                                                   xl
                                                                                   vO
                                                                                   XI

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                          TABLE 1
    COMPOUNDS DETECTED IN RESIDENTIAL AND MONITORING WELLS AT
    MONTGOMERY TOWNSHIP HOUSING DEVELOPMENT AND ROCKY HILL
    MUNICIPAL WELLFIELD SITES DURING THE REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION
                                      •Itjaa                        pt•am               background background
                                                                                           MX.        •em
                                       •IX.                            een
                                    cone (•)                   eone . (•>                conc.(b)   eone.(b)
                             MONITOR I KC •OTAILE .      MONITORING •OTABLC
                               WELLS       WELLS           WELLS     WELLS
 OCCAM !CS                     (ppb)    (ppb)              <ppb>     <ppb>               (PPb)         (PPb)
 1,1,1-trichloroethane*         ^ 1            37             4.9                 9*r        3.2S           ML
 1,1-dichloroethene*                 19       8.6             5.*                 4.9            S          •01
 1,1-dichoroethene*                 NO              44         MO                 5.9             s         SOL
 1,2-dichloroethene*                37              17        7.8                 S.O             S         IDL
 acetone*                           80              12       13.8                 8.6            22        11.1
bis(2-ethylhexyl>phthalatt          S8              NO       1J.3             '    NO             17       10.5
bromod i eh 1 oro«* thane           NO              NO         •0                  NO                          SOL
chlordane                          1.S         0.76          0.52                 0.5            0.            •OL
ehlorofona*                         19              NO        6.1                  NO                          80L
di-n-butylphthalate                 NO              NO         HO                  NO             1            •OL
diethylphthalate                    HO          4.2            HO                 9.6                          BOL
ethyl benzene                       NO          S.3            NO                 S.O                          80L
Mthylene chloride*                  IS           18           4.7                 4.7            8.            4.1
n-nitrosodiphenylanine              NO              NO         NO                  NO            2.            •OL
phenols                             63              54       15.3              12.2               1            •OL
 pyrene                            3.6              NO        9.7                  NO             1            •OL
 tetrachloroethene*                 S3              26        9.2                 s.s                          4.7
 toluene                           1.2              NO        4.9                  HO                          •OL
 trichloroethene*                  650          340           102             38.6                             4.8
METALS AND MISC. CONPOUMOS     <PP»>       <PP"i>                       <PP"»            CPP«>         (ppn.)
 alumirui                          140         0.19        """it              0.120          23.4               •?• 1
 antiaony                         0.11              HO       0.06                  NO        0.06         0.010
arsenic                          0.186         0.04         0.018            0.010         0.0041         0.008
barium                             2.3          0.3           0.4             .120          0.232           0.1
beryllfua                        0.017              NO      o.oos             .005         0.0038         0.004
cadmiM                           0.007         0.01         o.oos             .005          O.OOS              •OL
calcium                           2230          336           202             49.0           34.6          15.1
chromium                         0.406         0.12          0.06             .014          0.014         0.009
cobalt                           0.098        0.081          o.os             .010          0.023         0.022
copper                           0.581           0.2         0.09             .060          0.053         0.037
cyanide                             NO           0.1           NO             .010              •             •
iron                               165           3.8           25            0.220           18.4           4.S
lead                             0.786           2.2         0.09            0.090          0.039         0.013
MgnesiM                            193            76           29             14.0           19.1           8.4
Mnganese                           6.4           0.3          1.1            0.030           1.15               0.3
Mercury                         0.0004       0.0002        0.0002            0.0001        0.0002               BOL
nickel                            0.34         0.07          0.07             0.020          0.04         0.034
potassiua                         S6.6          1.9           e.7               1.7          3.94           2.4
silver                           0.024         0.18          0.01            0.017          0.036         0.014
sodium                              82           58            20              13.0          11.1           8.0
thalliw                              NO       0.006            NO            0.010
vanaditai                          0.2           43          O.OS               1.2         0.033         0.027
tine                                 1         0.21          0.17            0.070           0.16           0.1

•a. plume MX. and went are calculated from *I data for alt residential wells
   and all Mht tor ing wells except xv-60,KW-110,*v-m,NV-1SO,«V-13S,«U-150.
b. background max.and meant are calculated from tt data for the designated                                              o
    background wells *W-60,HW-110.KV-m,NW-1SO,HW-13S)«W-1S0.                                                            -<
e. In calcultlng the Man eonentration*, the contract detection liaiit for each
   individual compound net used for all valuet reported at not detected; therefore,
   all **ant are contervatively high estimite*. If the Maximum detected value reported                                  o
   was below the Mthod detection Unit, it fa pottible for the Man to exceed the Mxi                                     o
•   (rdicates compounds for which values were recalculated to inelude
    the retultt of additional sampling perforMd in April and August, 1987.


                                                                SOURCE: MTHD/RHMW RI/F

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                TABLE 2
                                COMPARISON OF SITE DATA FOR INDICATOR CHEMICALS
                                WITH GROUND WATER REMEDIAL RESPONSE OBJECTIVES


                                                    MONITORING WELL DATA                                  POTABLE WELL DATA
                             RESPONSE                            * DETECTEDX   OCCURENCES                                     OCCURENCES
                             OBJECTIVE        MAXIMUM MEAN       *. ANALYZED     ABOVE      MAXIMUM    MEAN     f DETECTEDX     ABOVE
             SUBSTANCE        (ug/l)          (ug/l) (ug/l)          (a)       OBJECTIVE    (ug/l)    (ug/l)    * ANALYZED    OBJECTIVE

       Trichloroethene          1.0             650     102.5       23X44          23         340      38.6        26X42         26
       Tetrachloroethent        1.0             53       9.2        13X44          4          26        5.5        8X42          8
       Chlordane                0.5             1.3     0.52        1X44           1         0.76       0.5        1X42           1
       1.1-dichloroethene       2.0             NO       NO         0\44           0          44        5.9        1X42           1
       Arsenic                  50            186 (b)   17.8        9X19         1 (b)        39       10.6        13X36          0
       •ariuM                  1000            2300     398.7       19\19        2(0          306      116.2      36X36          0
       Beryl Hue                5.0             17       5-2        12X19        3 (d)        NO        NO        0X36           0
       ChroMiuM                 SO              406      57         12X19        4 (d)        117      13.6        33X36         0
       Lead                     50              786     85.9        12X19        2 (c)       2170      94.5        29X36         4
       Nickel                   350             340     72.6        6X19           0          71       22.3        32X36         0
       Silver                   50              24      10.9        5X19           0          180      17.2        21X36          1
       (•) Background wells are not included In this data.
       (b) Not detected in duplicate sample taken from same well.
       (c) Exceeded objectives in saimles 3D and 3D duplicate. Monitoring well
           3D from which these samples were collected was a poorly installed well
           and data from this well is highly questionable.
       (d) Exceeded objectives in samples 3D. 3D duplicate, and 3S. Monitoring wells
           30 and JS from which these samples were collected were poorly Installed wells
           and data from these wells is highly questionable.
       NO Not detected




66ZO   TOO      A9W                                                                                  SOURCES MTHD/RHMW RI/FS

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              TABLE 3, SHEET 1 OF 3
                                   CRITERIA REVIEWED FOR GROUND MATER REMEDIAL OBJECTIVES

                                                                                                        NJ Inter!*
                                                                       NJ CM                            Groundwater Reference      Stte-    Site-Specific Site
                                                 HJ Ha                 Quality               Health     Clean-up    Levels for     Speclflc Coal to be    Specific
                                                 (1-280)     HCL(c)    Standards MCUJ(d)     Advisories Guidance    Carcinogens    ARAR     Considered    Objective*
       Substances                                (ug/l)(b)   (ug/1)    (ug/lHt) (ug/l)       (ug/l)<e) (ug/l)(u) (ug/l)(D          (ug/AXg) (ug/l)(h)     (ug/1)

       Acetone
       2,3 Benzofuran
       Bls(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate(r)                                                                                   51                       51             51
       BroBodlchloroBethane(THM)                             100(B>)                                         (v)                      100                      100
       M-Butylbenzene
       Carbon Tetrachlorlde                          2         5(y)                0            0.3(q)      5(v)       0.27             2        0              2
       Chlordana                                   0.5                             0(p)      0.021B(q)                 0.022          0.5        0             0.5
       Chloroform                                            100(B)                                         5(v)       0.03           100        0,»3          100
       Cy elopropy 1 benzene
       0-Dlchlorobenzena                           600                           620(p)       3,125          .•                       600      600             600
       1,1 Dlchloroethane                                                                                    (v)                                (v)            (»)
       1,2 Dlchloroethane                            2         5(y)                0           0.95(<|)     5(v)       0.38             2        0              2
       1 , 1 -Dlchloroethene( -ethy lane )           2         T(y)                t           0.2«(q)      5(v)       0.06             2        0.06           2
       Trans- 1 ,2-Dlchloroethene( -ethy lane)      10                            70(p)         350          (v)                       10       10              10
       Otethylphthalata                                                                                      ~
       Dl-n-butylphthlate
       Ethylbenzene                                                              680(p)         680                                            680             680
       Hethylene Chloride                            2                                            5(q)      5(v)                        2        2               2
       N-Nltrosodlphenylaalne
       Phenol                                                          3,500                                                                  3,500          3.500
       Tetrachloroethene                             1                                 (1)      0.7(q)      5(v)       0.69             1        0.69            1
       1,2,4-trlchlorobenzene                        8                                                                                  8                        8
       1.1,1 Trlchloroethane                        26       200<y )             200         22,000(q)       -                         26       26              26
       Tr lchloro*thene< -ethy lene )                t         5(y)                0                        5(v)       3.2              1         0              1
       Tr loh lorof 1 uoroawthane                                                                            _
       Toluene                                                                 2,000<p)      10,100          (v)                                (v)            (v)




                                                                                                                                  SOURCE} MTHD/RHMW RI/F8

0000

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         TABLE 3, SHEET 2 OF 3
              CRITERIA REVIEWED FOR GROUND WATER REMEDIAL. OBJECTIVES

                                                                               NJ Interim
                                         NJ CW                                 Crounduater Reference      Site-       Site-Specific Sit*
                NJ MCI                   Quality                  (tea1th      Clean-up     Levels for    Specific    Goal to be   Specific
                (A-280)       NCUc)      Standards HCLG(d)        Advisories Guidance       Carcinogens   ARAR        Considered   ObjectIre
Substances      (ug/l)(b)     (ug/1)     (ug/l)(t) (ug/l)         (ug/l)(e) (ug/l)<u)       (ug/l HO      (ug/l)(g)   (ug/l)(h)    (ug/1)

Aluatnuu
Arsenic                        50<«)        50     50(p)    50                                 0.002          50          0.002       50
Barlui                      t,000(B>      1,000 1,500(p) 1,800                                             1,000      1,000        1,000
BeryllluB                                                                                      NA                                      5 (aa)
CadaluB                        10(«)         10       5(p)             IB                      NA         \   10          5           10

Calctu»                                                                  \

ChroBluB                      50(a)<9>       50      1?0(p)          170                       NA              50        50           50
Cobalt                                                                  /•                                    _,
Copper                                    1,000(w),300(p)                                                               300           300
Cyanide                                     200                      750                                                200           200

Iron                                        300(u)
Lead                           50(>)         50      20(p)             10(k)                                  50         10           50
HagnestuB
Manganese                                    50(u)
Mercury                         2<«)          2        3(p)          5.5                                          2       2           2

Nickel                                                               350                       NA                       350           350
Potass IUB                                                    *
Silver                         50(a)         50                                                               50         50           50
SodlUB                                   50,000(w)
Thallium

Vanadlua
Zinc                                      5,000(w)




                                                                                                          SOURCE I MTHD/RHMU RI/F8
       r
       toov

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        TABLE 3, SHEET 3 OF 3

                              CRITERIA REVIEWED FOR GROUND WATER REMEDIAL OBJECTIVES


Norest
a. Federal and State criteria reviewed to prepare this table.
b. Nailmua Contaminant Level, State Safe Drinking Hater Act.
c. HAilmimi Contaminant tevel, rederal Safe Drinking Hater let.
4. Haitmua Contaminant Level Goal, Federal Safe Drinking Meter Act.
e. CM drinking water health advisories, baaed on life tie* exposure.               .
f . The reference concentration for carcinogen* la calculated baaed on a t * 10~* risk and the cancer potency factor (CPF) provided In the Superfund Public
    Health Evaluation Manual (OSEPft, 19fl6b) a* follows!
          reference concentration (ug/1) • (t • 10~*)/CPF
      Where available oral route Cff* ere used, MM   reference concentration* are baaed on Inhalation route OFF*.
g.    Host stringent *He *pectfle applicable or relevant and appropriate requirement.
h.    Host atrlngent health-based goal to be considered for action being considered.
I.    An HCLC vaa proposed but subsequently withdrawn, a new HCLO currently under dt sous* ton (USEPI, OtH, 1987).
J.    DEHP Included as per Input fro* HJDCP.
b. Based on Health Advlaory of 20 ug/day and Ingestlon of 2 liter* per day.
a.    InterlBj HCL.
p.    Proposed value.
e,.   Reference concentration* for potential carcinogen*, correspond* to a potential cancer.
r.    DMethylheiyDphthlat* or Bt*(2.ethyltieiyl)phthlat*.
*.    falue of Chromlum(*6).
t.    »J*C 7i9-6. Hew Jersey Croundvater Quality Standards, Primary Standard, Class CH2.
u. H«w Jersey Interim Croundvater Clean-up Guidance, developed 1996. On an Interla) basis the corrective aetlon level of 5 ppb (ug/1) Is applied to
      Individual chemical* oategortied as carcinogens by HJDEP.
*. On an Interim basis, the corrective aetlon criteria for groundwater of 50 ppb total volatile organic toilc pollutants In groundwater shall apply. to the
   aua of all compounds Indicated.
w. HJ«C 7i9-6. Hew Jersey Groundwater Quality Standard*, Secondary Standards, Class CM?.
y. U.S.EP* 1987 national Primary Drinking Hater Regulations - Synthetic Organic Chemical*. Federal Reglater 52 (IJO)i   25689-25717.
i. EP* Ambient Hater Quality Criteria (HOC) for Protection of Human Health.
aa. Walue calculated from CPF for Inhalation rout* of 7.0 (mg/kg/day) , wm* below the method detection limit and below background duality. Since this la
    an objective to b* considered for cleanup, the goal will b* set at the loweat technically achievable level (I.e. the method detection limit).
bb. ""»" Indicates that the information is not available
cc. "UO./1" ia equivalent to parts per billion (ppb)




                                                                                                                     SOURCEi MTHD/RMMW RI/FS




      2080      TOO     A9W

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 TABLE 4, SHEET 1 OF 5
           SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ATLERNATIVES

 ALTERNATIVE                  CAPITAL   ANNUAL    PRESENT   TIME TO
                               COST      O&M       WORTH    ACHIEVE
                             ($1000)    COSTS     ($1000)    ARARs
                                        ($1000)             (years)
1. NO ACTION:                    13        34        222       40
Ground water monitoring,
5-year site reviews.
2. AQUIFER ISOLATION:           94                   303       40
Public water hookups,
seal private wells,
ground water monitoring,
5-year site reviews.
3A. PUMP/AIR STRIP IN        3.534        124     4,296
ENTIRE PLUME, DISCHARGE
TO SURFACE WATER AND
GROUND WATER:
Extraction wells (13),
air stripping,
some discharge to SW,
some discharge to GW,
public water hookups,
seal private wells,
ground water monitoring.
3B. PUMP/AIR STRIP IN        4,713        151     5,641
ENTIRE PLUME, DISCHARGE
TO GROUND WATER:
Extraction wells (13).
air stripping,
discharge to GW,
public water hookups,
seal private wells,
ground water monitoring.
3C. PUMP/AIR STRIP IN        3.204        131     4.132        40
ENTIRE PLUME, USE TREATED
WATER AS A POTABLE SUPPLYi
Extraction wells (13),
air stripping,
use treated water as a                                                -<
potable supply,
public water hookups,                                                 O
seal private wells,                                                   O
ground water monitoring.
                                                                      O
                                                                      CO
                                                                      O
                                                                      (*)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 TABLE H, SHEET 2 OF 5
           SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ATLERNATIVES
 ALTERNATIVE                CAPITAL   ANNUAL    PRESENT   TIME TO
                             COST      O&M       WORTH    ACHIEVE
                           ($1000)     COST     ($1000)    ARARs
                                      (*1000)             (years)
HA. PUMP/CARBON            4,153      1,059     10,653
ADSORPTION IN ENTIRE
PLUME, DISCHARGE TO
SURFACE WATER AND
GROUND WATER:
Extraction wella (13),
carbon adsorption,
some discharge to SW,
some discharge to GW,
public water hookups,
seal private wells,
ground water monitoring.
IB. PUMP/CARBON            5,332      1,081     11,998
ADSORPTION IN ENTIRE
PLUME, DISCHARGE TO
GROUND WATER:
Extraction wells (13),
carbon adsorption,
discharge to GW,
public water hookups,
seal private wells,
ground water monitoring.
1C. PUMP/CARBON            3,823      1,081     10,H89
ADSORPTION IN ENTIRE
PLUME, USE TREATED WATER
AS A POTABLE SUPPLY:
Extraction wells (13),
carbon adsorption,
use treated water as a
potable supply,
public water hookups,
seal private wells,
ground water monitoring.


                                                                         3:
                                                                         £7)


                                                                     O
                                                                     o

                                                                    O
                                                                    CD
                                                                    O

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  TABLE 1, SHEET 3 OF 5
            SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ATLERNATIVES
 ALTERNATIVE                     CAPITAL   ANNUAL    PRESENT   TIME TO
                                  COST      O&M       WORTH    ACHIEVE
                                ($1000)     COST     ($1000)    ARARs
                                           ($1000)             (years)
5A. PUMP/AIR STRIP IN           1,971 91             2.518         5
SOURCE A R E A , DISCHARGE TO
GROUND WATER DOWN
GRADIENT:
Extraction wells (3),
air stripping,
discharge to GW down
gradient,
public water hookups,
seal private wells,
ground water monitoring.
5B. PUMP/AIR STRIP IN            1,912 91            2,516         5
SOURCE AREA, DISCHARGE TO
GROUND WATER UP GRADIENT:
Extraction wells (3),
air stripping,
discharge to GW up
gradient,
public water hookups,
seal private wells,
ground water monitoring.
5C. PUMP/AIR STRIP Iff           1,113 91            2,081        10
SOURCE AREA, USE TREATED
WATER AS A POTABLE
SUPPLY:
Extraction wells (3),
air stripping,
use treated water as a
potable supply,
public water hookups,
seal private wells,
ground water monitoring.



                                                                   cr>
                                                                       o
                                                                       o

                                                                         o
                                                                         CO
                                                                         o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  TABLE H, SHEET 4 OF 5
            SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ATLERNATIVES
 ALTERNATIVE                 CAPITAL   ANNUAL    PRESENT   TIME TO
                              COST      O&M       WORTH    ACHIEVE
                            ($1000)     COST     ($1000)    ARARs
                                       ($1000)             (yep -s>
6A. PUMP/CARBON             2,123       579      5,677
ADSORPTION IN SOURCE
A R E A , DISCHARGE TO
GROUND WATER DOWN
GRADIENT:
Extraction wells (3),
carbon adsorption,
discharge to GW down
gradient,
public water hookups,
seal private wells,
ground water monitoring.
6B. PUMP/CARBON             2,091       579      5,645
ADSORPTION IN SOURCE
A R E A , DISCHARGE TO
GROUND WATER UP GRADIENT:
Extraction wells (3),
carbon adsorption,
discharge to GW up
gradient,
public water hookups,
seal private wells,
ground water monitoring.
6C. PUMP/CARBON             1.592       579      5,116
ADSORPTION IN SOURCE
AREA, USE TREATED WATER
AS A POTABLE SUPPLY:
Extraction wells (3).
carbon adsorption,
use treated water as a
potable supply,
public water hookups,
seal private wells,
ground water monitoring.
                                                                      •<
                                                                      o
                                                                      o

                                                                      o
                                                                      CO
                                                                      o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  TABLE 4, SHEET 5 OF 5
            SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ATLERNATIVES

 ALTERNATIVE                 CAPITAL    ANNUAL    PRESENT   TIME TO
                              COST       O&M       WORTH    ACHIEVE
                            ($1000)      COST     ($1000)    ARARs
                                /'  *   ($1000)             (years)
7. PUMP/AIR STRIP IN         1,618        84      2,136
SOURCE AREA WITH
VICINITY INJECTION
(3 AIR STRIPPERS):
Extraction wells (3)
air stripping (3 units)
discharge to GW near
treatment,
public water hookups,
seal private wells,
ground water monitoring,


NOTE:
1)   Present worth is calculated using an interest rate of 10},
     and a project duration of 10 years. System operation for the
     full period was assumed in calculating the present worth.
2)   Estimated times presented are relative times for remediation
     of the contaminated ground water, and are based on
     assumptions of the degree of aquifer flushing caused by
     Implementing each alternative and the necessary amount of
     flushing required for remediation.




                                                                  c>

                                                                   o
                                                                   o
                                                                      \r>-

                                                                       o
                                                                        CD
                                                                        O
                                                                         •vl

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         TABLE 5
                                                          The Nine Remedial Evaluation Criteria

                                          Long-ten                      Redaction of
       Short-Ten                       Effectiveness                Toxlclty, Nobility                            Implementablllty       Cost
     Effectiveness                          and                        • and Volume
                                        Peraanence                          (TMV)

  Potential Impacts on          Magnitude of total residual       Treatment process and           Technical feasibility                  Capital
  comnraity during RA           risk In tens of untreated         amount of material to be        - Difficulties & unknowns associated
  implementation                waste & treatment                 treated                           with technology                      Operation
                                residuals                                                         - Reliability of technology            and
                                                                                                  - Ease of undertaking additional       mainten-
  Potential Impacts on          Adequacy and suitability          Amount of hazardous               action, If required                  ance
  workers during RA and         of controls (engineering &        materials that will be          - Reliability & effectiveness of
  the effectiveness and         institutional) used to manage     destroyed or reduced              monitoring                           Present
  reliability of protective     untreated waste and treatment     including how principal                                                worth
  •easures                      residuals                         threat Is addressed through . Administrative feasibility
                                                                  treatment                     - Ability & time necessary to obtain
                                                                                                  required approvals/permits
  Potential environmental       Reliability of controls over      Degree of expected THV        - Steps required to coordinate with
  impacts of RA and the         time, including potential         reduction (e.g. percent         other Agencies and associated
  effectiveness and             for failure and potential         of total, order of magni-       time requirements
  reliability of mltlgstlva     resulting risk                    tude)
  measures                                                                                     Availability of services and materials
                                                                                              - Treatment, storage or disposal
  Tl»e until protection is                                        Degree to which treatment     capacity
  achieved                                                        la Irreversible             - Existence of multiple vendors
                                                                                              - Availability of needed equipment
                                                                  Type and quantity of          6 specialists
                                                                  residuals resulting from    - Timing of technology availability
                                                                  treatment process




Compliance                    Overall                           State                          Community
with ARARs                    Protection                        Acceptance                     Acceptance

  Attainment of chemical-       Row alternative eliminates       Features of the alterna-         Features of the alternative
  location- , and action-       reduces, or controls existing    tive the State supports          the community supports.
  specific requirements         and potential risks to human
                                health and the environment        Features of the alterna-        Features of the alternative
  Compliance with other         through treatment, engineer-      tive about which the State      about which the community
  criteria, advlaories,         ing controls, and/or institu-     strongly opposes                has reservations.
  and guidance                  tional controls
  Grounds for invoking                                                                            Elements of the alternative
  a waiver                                                                                        the community strongly opposes



   8080          TOO   A9W

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      N




                                            JOOOfT
                                    SCAIC




                        FIGURE 1
             STUDY AREA FOR MONTGOMERY TOWNSHIP
             HOUSING DEVELOPMENT AND ROCKY HILL
6080
                 MUNICIPAL VELLFIELD SITES
       TOO
                          SOURCEI MTHD/RHMW RI/FS

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                NO DATA
                                 AVAILABLE




                              FIGURE 2
                   AVERAGE TCE CONCENTRATIONS FROM
                   1979 THROUGH 1965 IN MONTGOMERY
                    TOWNSHIP HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
0180   TOO   A9W
                             SOURCE: MTHD/RHMW RI/FS

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -car
              POTJNTIAL IQtmCM Of CONTAMINATION


              I.      MIINCE TOM CHEMICAL MU AftCH
                      POLVCELL
                      MMNCE TON OAMMA TtCM
                      COMTO INDUSTRIES
                      mmcETON AIMPOMT
                      MMMMtOLL HAND
                      TNUL-S AUTO AND MOSIL
                      TtHAGO OAt STATION
                      NM. PtNMGAS
              M.      TOMN AMD COUNTHT ANIMAL NOSMTAl
              II.     MONTOOMEMY tHOTftHO Cf NT(N
              II.     OTLLAOC SHOmx
              II      MUNCITON VOLKStMOtN




           LCOfMO


                     WATEtt SUTM.Y Mf LLS

                     NJOCf MOMITOMIMC WELLS
                     •INSTALLED IMI)


                     •OHINOS AT MINCE TON
                     OAMMA TECM


                    . IOCMHOF WELL IN FEET
            l»mi MAXIMUM HEPONTEO
                     CONCENTNATION Of TCE




           mm        AM AS or HIGHEST TCE LC VE LS AT MTHO

           MOTE.:
            I. ALL LOCATIONS ARE AMWOXIMATf


                                                MOO ft




          FIGURE 3
POTENTIAL SOURCES AND BACKGROUND
 GROUND WATER QUALITY DATA FOR
       MTHD/RHMW SITES

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     N




           UOiHO
              MH.«   MONITOniWO f*tlt. LOCATION
                     ANOMUMMH

            IMM1I    MATIM lit VATION IN M tt
                     MOVI MtAM MA LtVtL

                     nixoMtTHic umrAcf COMTOUII
                     KOMTOUM IMTlnVAl M rTI




              MCt MA^ t.t IMMWTI MKICt.
              HOCKV Mli OUAOMANOLI.
              NtN JIMM». DAT!O «•»•




                     •CALC




          FIGURE 4
 SHALLOW WELL WATER ELEVATIONS
ON AUGUST 21.19*7 FOR MTHD/RHHW
           SITES

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   N




                     uot»o
                     Q   m*-t MOMITOimMI MILL LOCATION
                                           IN

                      IWM1I        WATM tLIVATIWMH fliT
                                   A*OV* Ml AM MA LIVtL

                      •^g).—— nilOMf TMIC MJKFACf COMTOUH
                                   KOMTOUN MTIMVAL «»»TI




                         •OUUCt:
                         mot MAT ».• MMUTI MUMS.
                         HOCK V MLL OUAOdANOLI.
                         Hf« JlttM V. DAT! O m«




                                   KALE




                    FIGURE 5
            DEEP WELL WATER ELEVATIONS
              ON AUGUST 21,1987 FOR
                 HTHO/RHNW SITES
TOO   A9W

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              Uftpraoaoarar*




                       DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                           DIVISION OF HAZARDOUS SITE MITIGATION
                            401 E. Slate St, CN 413, Trenton, NJ. 08625-0413
                                              (609) 984-2902
                                                   •

Anthony J. Farro
Director
                          MONTGOMERY TOWNSHIP HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
                             AND ROCKY HILL MUNICIPAL WELLFIELD
                                       SUPERFUND SITES
                         MONTGOMERY TOWNSHIP AND ROCKY HILL BOROUGH
                                       SOMERSET COUNTY
                                         NEW JERSEY

                                      RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY



   This community relations Responsiveness Summary, prepared as part of the
   Record of Decision (ROD), is divided into the following sections:
   I.      OVERVIEW
          •This section discusses the New Jersey Department of Environmental
           Protection's (NJDEP) and the United States Environmental Protection
           Agency's (USE?A) preferred alternative for remedial action and likely
           public reaction to this alternative.
   II.     BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS

           This section provides a brief history of community interest in the
           Montgomery  Township   Housing  Development/Rocky  Hill   Municipal
           Wellfield     (MTHD/RHMW)        Superfund          sites         and       identifies   key
           community issues.     A chronology of community relations activities
           conducted by the NJDEP and USEPA prior to and during the Remedial
           Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) is included.
   III.    SUMMARY OF MAJOR QUESTIONS AND COMMENTS RECEIVED DURING THE PUBLIC
           COMMENT PERIOD AND NJDEP'S RESPONSES

           This is a summary of major questions and comments    regarding the
           results of the RI/FS directed to NJDEP during the public comment
           period.    This section also addresses major concerns expressed
           throughout the RI/FS phase. NJDEP's/USEPA's responses are included
           in this section.
   IV. REMAINING CONCERNS

           This describes the remaining community concerns of which NJDEP and
           USEPA should be aware in conducting the Remedial Design and Remedial
           Actions at the MTHD/RHMW sites.
                                      • •       ' . -                              .
                               New Jersey is an Equal Opportunity Employer
                                              Recycled Paper

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              -2-



ATTACHMENTS;
     A.       Agendas and Fact Sheets distributed at the 1/14/86, 7/29/87 and
              5/12/88 Public Meetings.

     B.       List of speakers at the 5/12/88 Public Meeting.
     C.       Letters sent to NJDEP during' the public comment period (April 25,
              1988 - May 31, 1988).       I   -
                                         jf           .                    •

     D.       Public notices and press releases concerning the 1/14/86, 7/29/87
              and 5/12/88 Public Meetings, and an informational flyer.
     E.       New Jersey State Department of Health Stream or Vastewater
              Analysis Field Information Data Sheets.
     F.       Proposed Remedial Action Plan (PRAP).
I.   OVERVIEW
     The remedial alternative presented in this Record of Decision
     represents a final remedial solution for the RHMW/MTHD sites.   It
     addresses ground water contamination in the underlying aquifer.
     The specific components of the remedial action are as follows:
          - Extraction of the contaminated ground water through pumping
             followed by on-site treatment and reinjection of the treated
             water back into the underlying aquifer. The ground water will be
           . treated to achieve federal and state cleanup standards;
          -   Connection of any remaining affected residences to the public
              water supply;
          - Sealing of private water supply and monitoring wells within the
            contaminant plume; and
       -      Implementation of a ground water sampling program to monitor the
              effectiveness of the cleanup.
     Based on comments received during the public comment period, Montgomery
     Township officials and residents are concerned about the placement of
     the pump and treatment units as well as the air emissions and potential
     noise pollution associated with these units. The Borough of Rocky Hill
     has expressed concern regarding payment for costs incurred in the
     installation and operation of the Borough's water supply treatment
     system.
     These concerns have been addressed both at the May 12, 1988 public                   «
     meeting and within this Responsiveness Summary.
                                                                                    o
                                                                                    o
                                                                                    t-k

                                                                                   o
                                                                                   0>
                                                                                   t-1
                                                                                   OJ

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   -3-


II. BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS
    Concern over the quality of potable water from the Rocky Hill well
    first developed as a result of a Rutgers University study in 1979
    which indicated high levels of trichloroethene (TCE) at this
    municipal facility. The Rocky Hill findings triggered a subsequent
    sampling program for the neighboring Montgomery Township Housing
    Development.
    Residents of both Montgomery Township and the Borough of Rocky Hill
    expressed concerns early on regarding the water quality and the
    economic implications associated with this problem. This included Rocky
    Hill residents' dissatisfaction with the taste and higher cost of the
    water supplied by the Elizabethtown Water Company. Borough officials
    addressed these concerns and acted to protect public health by
    installing air stripping units which effectively treat the water supply
    so that it meets potable standards.
    In Montgomery Township, the Health Department took an early lead in
    initiating the testing of private wells for contaminants, alerting the
    community to possible problems and organizing Township meetings. In
    1980, a citizens' committee was formed in Montgomery Township. This
    committee sent a petition to the Township requesting a clean water
    supply for all the residents. The group also produced newsletters,
    coordinated meetings, helped organize a sampling program and gathered
    information about the water problems in their area.               This
    organization's activities apparently diminished over the next three
    years. Three of the committee leaders relocated, while only two or
    three families from the development attended an update meeting in May
    of 1983. The Montgomery Township Health Department, the USEPA and the
    NJDEP do not have records of any recent activities sponsored by this
    c it izens' committee.
    Other organized bodies involved In these issues have included: The
    Montgomery Township Board of Health, the Montgomery Township
    Environmental Commission and the Association to Improve Montgomery
    Township.
    Montgomery Township officials arranged for the Elizabethtown Water
    Company to extend service into the MTHD beginning in 1981. At
    present, roughly one-half of the residences have been connected to this
    supply. A September 1987 Operable Unit Record of Decision addressed
    this issue.
    Other community concerns not addressed in this 1988 Responsiveness
    Summary were addressed in detail in the September 1987 Operable Unit
    Record of Decision.

                                                                              o
                                                                              -<
                                                                              o
                                                                              o

                                                                              o
                                                                              CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       -4-


Chronology of Ma lor Community Relations Activities
Community Relations activities conducted at the HTHD/RHMW sites to date
include the following:
    A Community Relations Plan was prepared (June, 1985).
    Municipal officials were contacted to advise them of a contract award
    to conduct the RI/FS for the MTHD/RHMW sites (August, 1985).
    An informational flyer was distributed to homes in the MTHD regarding
    the RI/FS and planned activities (November, 1985).
    NJDEP held a briefing for municipal officials (November 14, 1985).
    Notices were sent to those listed on the Contacts list of the Community
    Relations Plan and press releases were sent to the media announcing the
    January 14, 1986 public meeting (December 1985).
    A public meeting was held at the Montgomery Township Municipal Building
    to discuss the initiation of the RI/FS.        Approximately 35 people
    attended including citizens, local officials and media representatives
    (January 14, 1986).
    The Operable Unit MTHD RI/FS report was placed in repository for
    public review and comment at five locations: the Montgomery Township
    Municipal Building, the Mary Jacobs Library in Rocky Hill, the
    Somerset County Library Main Branch, NJDEP in Trenton and USEPA in New
    York. The public comment period was from July 15, 1987 to August 14,
    1987.
    Notices were sent to those listed on the Contacts list of the Community
    Relations Plan and press releases were sent to the media announcing the
    remedial action alternatives and the July 29, 1987 public meeting (July
    1987).
    A public meeting was held at the Montgomery Township Municipal Building
    to discuss the completion of the Operable Unit RI/FS for Private
    Potable Wells. Approximately 35 people attended Including citizens,
    local officials and media representatives (July 29, 1987).
    The   MTHD/RHMW   RI/FS   report    and   Proposed   Remedial   Action   Plan
    (PRAP) was placed in repositories for public review and comment at
    five locations: the Montgomery Township Municipal Building, the Mary
    Jacobs Library in Rocky Hill, the Somerset County Library Main
    Branch, the NJDEP in Trenton and the USEPA in New York. The public
    comment period was from April 25, 1988 to May 31, 1988.
    A Notice was sent to those listed on the Contacts list of the Community
    Relations Plan and a press release was sent to the media announcing the
    May 12, 1988 public meeting and the availability of the PRAP (April
    1988).

                                                                                    o
                                                                                    00
                                                                                    l-»
                                                                                    Nl

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                        -5-


—       NJDEP held a briefing for municipal officials (May   12, 1988).
        A public meeting was held at the Montgomery Township Municipal Building
        to discuss the completion of the RI/FS for the MTHD/RHMW sites.
        Approximately 30 people attended including citizens, local officials
        and media representatives (May 12, 1988).
        Telephone contact and written correspondence was maintained between
        NJDEP and municipal officials and the press (ongoing throughout RI/FS).
III.    SUMMARY OF MAJOR QUESTIONS/AND COMMENTS RECEIVED DURING THE PUBLIC
        COMMENT PERIOD AND NJDEP'S RESPONSES
        In April 1988,  the Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) and
        the Proposed Remedial Action Plan (PRAP) were placed in the following
        repositories for review: Somerset County Library, North Bridge St. &
        Voge Ave; Mary Jacobs Library, 64 Washington Street, Rocky Hill;
        Montgomery Township Municipal Building; NJDEP, 401 East State Street,
        Trenton; and USEPA Emergency & Remedial Response Division, 26 Federal
        Plaza, New York.
        On May 12, 1988 NJDEP held a public meeting to present the results of
        the RI/FS and to receive comments/questions. (See attachment A: agenda
        and fact sheet distributed at the meeting.) The meeting was held at
        the Montgomery Township Municipal Building. Notification of the public
        meeting and the availability of the RI/FS reports and the PRAP was
        accomplished through press releases and direct mailing of notices to
        contacts listed in the Community Relations Plan including local, state
        and federal officials, as well as identified concerned citizens.
        Approximately 30 people attended Including citizens, local officials
        and media representatives and five people commented during the meeting
        (see Attachment B). NJDEP also held a briefing for municipal officials
        prior to the public meeting on May 12, 1988.
        The public comment period was originally scheduled from April 25, 1988
        through May 23, 1988 but was extended to May 31, 1968 at the request of
        a former commercial property owner in the area. In addition to the
        comments made during the public meeting and briefing, four letters were
        received by NJDEP (see Attachment C).
Following is a summary, organized by subject, of all major questions/
comments received by NJDEP at the public meeting, briefing and during the
comment period. Major subjects include:
    . Payment of costs to the Borough of Rocky Hill.
    .   Consideration of technologies for the prevention of air and nois
        pollution associated with air stripping units;                            -^
                                                                                  en
    . Concerns associated with the placement of the pump and treat units;          "^
                                                                                   o
                                                                                   o

                                                                                       o
                                                                                       CD
                                                                                       f»
                                                                                        CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                     -6-


     . Comments    contained   in the report, "Evaluation of Remedial
       Investigation/Feasibility Study of Montgomery Township Housing
       Development and Rocky Hill Municipal Wellfield #2 Somerset County,
       New Jersey"; and
     . Comments submitted to NJDEP by Geraghty & Miller on behalf of
       Princeton Gamma Tech (PGT).
Payment of Costs to the Borough of Rocky Hill
1.     The Borough of Rocky Hill expressed concern regarding payment for costs
       incurred in the installation and operation of the Borough's water
       supply treatment system.
       Response; While the RI/FS evaluated the response action taken by the
       Borough of Rocky Hill to the contamination and concluded that it was
       appropriate, determination of whether federal funds would be provided
       for this action has not been made at this time.
Consideration of Technologies for the Prevention of Air and Noise Pollution
1.     Montgomery Township Officials expressed a preference for the carbon
       adsorption alternative or the use of carbon adsorption equipment on the
       air stripping unit(s) as a means of minimizing noise and air pollution.
       In addition the municipality requested that they be involved with the
       location and design of the selected alternative early on and that the
       public have input into Remedial Design Phase decisions (see Attachment
       C).
       Response: As part of the development of a response to this question,
       NJDEP/USEPA have further evaluated the air emissions from the system
       recommended by NJDEP/USEPA.   The results of this evaluation appear
       below:
      The air stripper system identified in the RI/FS as Alternative 5B was
      used as the basis in this evaluation. This system treats ground water
      contaminated with a concentration of 200 parts per billion (ppb)
      TCE at a flow rate of 1,050 gallons per minute (GPM). TCE would
      be displaced Into an air stream being introduced at a rate of 50 parts
      air to one part of water, or 7,000 cubic feet per minute (CFM).
      Further assumptions for the calculations of ground-level concentrations
      and impacts are the following: stack height - 20 ft., stack velocity
      1,000 feet per minute (FPM), and duration of operation - 10 years.
      The resulting ground-level concentration has been estimated at 6.3
      ppb as a maximum concentration, with an average concentration of 0.63
      ppb.   The potential for odor concern can be identified by comparing
      the maximum concentration (6.3 ppb) with the odor threshold
      identified for TCE (50,000 ppb), and the result is that the odor ^
      threshold has not been exceeded. The probability for increased cancer ^
      risk from exposure to the average concentration (0.63 ppb) is about
      one in ten million (0.12xlO~ ), which is well below the typically o
      applied negligible risk of one In one million (1.0x10 ).              o

                                                                                 o
                                                                                 0>

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    -7-



     The above evaluation indicates that neither health, nor odor concerns
     are expected from implementation of the remedy. In addition, the air
     and water quality will be monitored in a manner prescribed in the
     Design Phase. As previously stated in the RI/FS, the need for carbon
     adsorption on the air stream would be determined once more accurate
     expectations of ground water flow, TCE concentrations and resulting
     air emissions are developed during Design.

     Noise concerns will be addressed in the Design Phase by proper
     equipment selection, sizing and location.    The likelihood of noise
     problems from a well designed system is minor, as can be exhibited by
     the similar (although somewhat smaller) treatment unit currently in
     operation at Rocky Hill Vellfield.
     NJDEP will keep the Township informed during the Design Phase.        A
     briefing will be held for municipal officials and a fact sheet and
     press release will be Issued. This will further help to assure that
     the community's concerns are addressed; NJDEP requests that the
     Township initiate contacts with NJDEP as the need arises.      NJDEP1 s
     Bureau of Community Relations can be contacted at (609) 984-3081.
2.   The Township Health Officer had several questions regarding air
     pollution: Who will conduct air monitoring? How often will monitoring
     and stack testing be done?      Who will pay for the monitoring? The
     Health Officer further requested that the results be sent to the Health
     Department .
     Response: NJDEP or the NJDEP contractor will conduct air monitoring
     as part of standard Operations and Maintenance procedures.         The
     sampling results will be sent to the Township Health Department.
     NJDEP' s Division of Environmental Quality will assist in developing a
     sampling program, including a schedule for sampling. Operations and
     Maintenance tasks are publicly funded by the state and federal
     governments unless agreements can be reached with a responsible party
     to fund this work.
Concerns Associated with the Placement of the Pump and Treat Units
1.   A resident requested a copy of the diagrams used by the consultant to
     demonstrate the proposed location of the pump and treat units.
     Response; The resident was informed that the diagrams used at the
     public meeting are part of the RI/FS reports which are available for
     public review in local repositories. In addition, the Township Health
     Officer has a copy of the RI/FS reports.
Comments contained in the report. "Evaluation of Remedial Investigation/
Feasibility Study of Montgomery Township Housing Development and Rocky Hill
Municipal Wellfield #2 Somerset County. New Jersey", submitted to NJDEP by
Groundwater Technology. Inc. on behalf of EG & G. Inc. (See Attachment C)

                                                                               o
                                                                               o

                                                                               o
                                                                               00
                                                                               N)
                                                                               O

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    -8-



     (EG & 6, Inc. engaged the services of Groundwater Technologies, Inc.
     to prepare comments on the RI/FS and PRAP. EG & G is the current
     owner of Princeton Applied Research, Inc. (PAR), who occupied the
     current PGT facility during a period reportedly from 1966 through
     1971.    Summaries of the comments are presented below, and their
     associated responses follow, in order.
Inventory of Potential Sources:
1.   The inventory of potentially responsible parties is not complete since
     it fails to identify or discuss the following:
     a.   Princeton North Shopping Center which includes a six-bay Goodyear
          auto service store (Princeton Tires), a print shop (Triangle
          Reproduction) and a dry cleaners (Mrs. B's Dry Cleaning and
          Laundry);
     b.   Princeton Gamma Tech facility on the west side of Route 206;
     c.   Current Thul's Auto Supply store on Route 518 west of Route 206;
     d.   G. H. Printing, and
                                     s    \
     e.   Princeton Research Printers.
     Response; Princeton North Shopping Center (which includes the current
     Goodyear and Triangle Reproduction facilities) was constructed in 1973
     or 1974, and has been connected to the available sewer system since
     that date. Available information notes that the dry cleaner in the
     shopping center did not dry clean on the premises until just recently.
     No phase II RI field efforts were focused on the PGT/Route 206
     facility because an early site visit noted that the nature of the
     facility's operation was mainly offices, and no contamination was found
     in either Monitor well (MW-6) or MW-10.
     Thul's Auto Supply was located on Route 206 during the late 70's
     (while the contamination was already evident in RHMW). Sampling was
     performed at the Route 206 property, although sampling was not
     performed where Thul's relocated to Route 518.
     G.M. Printing is connected to the Montgomery Shopping Center septic
     system. This system was sampled during the RI.
     1377 Route 206 is also known as Princeton Chemical Research, which is
     the name of a previous owner. Samples of water, soil and septic tanks
     have been collected, the results of which are available in the RI/FS
     reports.                                                                      ;j
                                                                                   &
Ground Water Flow Direction:
                                                                                   o
2.   No discussion is presented to support the implication that the RI/FS          o
     RHMW #2 pump test conditions and historic production conditions               *~*
     produced comparable directions of ground water flow, despite the          Q
     availability of a procedure to evaluate the drawdown of                   co
     Intermittently pumped wells.                                              £f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      -9-



      Response; Pumping at a capacity greater than the daily pumping rate
      accentuates the aquifer properties; it does not change them. Although
      other pumping test procedures are available, the procedures used in
      this test were designed to collect the maximum amount of data in the
      minimum time period.
Baseline Contamination:
3.    The RI should have investigated all possible septic fields for TCE
      contamination and other chlorinated volatile organic compounds to
      properly establish baseline conditions.
      Response;    Fifteen septic fields were investigated in the RI (13
      'SF*  samples and SB-13, SB-16).      In addition seven septic tank
      samples were collected. This is considered to be appropriate for the
      site.    Several background monitor wells were installed to identify
      baseline groundwater conditions. The RI has addressed all compounds of
      concern at the site. TCE was used as an indicator chemical and TCA
      was not, based in part on frequency of detection. The following table
      illustrates this point:
                    Number of Detections of TCA and TCE
           Phase I       Phase I         Phase II      Phase II
        Monitor Wells Potable Wells    Monitor Wells Potable Wells
TCA            0             1              0              1
TCE            9           21               15             5
Limitations:
4.    The statement of limitation in the RI employs several unsubstantiated
      assertions to support the assumption that the Brunswick Formation meets
      the classical definitions of unconfined and semi-confined aquifers
      despite the existence of data indicating otherwise.
      Response: Although the presence of fractures results in anisotropic
      aquifer characteristics, the flow characteristics in any given
      direction are more typical of porous media conditions rather than
      channel flow conditions. This conclusion has been substantiated in the
      RI.
RI/FS Timetable:
5.    The date on the Feasibility Study Volume 2 (March 1988) precedes the
      date on the Remedial Investigation Volume 1 (April 1988), suggesting
      that the identification of the source area is biased.
      Response; The different dates on the two report covers is from an         o
                                                                                K
      error in report production. Both the RI and FS were completed in April
      1988.  RI development began well before the FS, but the submittal for
      public comment was deferred to coincide with FS release.                  o
                                                                                i-^
                                                                                o
                                                                                CD
                                                                                ro
                                                                                ro

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    -10-



Anecdotal Information:
6.   Unsubstantiated anecdotal information regarding TCE usage appears to
     be extensively relied upon to draw conclusions regarding the source
     area. In addition, the narrative of Potential Sources of Contamination
     highlights multiple potential sources for TCE but does not explain
     why these potential source areas were not investigated further.
     Response: The comment refers to Chapter 3 of the RI, which is entitled
     "Site Background Information". Unconfirmed results and findings were
     included in the chapter to serve as the basis for the site
     investigation.     The findings of the RI, not unsubstantiated
     information, were primarily used for development of the conclusions
     stated in the report.
     The comment further notes that additional data is needed to support
     eliminating these facilities. The task of virtually eliminating any
     possibility of secondary contamination is difficult, especially when an
     identified upgradient source contributes contamination. This was not
     within the scope of the RI.
Well Installation and Sampling:
7.   It appears that a significant number of wells were not adequately
     designed for the scope of the project.       (Ten of the thirty wells
     installed for the RI could not be sampled during the first round
     because they were dry). Furthermore, the excessively wide temperature
     range (5°C to 23.0 C°) of ground water samples taken for the two
     sampling rounds suggests that either the thermometer used may have been
     faulty, not enough time was allowed for the thermometer to reach
     equilibrium, or that the wells were inadequately purged to provide a
     representative sample. At a minimum, the significant temperature range
     should have been discussed and Justified.
     Response; The well construction program was developed to monitor two
     ground water regions. The first region was the overburden and heavily
     weathered bedrock, and the second was the competent bedrock. Early in
     drilling it became evident that some of the shallow boreholes were
     dry, though the use of mud-rotary drilling techniques made precise
     determination difficult. The choices remained to either: 1) drill
     slightly deeper until a water filled well was expected (possibly by
     using the water depth of the corresponding deep well as a guide), 2)
     abandon dry boreholes, or complete the wells as originally planned,
     since some dry wells were expected to fill with water either after
     development (water jetting was used) or during a wetter season. The
     idea of completing a deeper well would have resulted in a well which
     would not satisfy the objectives of the shallow wells, probably getting
     most water from the competent bedrock. The decision proved to be sound
     since many 'dry* boreholes produced water upon development, and other
     wells which were dry in round one sampling later contained water.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    -11-

     Regarding the temperature range of the samples, the cause was not
     identified. It can be noted however, that inadequate well purging has
     been ruled out as the cause for these variations. Monitor wells were
     all purged of 3 to 5 well casing volumes of water prior to sampling,
     except for a couple of shallow wells which were very slow to recover
     with water. These wells were purged till dry and allowed to recover.
     Domestic wells were purged by running the tap for an excess of 30
     minutes.
Pump Test:
8.   The absence of significant drawdown in the shallow wells indicates
     that the six-hour pump test was not of sufficient duration since the
     well logs indicate that the deep/shallow pairs actually monitor the
     same ground water system.
     It also appears that the choice of data points was based solely on
     those points falling in a straight line, without consideration of the
     hydrologic characteristics which they represent.
     In addition, a drastic increase in drawdown occurred at 110 minutes
     in all wells, yet pumping did not continue past 360 minutes. This
     steepening of drawdown curve could represent a sudden dewatering of
     fractures or encroachment on an impervious boundary.
     Finally, according to the pump test data, ground water (and any
     accompanying contamination) should be expected to move toward RHMW #2
     from a greater distance in a northeast-southeast direction.
     Hydrogeologic characteristics of the area should therefore inhibit
     (but not necessarily prevent) the movement of ground water flow from
     PGT to RHMW #2.
     Response: While it is agreed that the duration of the pumping test
     could have been longer than six hours, it is obvious from the results
     that the shallow and deep ground water zones monitored are in poor
     hydraulic connection.
     Curve matching of pumping test data is the science of obtaining a
     closest fit (best match) to a type curve produced by field data. The
     NJDEP & USEPA believe this procedure to be correct. A relatively poor
     hydraulic connection, as indicated by the pump test, has been noted in
     the RI.
Nature and Quality of Ground Water Data:
9.   Given the extensively fractured nature of the aquifer, it must be
     assumed that the shallow and deep zones are in hydraulic communication   2
     at each pair of monitoring wells, offering man-made pathways for deep    <j>
     Infiltration of shallow contaminants, driven by existing vertical
     gradients (Table 5-1). Thus, ground water samples from these             o
     monitoring wells must be regarded as composite samples with possible     o
     man-made impacts, and water quality data cannot be interpreted with      *"*
     reference to its alleged vertical position. Furthermore, since round
     two sampling took approximately seven weeks to complete, data may not    co
     be internally consistent and comparable.                                 ^

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                     -12-


      Response; Since the shallow monitor wells and deep monitor wells were
      not installed in the same borehole, it is not necessary to assume the
      shallow and deep monitor wells are in hydraulic connection with each
      other. Although it is possible that the wells monitor the same zone,
      it is also quite probable that properly installed monitor wells can
      evaluate specific zones of interest.       Data suggests (water levels
      analyses) that individual zones are being monitored by the wells.
Ground Water Divide:
10. Based on standard accepted pumping test criteria of 72 hours drawdown
    and 48 hours of recovery, a 14-hour recovery period is considered
    insufficient time for complete recovery of a pumping well prior to
    starting the actual pump test (RI page 5-3). Therefore conclusions
    drawn from the RHMW #2 pump test data should be considered suspect.
      In addition, the RI does not address the possibility that intermittent
      pumping could easily affect the location of the inferred on-site ground
      water divide due to the relatively flat piezometric surface.
      Response; The use of RHMW as the pump test well placed operational
      limits on the pump test duration. This test was still preferred as
      compared to a typical pump test, which would have been operated for the
      standard accepted duration, but would have utilized a much smaller flow
      rate as part of its standard accepted design.
      Regarding the variations between the pump test duration and actual
      pumping condition, it must be noted that the pump test was designed to
      obtain aquifer flow constants, and not just ground water contours. The
      pump test was therefore designed to place a maximum stress upon the
      aquifer (within operational limits of the wellfield) in order to
      obtain the best possible Information. Typical ground water contours
      are noted to be variable between those for pumping and non-pumping
      conditions.
Analytical Data:
11.   It is an inappropriate conclusion that a 20 ppb difference for a
      selected compound (between MW-7 and MW-4) be used to identify the
      source area, based on two rounds of sampling approximately eight months
      apart.   Due to the inherent impurities and composition variations,
      chlorinated solvent analyses of trends should have, at a minimum, been
      based on the total chlorinated volatile organic compounds, including
      tentatively identified compounds.    In addition, ECRA wells MW-3 and
      MW-4 on the hydraulically upgradient side of PGT showed elevated
      levels of 1,2-dichloroethene suggesting that there are other sources
      upgradient of PGT.                                                        -^
                                                                                Q
      Response; The RI report conclusions were not based on a ratio in TCE      "*•
      concentration of less than 1.5:1 between onsite and offsite condition
      (relative to the PGT property).      Conclusions are based on several     o
      factors    including    hydrologic    conditions   and   onsite   TCE     "-"
      concentrations reported by PGT in excess of 4,900 ppb, which is
      closer to 10 times greater than offsite conditions (the minimum noted     g
      ratio of average concentration was between results for PGT's MW-1         K>
      to and MW-4D, which is about 5.5:1).                                      ^

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    -13-



QA/QC Issues:
12. On the table labeled Round One Monitoring Well Samples Tentatively
    Identified Compounds, the location of MW-AS is identified as
    "Polycell" and should be listed as "airport".
     The absence of a lock (contrary to NJDEP regulation) on MW-16 and the
     integrity of data is of particular concern since it is between
     monitoring wells MW-7S, MW-7D, and MW-AD, which have had elevated
     concentrations of contaminants, while monitoring well MW-16 has not.
     Response:    The comment regarding table headings is correct; the
     tentatively identified compounds noted for MV-4S actually apply to
     MW-4S "airport". The lock on MW-16 was broken several months after
     the sample was collected during a water level survey by NJDEP and
     Geraghty & Miller. The lock has since been replaced.
Comments Submitted to NJDEP by Geraghty & Miller on behalf of Princeton
Gamma Tech (PGT)
PGT engaged the services of Arent, Fox, Kintner, Plotkin & Kahn
(Arent et al.) to prepare comments on the RI/FS and PRAP. Arent et
al. additionally hired Geraghty & Miller, Inc. (G & M) and Roy F.
Weston, Inc. to present comments.
The comments were numerous and diverse as indicated by their extensive
volume, although three major issues are noted within these comments. These
major issues are as follows:
     Concern was expressed that portions of the RI were not adequately
     performed. Examples of inadequacies included a lack of details in the
     background search, and lack of a soil gas survey.
     PGT noted that other possible source areas exist and expressed
     concern that these areas were not eliminated as potential sources.
    Preference was noted for Alternative #2, which consisted of providing
    water connections, but not flushing the aquifer.
As a response to the first major issue, it must be noted that the background
search, and the scope of the site investigation at these sites are already
relatively extensive.        The presentation of additional background
information, or the recommendation that another one of the myriad of
investigative techniques be utilized does not alter the results of the RI.
Specifically, this information does not detract from the findings that
relatively high concentrations of TCE are present in a location which
could impact the ground water of both RHMW and MTHD.
Regarding the second issue, significant efforts were made to identify and      3
characterize all potential sources within the study area. NJDEP recognizes     ^
the fact that these efforts do not virtually eliminate the possibility that
any given location is a contamination source. To accomplish this task would    o
amount to conducting a major field investigation at every property in the      o
study area, which is not required to meet the objectives of the study.
                                                                               o
                                                                               CD

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    -14-


The third issue must be based on the comparison of the benefits of a more
expedient cleanup and the disadvantages of Increased costs. Review of the
costs and cleanup times of the different alternatives presented in the RI/FS
resulted in a marked preference on the part of NJDEP and USEPA for
alternatives utilizing a limited aquifer flushing scheme.
MTHD Contamination:
1.   The estimates of maximum rate erf ground water flow found in the RI
     prove that PGT could not have contaminated the ground water under
     MTHD.    Shallow ground watex' flow from PGT is in a northwest or
     west-northwest direction away from the MTHD. In addition, available
     data indicate that deep ground water flow from PGT would be in the
     southeast direction also away from the MTHD. Further, there is no
     explanation as to why PGT's ECRA water-level analyses were excluded
     from the RI/FS whereas the chemical analyses are included (at Vol. 3,
     Appendix 1).
     Response: Several homes in the MTHD are currently supplied by
     municipal water. Prior to connection to the municipal water supply,
     the homes were supplied by privately owned individual wells.        The
     comment fails to address the Impact of the pumping of the individual
     wells on the ground water flow direction and flow rate. Additionally,
     although the ground water flow component at the PGT facility is
     predicted (by PGT consultants) to be to the northwest, the regional
     ground water flow component is to the northeast as evidenced by
     fracture trace analyses and ground water flow contours as stated in the
     RI/FS report.    The northeast orientation of the primary fracture
     system, coupled with the pumping of all the MTHD individual
     residential wells, could have potentially induced ground water flow
     toward the MTHD greater than what is currently evidenced beneath the
     PGT facility.
     The water level information collected by PGT under the ECRA program
     was not included in the appendix since it was not referenced in the
     RI. This data was not referenced for the following reasons:
     It was preliminary and only part of ongoing PGT activities regarding
     water levels.
     As noted above, it did not present information beyond that presented in
     the regional study of the RI.
     Minor discrepancies were noted in the reported well casing elevations,
     which would have required resolution prior to inclusion in the report.
RHMW Contamination:
2.   PGT could not have contaminated the RHMW for the following reasons:
     a.   Contaminated shallow ground water under PGT flows naturally away       -<
          from the RHMW (G & M Assessments, Figures 1 and 7; pages
          2,11-12);                                                             g

                                                                               o
                                                                               03
                                                                               IV>
                                                                               \1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    -15-




     b.   Pumping action does not draw the contaminated water to the RHMW
          (RI at 5-5 and 6-3) and;
     c.   Wells between PGT and the RHMW were not contaminated (RI at
          5-29 Table 5-7).
     Response;     No conclusion has been reached stating that PGT
     contaminated the ground water entering either RHMW or MTHD.       The
     conclusions presented in the RI/FS report note that the property is a
     primary source area for contamination to the sites.       Among other
     factors presented in the report, the results used in forming this
     conclusion Include a water level in Monitor Well MW-7D of 3 to 4 feet
     below that in MW-75, a water level in (MW-7D) and RHMW of 5 to 60
     feet below that in MW-7D, and the presence of ground water TCE
     contamination in PGT's MW-1 in concentrations typically 20 times
     greater than that in RHMW.     The general downward water flow, the
     location of the PGT property upgradient of any contaminated offsite
     location, and the presence of cm-site TCE in concentrations well
     above those found offsite is typical across the entire RHMW/MTHD
     site.
     The presence of TCE in MW-9D, MW-9S and the PGT production well
     only serves to further support the above conclusions, since the only
     Identified upgradient source of contamination to these wells is the
     PGT property.      The variations in shallow well elevations are
     negligibly minor when compared to the differences found both within the
     on-site well pair, and across the site as a whole.
Deficiencies of RI/FS:
3.   Public participation was not timely invited.
     Response: In accordance with the requirements of the Comprehensive
     Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), and
     the Superfund Amendments Reauthorization Act (SARA), NJDEP conducted an
     extensive community relations program. The major community relations
     activities conducted at the MTHD/RHMW sites to date are outlined
     earlier in this Responsiveness Summary under the Chronology of
     Community Relations Activities.       PGT received a hand-delivered
     informational flyer describing planned RI/FS activities in November
     1985.
4.   Why did NJDEP's Consultant, Woodward-Clyde Consultants (WCC), not
     use the resources of USEPA's Denver facility for sophisticated
     analyses of aerial photographs and also make use of the 1961 and 1974
     aerial photographs considered by G & M? What indications of disturbed
     areas did WCC find on the aerial photographs it considered? How did
     its findings influence decisions to sample or not to sample?

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      -16-


     Resoonse; The degree to which aerial photographs were used in this
     RI/FS is considered to be appropriate by NJDEP/USEPA. Although aerial
     photos can be a useful supplement to a ground water investigation,
     primary data collection should be relied upon as the principal
     investigative technique. The fact that the 6 & H aerial photo review
     found no significant new information further supports this.
Spray Waste Irrigation Area:
5.   What is the location of the tank farm referenced on the RI (at 3-10)
     and the spray waste irrigation area? Is the disturbed area identified
     by 6 & M (Figure 4) the tank farm and/or the'irrigation area? Finally,
     why were soil samples taken and monitoring wells installed outside the
     disturbed area identified by 6 & H and no samples taken or analyses
     conducted in the tank farm or spray waste irrigation areas?
     Response: The waste discharge area behind the property once operated
     by Prlnceton Chemical Research (FOR) has been identified as the patch
     of white sand clearly evident in aerial photos. This area is the
     location of S8-2. The tank farm at the PCR facility is the
     rectangular area of graded land immediately behind the building. Soil
     boring SB-3 is in this location.
6.   We request access to the entire file of NJDEP's investigations of 1377
     Route 206, since only selected portions appear to be included in the
     RI/FS.
     Response: Available results regarding the 1377 Route 206 property are
     Included in the RI report. The RI compiled the limited historical data
     currently available, and augmented it with six soil borings, a pair of
     monitor wells and a septic sample.      PGT's request for file access
     should be coordinated through the NJDEP Division of Hazardous Waste
     Management.
Residential Septic Sampling System:
7.   Why did WCC not sample residential septic systems in the MTHD or in
     Rocky Hill Borough?
     Response;   Residential septic systems were sampled as part of the
     RI/FS. Only one residential septic tank sample was collected (Tank
     4).    Septic field borings were typically used in the residential
     locations instead of tank samples (SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-4)                      in
     an attempt obtain evidence of past discharge.
Potentially Responsible Parties:
6.   The Fifth Dimension was not identified as a potential responsible party   3
     (PRP), and its old septic system was not sampled. Field samplings         o
     were not attempted at Fifth Dimension or the disturbed area to the east   "*
     of it, and a monitoring well was not placed directly between Fifth
     Dimension and the RHMW.                                                   o
                                                                               »-»
                                                                               o
                                                                               00

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      -17-


     Response;   The background investigation and earlier Remedial Action
     Master Plan did not identify the former Fifth Dimension facility as a
     potential source of TCE contamination.     Information suggesting their
     contribution has only recently been made available by PGT.
     The site investigation used several wells upgradient of RHMW to help
     identify potential sources from outside of the study area.     These
     wells, which were all uncontaminated, include MW-6, MW-10, MW-11,
     MW-14, MW-15.  MW-10 is located 500 feet north in a line between
     the Fifth Dimension location and RHMW; it is actually between the
     facility and PGT and is somewhat downgradient of the location.
     Another well located more downgradient of the location (static
     conditions) is MW-13, which also is not contaminated. It should be
     noted that possible contribution from this or any location has not been
     virtually eliminated as a result of the RI.
9.   Why was Nemes omitted as a PRP          and its old septic system not
     sampled?
     Response;   Because of a lack of an apparent cause, no sampling or
     investigation was conducted at this property as part of the RI. Please
     note the introductory response to general issues raised by G & M on
     behalf of PGT earlier in this Responsiveness Summary.
Analytical Assurance:
10. What analytical assurance did WCC or NJDEP secure that the TCA
    reported in the Montgomery Township Shopping Center's septic system as
    of 2/11/80 was not TCE (Waston Letter at 5)7
     Response; Two septic fields, two septic tanks and three monitor wells
     were sampled on this property as part of the RI. Historical samples
     were also reviewed. The area identified as disturbed soil north of the
     facility appears to be mounded material generated during construction
     of the shopping center.
     The comment also questioned data quality, and suggested (by reference
     to the Veston letter) that the full data package be included as part
     of the RI. Data packages were not included as a means of keeping the
     report size to a minimum. Data for this site encompassed approximately
     25,000 pages, which is excessive for inclusion in the report.
     Analytical assurances for sample data are secured by preparation and
     review of the following information:
          1)   Quality Assurance Project Management Plan;
         2)    Field Sampling Plan;
         3)    Field Sampling Audits by NJDEP;



                                                                               o
                                                                               o

                                                                               o
                                                                               CO
                                                                               o)
                                                                               o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    -18-


          4)   Data packages prepared in accordance with NJDEP Tier I
               deliverable requirements;
          5)   Audits of <data packages by the Bureau of Environmental
               Measurements and Quality Assurance - Office of Quality
               Assurance.
     In general, the work conducted by Woodward           Clyde   and   their
     laboratory has been acceptable to NJDEP and USEPA.
     Regarding the identification of TCA in the Montgomery Shopping Center
     septic tank, the results were obtained from the lab data sheet (and not
     the RAMP) and no further confirmation was employed since the
     information was used to a limited extent.
Soil Gas Surveys:
11. Why were cost effective soil gas surveys of vicinity properties not
    conducted (Veston Letter)?
     Response: Neither a soil-gas survey nor other similar field survey
     techniques were employed at these sites. Combined use of monitor wells
     and source borings was used instead.
Other Contaminants:
12. The RI/FS fails to consider and pursue data which indicate that there
    are sources of both TCE and other contaminants in the area which are
    not associated with PGT.
    Response; All RI sample results identified in concentrations greater
    than the typically applied response objectives (such as drinking water
    regulations or soil action levels) have been discussed in the RI/FS.
    Please refer to section 4.2, Evaluation of Cleanup Criteria, within the
    FS for an example of this discussion.
History of PRP Sites:
13. The RI/FS failed to investigate some PRP sites and did not disclose
    the history of others.
    Response;   Chapter 2 (Introduction) and Chapter 3 (Site Background
    Information) of the RI/FS reports, as well as Appendices A and B,
    provide a summary of the background information.      More detailed
    historical information is present in the two Remedial Action Master
    Plans and the Background Report.
    The comment also refers to a previous letter from Arent et al.              g
    (Attachment C) that noted an error in the reporting of septic tank          -<
    contamination at PGT. The attached data sheets (Attachment E)
    indicate that two samples were collected at this location, unlike the       o
    RI which presents the data as a single sampling event.                      2

                                                                                o
                                                                                03

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   -19-


     The RI attempted to find the source(s) of contamination, not the
     individual(s) responsible for this contamination.         Historical
     information was used for the development of the field investigation,
     not for responsibility assignment.
     The possibility of secondary contribution will be addressed in the
     monitoring program being incorporated as part of the remedy.
     TCE Migration:

14. Has the TCE migrated from its source?
     Response: While a portion of the TCE has migrated from the source,
     shallow ground water contamination is still evident at the primary
     source area. The conclusions of the RAMPs regarding TCE migration
     were based on information available at the time (1983-4).       The
     conclusions of the RI/FS include significant additional information
     which has failed to support the issues of the comment.
Counterpumping:
15. Counterpumping is unjustified because of the geology of the site and
    the numerous unidentified sources of Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC)
    which may presently be contaminating the ground water.
     Response: The possibility of secondary contribution will be addressed
     in the monitoring program being Incorporated as part of the remedy.
Public Health Rationale:
16. The public health rationale of the FS underlying the PRAP does not
    make sense.
     Response; The Public Health Assessment contained in the RI/FS report
     was performed in a manner consistent with USEPA guidance (USEPA, 1986)
     and satisfies all applicable ox relevant and appropriate requirements
     as designated by SARA.
TCE Sources:
17. Since VCC failed to identify the TCE source, VCC Is in no
    position to design a rational FS, beyond the measures already mandated
    and undertaken plus Aquifer Isolation and Monitoring, Alternative 2.
    Response; The primary source area was identified as the current PGT
    property.   It is correct that only low concentrations of TCE have
    been found in one septic tank sample.           No soil samples were
    contaminated with TCE. The FS is nonetheless acceptable.                  3:
                                                                              O
                                                                              ^C
Precedence for Alternative 2:
                                                                              o
18. There is precedence for Alternative 2 reflected in at least three         o
    Records of Decisions which addressed situations similar to the MTHD
    and RHHW contamination. These RODs appear to be the appropriate           o
                                                                              o>
                                                                              (*>
                                                                              IV)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      -20-


      models for addressing the concern at the MTHD and the RHMW
      Superfund sites particularly since the installation of air stripping at
      the RHMW in 1983 and the 1987 ROD for the MTHD have already
      addressed and eliminated any public health concerns.
      Response; Section 4.2 within the FS identifies the remedial response
      objectives for the MTHD/RHMW sites and discusses the formulation of
      the site specific remediation criteria for ground water, soils and
      surface waters.                / x
      Remedial response objectives address the protection of public health,
      welfare, and the environment from existing or potential threats posed
      by contaminated materials.    The objectives are used to focus the
      development and evaluation of all the site specific remedial
      alternatives possible.        Response* objectives are selected in
      consideration of the site specific data generated during the field
      investigations, the applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements
      (ARARs), and other response guidance. The objectives developed for
      (MTHD/RHMW) are consistent with USEPA requirements/policies.
Costs of Response:
                                       s     \
19. Given the serious flaws of the RI/FS set forth in the above comments
      and in the attachments, we do not concede that the costs of preparing
      the WCC RI/FS may properly be considered "costs of response" under
      CERCLA or the New Jersey Spill Act.
      Response;  The RI/FS has been conducted in accordance with CERCLA, and
      is therefore an appropriate cost.
G & M Assessment and Weston Letter:
20.   Since the Rocky Hill Municipal Well (RHMW) represents one of the
      Superfund sites, at a minimum, several water samples should have been
      obtained from this well during the RI for an analysis of Priority
      Pollutant constituents plus 40 peaks.
      Response; Water quality samples are collected by the Township as part
      of their operation. Some of these results are included in the RI.
21. During the December 13, 1986 pump test, time-dependent water samples
      should have been analyzed to assess TCE variations with the
      enlargement of the capture zone for the RHMW over the duration of the
      pumping test.
      Response; This was not done. However, analytical samples of water
      were collected after treatment as part of the NJDEP discharge             3
      requirements.                                                             C~< ,
                                                                                             i
22. The well inventory (description of well construction details) for               Q
    domestic wells in the MTHD and other wells in the study area is                 o
    Inadequate in terms of domestic and production well locations and               *-*
    pertinent well construction details.
                                                                                        CD
      Response; Well logs are included in the Interim report (on file)                  w
      which provide some additional information.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       -21-



23. The number and location of water-level measurement points (monitoring
    wells) that form the basis of the RI at the MTHD is insufficient for
    an assessment of shallow ground water flow conditions in this area.
      Response:   The hydrologic investigation is considered adequate and
      appropriate by NJDEP and USEPA.
24.   The deep monitoring wells are cased in the bedrock over almost the
      entire thickness of the Brunswick Aquifer to the depth the wells were
      drilled. This does not allow for an assessment of ground water flow
      conditions in the deeper portions of the Brunswick Aquifer.        In
      addition, well depths are highly variable (85 to 250 feet), further
      complicating an assessment of deeper flow conditions.
      Response;    The investigative methodology is considered appropriate
      mostly based upon the fact that natural flow is predominately within
      vertical fractures.
25.   Given the VCC pumping test results and their statement that "the
      facility for contaminant migration would be greatest along strike"
      (RI, Page 3-6), it is surprising that the WCC study did not
      concentrate on studying potential sources that lie along formation
      strike in proximity to RHMW.
      Response;    The investigation maintained an effort to investigate
      potential sources of contamination to MTHD/RHMW sites without
      concentrating along the strike.    While the ground water flow is
      greatest along the strike, flow perpendicular to the strike is also
      expected.
26.   The Public Health Assessment (PHA) did not address the No Action and
      Aquifer Isolation alternatives in any detail. The Aquifer Isolation
      Alternative warrants consideration.
      Response; The PHA was based upon a No Action scenario. The Aquifer
      Isolation Alternative has been considered throughout the RI/FS Study.
      The Alternative, however, was not as effective at achieving the site
      objectives as the selected alternative.
27.   How was the "perceived likelihood of finding non-volatlles in a given
      boring" evaluated (RI at p. 4-5)?
      Response;    Selection of samples for analysis was based upon the
      following instructions presented to VCC:
      Hierarchy for deciding which samples are to be sent to the lab are as
      follows (in descending preference).
                  a)   High OVA reading
                  b)   Visible contamination
                  c)   Bottom of Boring (Water-Table)
                  d)   2-4 feet depth

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   -22-


28. The statement (RI at p. 6-7) referring to "the plume" as having
    achieved "steady state" is inaccurate.     The TCE concentrations are
    erratic with time, and no other data are presented to indicate that any
    "plume" has achieved steady state.
     Response: In context, the statement in question refers to a lack of
     significant trends.  Variations in samples at a given location are
     recognized.
IV. REMAINING CONCERNS
Many of the issues addressed in this Responsiveness Summary will continue to
be of concern to the community.         Montgomery Township officials have
requested that they be kept up-to-date on Remedial Design activities,
including a briefing during this phase, and have also requested an
opportunity to provide input into the Design. Honoring of this request
should help to further alleviate some of the above concerns, including those
of noise and air pollution and placement of the pump and treat units.
The concerns regarding the sealing of private wells and connections to the
public water supply system for the MTHD are generally being addressed
under the September 1987 Operable Unit Record of Decision.
The issue of payments for past water line connections in MTHD is
continuing to be addressed by NJDEP and USEPA under applicable laws and
regulations.
Although NJDEP and USEPA have been able to identify a primary source of the
contamination, a responsible party(ies) has not been named.           Should
payment to the communities for past actions be precluded by applicable laws
and regulations, then the question of reimbursement for past costs may
remain unanswered until a responsible party(ies) is identified, at which
time the communities may choose to pursue reimbursement from the responsible
party(ies).




                                                                               O
                                                                               o

                                                                               O
                                                                               00
                                                                               CO
                                                                               en

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ATTACHMENT A




               ff)


               o
               o

                o
                00
                CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

                              DIVISION OF WASTE MANAGEMENT

                     HAZARDOUS SITE MITIGATION ADMINISTRATION

                                     Public Meeting
                                        on
              Initiation of Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
                                          at
      Montgomery Township Housing Development/Rocky Hill Municipal Vellfleld
                             Tuesday, January 14, 1986
                                     7:'30 p.».
                      Montgomery Township Municipal Building
                                     2261    Routt 206
                                     Belle Meada, NJ

                                            AGENDA
1.    Opening Remarks;                               Mr. Robert Predale, Chief
      Introduction of KJDEP                          Bureau of Site Management.
      Personnel and Contractor: *                    KJDEP
      Woodward-Clyde Consultants
2.    Overview of Past History and                   Mr. Kevin M. Psarianos, Site Manager
      Current Situation                              Bureau of Site Management
                                                     NJDEP
3.    Presentation: Remedial                         Mr. Robert Gaibrois, Project Manager
      Investigation/Feasibility Study                Woodward-Clyde Consultants
It.   Questions and Answers




                                                                                            o
                                                                                            -c
                                                                                            o
                                                                                            o

                                                                                            o
                                                                                            00
                                                                                            (.0

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  STATE or NEW JEX»EY
                                            DEMJITHEtfT OF EwVIUOOTIEllTAi P»OTECTIOII




                                  • FACT SHEET
                                       on
          Conatncraint of tht Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
                                       at
     Montgomery Township Housing Development/Rocky Rill Municipal Vellfield
                   Montgomery Township and Rocky Hill Borough
                                 Somerset County
                                       *

                                                     *

Site Description!
The Montgomery Township Housing Development site consists of 71 residences, each
on approximately one acre, situated on Sycamore Lane, Robin Drive, Oxford Circle
and Cleveland Circle in Montgomery Township. The Rocky Hill Municipal Vellfield
site is a two-acre tract of land located to the south of the Montgomery Township
Housing Development in Rocky Hill Borough.
The major environmental concern at these sites is contamination of the ground
water with trichloroethylene (TCE) ard other pollutants. The source(s) of this
contamination remains unknown. All of the 71 residences have private wells which
draw water x from the Brunswick Shale Formation. Since the discovery of ground
water contamination, 33 homes have been connected to the Elizabethtown Water
Company's public water supply. Some remaining residences in and around the
development continue to draw water from the Brunswick aquifer.
The aquifer also supplies drinking water for approximately 1,000 residents of
Rocky Hill and is used as a source of potable and process water, as well as for
irrigation.   However, two air stripping units presently treat the Pocky Rill
Municipal Veil so that it meets potable water standards.
The remaining public health concern is that some residents may still be using
TCE-contaminated well water. The flow of contaminants in the fractured rock
aquifer' is difficult to predict and future samples may show contamination of
previously uncontaminated wells. Several potential sources of contamination
(industrial and commercial establishments in the area) have been identified. TCE
was also detected in septic tanks of commercial or industrial establishments at 6
of 13 identified potential sources.
                                                                                         3
Background:                                                                              ^
In 1979, the Rocky Hill Municipal Well was closed due to elevated levels of TCE. o
These levels eventually declined and the well was reopened in July, 1981 only to o
be shut down for a second time in January, 1982 when TCE levels again Increased. *"*
                                                                                 o
                                                                                 CO
                                                                                 (*)
                                                                                         00

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 I
                                                     I


During thtsa Interim closure*, vattr was supplied to the Borough by the
Elirabethtown Water Company. Since July, 1983 the well has been operating with
air stripping units.    Concern over the findings in Rocky Hill triggered a
sampling program for the neighboring Montgomery Township Housing Development.
                                                               *

In May, 1983 the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEF) began
Investigations to determine the sources of contamination and the direction of
ground water flow. Cooperative Agreements between NJDEP and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency to perform Remedial Investigations/Feasibility
Studies (RI/FS) were finalised In the fall of 1984.
One RZ/FS is being conducted for both sites due to their close proximity and the
potentially related source(s) of contamination. The study which was initiated in
September 1985 is being conducted by Woodward-Clyde Consultants of Wayne, NJ and
is expected to be completed during the winter of 1986.
Of 99 New Jersey sites on the National Priorities List (Superfund), the
Montgomery Township Housing Development and Rocky Hill Municipal Wellfield are
ranked 65th and 67th respectively.
1/86




                                                                                   IT
                                                                                   O
                                                                                   •<
                                                                                   o
                                                                                   o

                                                                               o
                                                                               0>
                                                                               CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                      REMEDIAL INVESTIGATIOK/FEASIBILITY STUDY
    Montgomery Township Housing Development/Rocky Hill Municipal Vellfield
Objectives
 "Determine types and concentration of hazardous substances present.
 "Define extent of contamination and movement of contaminants.
 "Try to Identify sources of the contamination.
 'Develop and evaluate remedial alternatives to determine the most
   environmentally-sound and cost-effective remedial action measure.
 "Projected completion: winter of 1986.
Pre-investigation Activities
 "Develop Project Schedule, Health and Safety Plan, Field Sampling Plan, and
  Quality Assurance Project Management Plan.
 "Conduct background investigation including: A review of available information
  regarding the sites; a site reconnaissance; and an inventory of existing
  drinking water wells within a one-mile radius of the sites.
 "Perform an analysis of surface geology and geophysical investigation.
 "Identify appropriate locations for monitoring wells.
Site Investigations
 "Install monitoring wells and drill soil borings.
 "Collect water, soil and septic tank samples for chemical analysis.
 "Monitor air quality during site investigations.
 "Define subsurface migration pathvay(s).
 "Assess aquifer characteristics and drinking water quality.
 "Identify the most probable sources of contamination.
 "Identify all hazardous substances.
Remedial Response
 "Develop remedial response objectives and identify appropriate remedial
  alternatives.
 "Determine and recommend level of cleanup required at the sites and/or vicinity.
Treatability Studies
 "Conduct all necessary laboratory sample analyses.
 "Develop and conduct a traatability/compatibility study program to provide data
   for remedial alternatives evaluation.
 "Use data from the laboratory programs during selection of appropriate remedial
  measures.


                                                                                    -<
                                                                                    o
                                                                                    o

                                                                                    o
                                                                                    o>

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Evaluation of Alternatives
 'Perform public health, environmental, and cost-effectiveness •valuations of
  remedial alternatives.
 •Recommend the most environmentally-sound, cost-effective remedial alternative
  to NJDEP.
Conceptual Design and Final Report    ^-'
 'Prepare conceptual design for selected cleanup alternative.
 'Present Final Report to NJDEP.
1/86
NJDEP




                                                                                   Q
                                                                                   -<

                                                                                  O
                                                                                  o

                                                                                  O
                                                                                  00

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                           Glossary of Terms

Administrative Consent Order (AGO); A binding legal document between a
government agency and a responsible party. It is issued by the
government in the form of an order that specifies site mitigation
activities to be undertaken by the responsible party.•
Contract; ' The legal agreement that outlines federal and state
government responsibilities at USEPA-lead sites on the National
Priorities List (Superfund sites) as authorized by the Comprehensive
Environmental Response* Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA).
Cooperative Agreement; An agreement whereby USEPA transfers funds and
other resources to a state for the accomplishment of certain remedial
activities at sites on the Kational Priorities List (Superfund sites)
as authorized by the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation
and Liability Act (CERCLA).
Engineering Design (Remedial Design); Following a feasibility study,
an engineering design is executed to translate the selected remedy in
accordance with engineering criteria in a bid package, enabling
implementation of the site remedy.
Focused Feasibility Study (FFS); A limited feasibility study which is
performed on a certain aspect of site remediation and/or when more than
one remedial measure is considered technically viable for the immediate
control of a threat
Immediate Removal Actions (IRAs); Actions taken to prevent or mitigate
immediate and significant risk to human life, health or to the
environment.
Initial Remedial Measures (IRMs); Actions that can be taken quickly to
limit exposure or threat of exposure to a significant health or
environmental hazard at sites where planning for remedial actions is
underway. .
Monitoring Well; A well installed under strict design specifications
that, when sampled, will reveal hydrogeloglc data at its point of
installation.     Monitoring wells are installed at predetermined
locations, usually in groups, to gain knowledge of site conditions
including: extent and type of ground water contamination, soil types,
depth to ground water and direction of ground water flow.
Kational Contingency Plan (KCP)t    The basic policy directive for
federal response actions under the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA). It sets forth the
Hazard Ranking System and procedures and standards for responding to
release* of hazardous substances, pollutants, and contaminants. The       3
NCP is a regulation subject to regular revision.                          ^
National Priorities List (KPL);  A list of the highest priority           o
releases or potential releases of hazardous substances, based upon        o

                                                                          o
                                                                          o>

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Statt and U.S. Environotntal Protection Agency (USEPA) Regional
•ubmiaaiona of candidate aitea and the criteria and methodology
contained in the Hazard Ranking System (HRS), for the purpose of
allocating funds for remedial response under the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability • Act (CERCLA).
Published by the USEPA, the NPL is updated periodically. Sites on the
NPL are commonly called Suparfund sites.
NJPEP: New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
NJDEP'e Management Plan for Hazardous Waste Site Cleanupa;   The    New
Jersey plan used to develop a work schedule and a systematic approach
to remedial action at hazardous waste sites and discharges of hazardous
materials which posa a threat to public health or the environment.
Remedial Action; (e.g., Removal/Treatment/Construction) The physical
action consistent with the selected remedy for a release or threatened
release of a hazardoua substance into the environment. The term
includes, but is not limited to such action* as removal, storage,
confinement, protection using dikes, tranches, ditches, slurry walls,
clay cover, neutralization, cleanup of releaaed hazardous substances or
contaminated materials, recycling or reuse, diversion, destruction,
segregation of reactive wastes, dredging or excavationa, repair or
replacement of leaking containers, collection of leachate and runoff,
on-site or off-site treatment or incineration, provision of alternate
water supplies, snd monitoring required to sssure that such actions
protect public health and the environment.
Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS);  The     Remedial
Investigation (RI) portion of a RI/FS in remedial planning involvea a
physical and other investigation to gather the data necessary to
determine the nature and extent of problems at the site; establish
remedial response criteria for the site; and identify technical and
cost analyses of the alternatives. The Feasibility Study (FS) portion
of a RX/FS in remedial planning involvea a study to evaluate
alternative remedial actions from a technical, environmental, and cost
perspective; recommend the most effective remedy for adequate
protection of human health and the environment; and prepare a
conceptual design, cost estimates for budgetary purposes, and a
preliminary implementation schedule for that action.
Responsible Party; Any person who has discharged a hazardous substance
or is In any way responsible for any hazardous substance which the
NJDEP has removed or is removing pursuant to the New Jersey Spill
Compensation and Control Act and/or the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA).
Spill Compensation Fund: The Spill Compensation Fund was created in
1976 with enactment of the Spill Compensation and Control Act and
became effective on April 1, 1977. It provides compensation to
qualified individuate and businesses that have suffered damages aa a
result of a discharge of hazardous substances.                             o
                                                                           o
USEPA: United States Environmental Protection Agency.                     ""
                                                                          o
                                                                          CD

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                HEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                          DIVISION OF WASTE MANAGEMENT
                    HAZARDOUS SITE MITIGATION ADMINISTRATION

        A Community lalatioaa Prograa at Suptrfund Hazardous Vast* Sit**

     Ac part of tha faderal/atata program of elaaaop at hazardous vaat*
•it**, a Community Relation* Prograa i* conducted to r*c*iv* local input and
to advia* local r**id*at* and officials about tb* planned r*a*dial action* at
tb* tbr** major stag** of tb* cleanup: 1) remedial investigation/feasibility
•tudy 2) engineering • desiga aad 3) reaoval/traatment/construction. Local
briefing* and meeting* ar* conducted with elected official* and residents and
generally take place att
     1)    Tb* connnencement of a remedial investigation/feasibility atudy *o
           that local concern* can b* addreased aarly in tba process.
     2)    Tba completion of a feasibility study to discuss tbe alternative
           courses of remedial action. There is a 30-day comment period after
           public presentation of tbe alternatives during which tbe feasibility
           atudy ia available in local repositories.
     3)    Tba engineering design *tag* to carry out tha mandate* of tb*
           selected remedial alternative.
    x
    4)     Tha commencement of tba removal/treatmeat/construction stage to
           advise of tbe azpaetad physical, remedial action.
    5)     Tba completion of tha remedial action.

     In addition to th* activities outlined above, there i* generally
ongoing communication with local official* and resident* a* required.
Depending upon whether tha New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(DE?) or tba Daitad State* Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) h«« tha lead
in remedial action at a ait*, community relation* activities are conducted by
the relevant Stata or Federal agency.
    •      •               •
     In New Jersey, tbe DEP Community Relations Program is directed by Grace ...
Singer. Chief. Office of Community Ralationa (609) 984-3081. At Region II.
EPA, th* contact parson ia Lillian Johnson, Community Relation* Coordinator
(212) 264-2515.                                                                >


                                                 •                                  o
HS43:J*                                                                    .      *-
4/85                                                 .'.       .
                                                                                §

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              STEPS INVOLVED IN A MAJOR HAZARDOUS WASTE SITE CLEANUP



        (1)                          (2)                           (3)                      (4)
Site Identified            Initial Site Investigation         Secure Site         Site Analysis Evaluation

and Referred                                                                                      mt

        (5)                          (6)                           (7)                      (8)

Priorltlxation             Determination of Lead           Community Relations    Signing of Contract or
                                                             Plan Activated        Cooperative Agreement

-       (9)                          (10)                          (U)                      (12)
Hiring of Contractor            Preparation of            Selection of Remedial    Hiring of Contractor
for Remedial Investi-           Feasibility                 Action Alternative    for Engineering Design
    gation/Feasibility            Study
      Study

        (13)                         (U)                           (15)
Hiring of Construction/       Cleanup Evaluation           Contractor Audit and
 Removal Cleanup                                                 Close out
     Contractor


    9*80       TOO   A9W


New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
5/84

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 Montgomery Township Housing Devtlopntnt Sitt
                                Somerset County
                               Meeting Regarding
                   Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
                                         for
                                Private Potable Veils
                           Wednesday, July 29, 1987
                                   7:30 P.M.
                    Montgomery Township Municipal Building
                                2261 Route 206
                                Belle Meade, KJ -




1.   Opening Remarks;                     Mr. Edward Putnam, Section Chief
     Introduction of NJDEP                Bureau of Site Management
     Personnel and Contractor,            NJDEP
     Woodward-Clyde Consultants
2.   Overview of Past History             Mr. Kevin M. Psarianos, Site Manager
     and.Site Background                  Bureau of Site Management
                                          NJDEP
3.   Presentation: Remedial               Mr. Robert Caibrois, Project Manager
     Investigation for                    Woodward-Clyde Consultants
     Private Potable Wells
4.   Presentation: Feasibility            Mr. Douglas Seely
     Study for Private Potable            Senior Project Scientist
     Wells - Remediation                  Metcalf and Eddy. lac.
     Alternatives
5.   Preferred Alternative:               Mr. Kevin Psarianos
     Hookups to Elizabathtovn
     Water Company and Well
     Sealing
6.   Questions and Comments                                                      0
                                                                                 -c
                                                                                 o
                                                                                 o

                                                                                  o
                                                                                  CD

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        tat
                                                        STATE OF NEW JERSEY
                                               DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION




                                        FACT SHEET

                                     Rtsults of
  -—                ' Remedial Investigation/Feasibility
                                      :i
                                                         Study
                                        at
                      Montgomery Township Rousing Davalopaant
                                        and
                          Reeky Bill Municipal Vtllfiald
                                  Suparfund Sitas
                    Montgoaary Township and Rocky Bill Borough
                                  Somerset County
                                         May, 1988
Sits Description:
The Montgoaary Township Bousing Development (MTHD) Suparfund aita
encompasses approximately 72 acres to the east of U.S. Routs 206 and north
of H.J. Route 518. The development consists of 71 private homes with six
additional homes included in the surrounding area. The Rocky Bill Municipal
Wellfield (RHKW) Superfund site is a two-acre tract of land located to the
aast of Route 206 and aouth of Route 518 in the Borough of Rocky Bill.
Drinking water for the MTHD is supplied by private residential veils and by
the Elicabethtown Water Company. Of the 77 residences* roughly one-half
have been connected to the Elizabethtovn system while the remaining
residents continue to use private wells. Rocky Bill Borough*a public water
system is supplied by the municipal wellfield.       An air stripping system
presently treata the vatar so that it meets drinking wster standards.
Background:
In 1979* the Rocky Bill municipal well was closed due to alavatad levels of
trichloroethene (TCE) and Elizabethtovn Vatar Company provided a temporary
alternative water supply. Sines July 1983, the Borough'a water supply has
been treated by the air stripping aystam. Concern over the Rocky Bill
findings triggered a subsequent sampling program for the neighboring MTHD.
In March 1981, Elizabathtown Water Company water linaa were Installed in
MTHD and residents were advised to connect to these lines*
Cooperative Agreements between the Hew Jeraey Department of Environmental                .
                                                                                         O
Frotectloa (NJDEF) and the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(USEPA) to perform Remedial Investigations/Feasibility Studies '(RI/FS) for
the aitaa were finalized in the fall of 1984. One RI/FS. initiated In the                O
fall of 1985, waa conducted for both altea due, to their close proximity and            o
the potentially related source(s) of contamination. The study was conducted
under the Superfund Program by Woodward-Clyde Consultants of Wsyna, KJ at a             O
cost of $990,000. Of 100 sites listed on the National Priorities List                   CO
                                                                                        *>.
(Superfund), the MTHD and RHMW are ranked 65th and 66th respectively.                   NJ




                            N*w Jtney it an Equal Opportunity Employ*
                                          RtcycledPopv

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Status:
Tht completed draft RI/FS and tht Propoatd Reatdial Action Plan (PRAP) art
available for public rtvitv at tht following rtpoaitoritat Soaeraet County
Library in Brldgtvater; Mary Jacoba Library in Rocky Bill; Montgomtry
Township Municipal Buildings USEPA Rtgion II, Emtrgtncy and Rtmtdial
Rtsponaa Division in Ntw York City and tha NJDEP Division of Hazardous Sitt
Mitigation la Trenton. Tha public comment pariod eloaaa May 23, 1988.
Comments on tha atudy ahould ba aubmitttd to Craca Singtr, Chief » Ntw Jtraty
Department of Environaantal Protection, Division of Hazardous Slta
Mitigation. Buraau of Community Rtlations, 401 East Stata Strttt, CN 413,
Tranton , MJ 08625. All public comments will ba incorporated into tht
reatdial alternative aelectioa process.      Tha aelected renedy will be
documented in a Record of Deciaioa (ROD) to ba issued by this suaatr.
Notice of the ROD vill be published and .the document will be available to
the public at the repositories listed above* The ROD vill be accoapanied by
an explanation of any aignificant changes froa the Proposed Reaedial Action
Plan and vill include a response to all cements received during the consent
period. Questions may be directed to Jeffrey Folatr of NJDEP at (609)
984-3081.
Remedial Investigation /Feasibility Study - Scope of Vork
—   Install monitoring veils and drill aoil borings*
—   Collect water, aoil and aeptic tank aaaples for chemical analysis.
—   Monitor air quality during aite investigations.
—   Define contaminant movement pathway (a).
—   Assess aquifer characteristics and drinking vatar quality.
—   Identify likely sources of contamination.
—   Identify all hazardous substances.
Rentdial Investijstion Results!
The Remedial Investigation consisted of a two-phase field investigation
which vaa designed to characterise tha extent of tha ground vater
contamination and identify a aourca(a).          Resulta of tha Phase I
investigation confirmed earlier findings that the ground vater vas
contaminated between the WWW and tha MTBD. An interim evaluation of these
findings concluded that private veils within and immediately aurrounding the
MTRD ahould be sealed and public vater connectiona provided. la September
1987. USEPA/NJDEP agreed to provide public vater connectiona under a
separate Record of Decision which addressed this issue exclusively* This
prograa is currently scheduled for coapletioa la early 1989.
Tha Phase II inveatigation indicated that tha contamination extends east
froa the RBMV to tha Millstone River and that tha priaary source of
contamination is located la an area north of tha RHMtf. Concurrent vith the
Phaee XI investigation, aa independent investigation vaa being conducted la
tha aource area by Princeton Gamma Tech* lac. (PCT), tha current site
occupant • la compliance vith tha atate*a Environmental Cleanup
Responsibility Act (ECRA). During tha PCT tavestigatioa. high levels of
ground vater contamination vera found at the PCT aite Identifying that aite
aa the priaary source area. However the PCT investigation also reveeled
that soil staples vera aot contaainated vith TCE, Indicating that the ground
vater contamination vas most likely caused by paet disposal practices.
                                                                                o
                                                                                CO
                                                                                -Cx
                                                                                CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

KJDEP/USEPA Preferred Remedial Action Alternative;
Tha following combination of remedial action alternatives ia being
raeooaended pending cotnatnta froa the public and final USEPA approval:
—   An aquifer treatment aystem consisting of pumping at tbe source area,
    air atripping units and upgradient rainjection of the treated affluent
    (the actual number and precise locations of the air stripping units
  '—vill be determined during the Engineering Design phase of the project);
—   Sealing of remaining affected private veils;
—   Connection of the residence in the southwest section of the aite to
    public vatar.
NJDEP and USEPA recommend thia alternative as the most appropriate aite
remedy because it affectively protecta public health and the environment in
the most cost-effective and direct way, vhila best meeting all appropriate
regulations.


                                                                 over-




                                                                              o
                                                                              -<
                                                                          o
                                                                          o
                                                                          (-1

                                                                         o
                                                                         03

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                        SUMMARY OP REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES*



Alternative            Description            Performance                   Implementabillty       i Present Cost6
                                                                                                  (Millions of Dollars)

1. No Action           Ground water           Does not Isolate public       Easily Implemented,            0.4
                       monitoring*            from aquifer. Aquifer
                       5-year alts            cleanup very slow (40
                       reviews*               years minimum).
                                                          ^
2. Aquifer Isolation   Public water           Isolates public fron          Easily Implemented.            0.5
                       hookupst aeal          aquifer. Aquifer cleanup
                       private wells(         very alow (40 years
                       ground water           •inismn).
                       monitoring*
                       5-year site
                       reviews.
3. Pump/Air Strip      Public water hook-     Isolates public fron          Not easily implemented.
   fro* Entire Plume   ups* seal private      aquifer.                      Construction in residential
                       wells* ground water                                  and hlatoric areas.
                       nonitoring* aquifer
                       flushing through
                       pumping (13
                       extraction wells)
                       and air stripping.
          3A.          Combination of sur-    Enhances flushing*                                            4.9
                       face water and         aquifer cleanup
                       ground water           expedited (4 years
                       discharge.             minimum).
          3B.          Reinjection of         Enhances flushing*                                            6.3
                       treeted ground         aquifer cleanup
                       water upgradient.      expedited (4 years
                                              minimum).
          3C.          Use treated water       Does not adequately                                          4.8
                       as potable supply.      enhance flushing*
                                               aquifer cleanup very
   °S80    TOO   A9W                           slow (40 yeara minimum),

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                             e
Alternative           Description           Performance            Inplenentabillty          ' Present Cost
                                                                                           (Millions of Dollars)
                                                                                           t
4. Punp/Carbon             as Alt. 3        Sane as Alt. 3.        Sana as Alt. 3.
   Adsorption fro*    except* activated
   Entire Pluu*       carbon adsorption
                      is used in place
                      of air stripper.
        4A.           San* as Alt. 3A.      Sane as Alt. 3A.       Sana as Alt. 3A.                   15.3
        4B.           San* as Alt. 3B.      Sane as Alt. 3B.       Sane as Alt. 3B.                   16.9
        4C.           Sana as Alt. 3C.      Sane as Alt. 3C.       SBM as Alt. 3C.                    15.4
5. Pimp/Air Strip     Public water hook-    Isolates public fron   Construction United
   fro* Source Area   ups* seal private     aquifer.               to coieaercial areas
                      wells* ground                                in southwest of site.
                      water wmltorlng*                             Inpact lessened.
                      aquifer flushing at                          Moderate inplenenta-
                      source area through                          billty.
                      pimping (3 extraction
                      wells) and air
                      stripping.
        5A.           Reinjection of        Enhanced flushing*                                       3.0
                      treated ground        aquifer cleanup
                      water downgradient.   expedited (5-year
                      Downgradlent          •inlntn).
                      flushes through
                      natural attenuation
                      (enhanced by
                      location of
                      injection wells).
        SB.           Reinjectlon of        Enhanced flushing*                                       2.9
                      treated ground        aquifer cleanup
TS80   TOO     ADW    water upgradient.     expedited (5 years
                                            •inlmra).
         5C.          Use treated water     Little enhanced                                          2.4
                      as potable supply.    flushing, slow                                                       over.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Alternative                Description           Performance1*               Implementabllity         Preaent Cost0
                                                                                                        (Millions of Dollars)
                                                                                                        i

     6. Pump/Carbon             Same aa Alt. S        Same aa Alt. S.              Same aa Alt. S.
        Adaorptlon from         axcepts activated
        Source Area             carbon adaorptlon
                                ia need in place
                                of air •tripping.
               «A.              Same aa Alt. SA.      Same aa Alt. SA.             Same aa Alt. SA.                8.3
               6B.              Same aa Alt. SB.      Same aa Alt. SB.             Same aa Alt. SB.                8.3
               6C.              Same ae Alt. SC.      Same aa Alt. SC.              Same aa Alt. SC.               7.8
     7. Pump/Air Strip          Same aa Alt. S        Same aa Alt. SB.              Same aa Alt. S.                2.5
        from Source Area        except: individual    Cleanup expedited.
        with f icinity          air atripping unit*   (7 yeara minimum).
        Injection               ere need at each
                                extraction well,
                                treated ground
                                water la reinjected
                      *         outside the contaminant
2
0                •              plume (typically
                                upgradiant).
O
o
     HOTESt
0
00   * The aelected alternative must meet all applicable or relevant and appropriate regulationa ati required by the
Cn       Superfund Amendmenta and Reauthorlsatlon Act of 1986.
ro                        %>

         Batlnated tinea preaented are a minlMai tine for renediation of contamination in the aquifer and are baaed on
           aaaonptlona of degree of aquifer fluahing cauaed by each alternative and neceaaary quantity of fluahing. (Refer to
           Section 5.3 of the Peaaibility Study for further detaila.)
     c
         Preaent coat ia baaed on assumption of a 25-year operation period with operating coata amortized at 8Z annual
           interest rate.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

>-

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  •                          Glossary of Terms
 Admin istretive Content Order (ACO)t A binding legal document between a
government agency and a responsible party* It ie issued by the goveraaent
ia the fora of aa order that specifies site mitigation activities to be
undertaken by the responsible party.
Contract i The legel agreeaeat that outlines federal and state government
responsibilities at USEPA-lead sites ea the National Priorities List
(Superfuad sites) as authorised by the Coapreheasive Environmental Response,
Coapensatioa sad Liability Act (CERCLA) sad aaendaents.
Cooperative Agreement*    An agreeaeat whereby USEPA traasfers funds and
other resources to a state for the accoaplishaeat of eertaia remedial
activities at sites oa the National Priorities List (Superfuad sites) as
authorized by the Coapreheasive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act (CERCLA) and aaendaents.
Engineering Design (Remedial Design): Following a feasibility study* aa
engineering design ia executed to translate the selected remedy ia
accordance with engineering criteria ia a bid package, aaabliag
iapleaentatioa of the site reaedy.
                                                  '*

Focused feasibility Study (fTS)t    A limited feasibility study which .is
performed on a certain aspect of site reaediatioa and/or when aore thaa one _
remedial aeesure is considered technically viable for the immediate control ~
of a threat.
Immediate Removal Actions (IRAs)i Actions takea to preveat or mitigate
iaaediate and significant risk to huaan Ufa* health or to the environment.
Initial Remedial Measures (IRKs)t Actions that caa be taken quickly to
limit exp&aure or \ threat ef exposure to a significant health or
environaental hazard at sites where planning for remedial actloas is
underway. \
Monitoring Vellt     A veil installed under strict desiga specificatioas
that, whea sampled, will rsveal hydrogeologle data at its point ef
installation. Monitoring wells are installed at predetermined locations,
usually ia groups, to gala knowledge of site conditioas including: extent
and type of ground water contaaination, soil types, depth to ground water
and directioa ef ground water flow.
National Contingency Tien (HCP)t The basic policy directive for federal
response actions under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation
and Liability Act (CERCLA) and amendments. It sets forth the Batard Ranking
System and procedures and standards for responding to releeses of hazardous
substances* aad coataminanta. The HCP is a regulatioa subject to regular
revisioa.
                                                                     *"
National Priorities List (HPL)t A list ef the highest priority relesses         3
or potential releases ef hazardous substances, based upon State aad U.S.            ^
Environaental Protection Agency (USEPA) Regional subaissioas of candidate
sites aad the criteria and methodology contained la the Bezerd Ranking          0
System (RRS), for the purposs ef allocating funds for reaedial response         o
                                                                                M
under the Coapreheasivs Environmentel Response, Compensation and Liability
Act (CERCLA) and amendments. Published by the USEPA, the NPL is updated
periodically. Sitea oa the NPL are commonly called Superfuad sites.             co

                                                                     bver-

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    -2-
        Nev Jeraey Department of Environmental Protection.
KJPCT's Kanagement Flen for Hazardous Waste Site Cleanups! The flew Jersey
plan ueed to develop a vork achedule and a systematic approach to remedial
action at hazardous vaste aites and discharges of hazardous materials which
pose a threat to public health or the environment.
Remedial Action:     (e.g.* Removal/Treatment/Constructioa)    The physical
action consistent vith the selected remedy for a release or threatened
release of a hatardoua substance into the environment. The term includes,
but ia mot limited to auch actions as removal, storsge, confinement,
protection using dikes, trenches, ditches, slurry vails, clay cover,
neutralization, cleanup of released hazardous substances or contaminated
materials, recycling or reuse, dlversioa, destruction, segregation of
reactive vastea, dredging or excavations, repair or replacement of leaking
containers, collection of leaehate and runoff, en-site or «ff-site treatment
or incineratioa, proviaioa of alternate vater supplies, and monitoring
required to assure that such actions protect public health and the
environment.
Reaediel   Investigation/Feasibility  Study   (RI/FS)t      The   Remedial
Investigation(RI)portion of a RI/FSia remedial planning involves a
physical and other investigation to gather the data necessary to determine
the mature and extent of problems at the aite; establish remedial response
criteria for the sits; and identify technical and cost analyses of the —
alternatives. The Feasibility Study (FS) portion of a RI/FS ia remedial
planning involves a study to svaluate alternative remedial aetioas from a
technical, environmental, and cost perspective; recommend the most effective '
remedy for adequate protection of human health and the environment; and
prepare a conceptual design, cost estimates for budgetary purposes, and a
preliminary implementation schedule for that action.
Responsible Party: Any person vho has discharged a hazardous substance or
is in any vay responsible for any hazardous substance which the HJDEP has
removed or is removing pursuant to the Rev Jersey Spill Compensation and
Control Act and/or the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation
and Liability Act (CERCLA) and amendments.
•SARA:    Superfund Amendments and Reauthorisatioa Act* passed ia October
 19S6 amending CERCLA (aee "Superfund" explanation below).
Spill Cempensetien Fund:     The Mew Jeraey Spill Compensation Fund was
created in 1976 with enactment of the Spill Compensation and Control Act and
became effective oa April 1* 1977. It provides compensation to qualified
individuals aad businesses that have auffered damages as a result of a
discharge of hazardous*substances.
Superfundt The common mama for the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA) enacted by Congress ia December 1980
snd amended ia October 1986 as the Superfuad Amendments aad Reauthorisatioa            ._
Act (SARA). The Act authorized that United States Environmental Frotectioa            c.
Agency (USEPA) to provide long-term remedies at hazardous vast* aites. The            ~*
Act established a fund from special taxes aad general revenuea, to
accompliah the cleanup of these aitss.                                            o
USEFAt United States Environmental Frotectioa Agency.
                                                                                 CO
MJDEP                                     ,                                      ,<"
3/S7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

at
Superfund
Hazardous
Waste
Sites
As part of the federal/state program of cleanup at hazardous waste sites, a Community Relations
Program la conducted to receive local Input and to advise local residents and officials about
the planned remedial actions at major stages of the cleanup. Local briefings and meetings are
conducted with elected officials and residents and generally take place at:

  v1) The commencement of a remedial Investigation/feasibility study
      so that local concerns can be addressed early In the process.

   2) The completion of a feasibility study to discuss the alternative
      courses of remedial action. There la a 21-day comment period
      on the alternatives during which the feasibility study la available
      In local repositories.

   3) The commencement of the treatment/construction/removal
      stage to advise of the expected physical remedial action.
                                                                                                         o
   4) The completion of the remedial action.                                                             -<
                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                     o
In addition to the activities outlined above, there is generally ongoing communication with local
officials and residents as required. Depending upon whether the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) or the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)           o
Is the lead agency In remedial action at a alte. community relations activities are conducted by    0>
the relevant State or Federal agency.
In New Jersey, the DEP Community Relations Program la directed by Grace Singer. Chief, Bureai
of Community Relations (609) 984-3081. At Region II. EPA. the Community Relations Coordinator
Is Lillian Johnson. (212) 264-2515.



Division of Hazardous SIU Mitigation

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         , Steps Involved InV
           (1)             Major Hazardous Waste Site Cleanup
     Sit* Identified
     •nd Referred
                                          (2)
                             Initial Site Investigation
                                                                   O)
                                                              Site Secured


                            Site Analysla Evaluation
                                and Assessment
          (5)
     Prlorltlzation

                                        (6)
                            Determination of Agency
                                     Lead
                               (N JDEP or USEPA)
                                                                   (7)
                                                          Community Relations
                                                              Plan Activated
                                        (a)
                             Signing of Contract or
                            Cooperative Agreement
           (9)
Hiring of Contractor for
Remedial Investigation/
    Feasibility Study
                                      (10)
                                 Preparation of
                                   Feasibility
                                     Study
                                                                   (11)
                                                          Selection of Remedial
                                                           Action Alternative
                                                              (after Public
                                       (12)                Comment period)
                                                                                  5
                              Hiring of Contractor                                -<
                            for Engineering Design
          (13)                                                                    O
                                                                                  O
Hiring of Construction/
 Treatment/Removal                                                                O
 Cleanup Contractor                                                                CD
                                       (14)                                        cn

                              Cleanup Evaluation
                                                                  (IS)
                                                          Contractor Audit and
                                                               Close Out

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 ATTACHMENT B




       Speakers at the 5/12/88 Montgomery Township Housing Development
               Rocky Hill Municipal Wellfield Superfund Sites
                               Public Meeting




Louis Barryi Montgomery Township Board of Health


Charles Searfoss, Montgomery Township Health Officer


Robert Manka, Montgomery Township Resident


Peter Rainer, Montgomery Township Administrator




                                                                         a

                                                                         o
                                                                         o

                                                                         o
                                                                         00
                                                                         Cn
                                                                         00

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ATTACHMENT C




               CD
               -C


               o
               o

               o
               00
               en

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                 APR 2 7 196*
                    Arent, Fox, Kintner, Plotkin & Kahn '
                              WMhlnglon Squvt 1050 Coonwaicm Avvnu*. N.W.
                                       Wuhmgion. O.C 20036-5339




DavMJ.Bvdin                               April 21, 1988
(202) 857-6069




  Grace Singer, Chief
  Bureau of Community Relations
  Division of Hazardous Site Mitigation
  New Jersey Department of Environmental
   Protection
  CN 413
  401 East State Street
  Trenton, New Jersey 08625
          Re:     Rocky Hill Borough 'Montgomery Township Development RTFS
  Dear Ms. Singer:
          Please include the enclosed letter in the record of public comments received
  and return the date stamped copy for our files.
               Many thanks.
         '-»
                                                      Faithfully,
                                                          •


                                                         *~ ""*""*•«   »    •   _" •k.«.   •
                                                                                     vc»- ••«.
                                                      David J. Bardin

  Enclosure




                                                                                                         o
                                                                                                         -<
                                                                                                         o
                                                                                                         o

                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                        CO


        T«l«phon«:(202)W7-eOOO CafctoARFOX Tttoc WU M2672 ITT 440266 TMMOptor (202) §87-6395

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                         2 7195$
                       Arent, Fox, Kintner, Plotkin &. Kahn                                     -
                                  Washington Square 1050 Connecticut Avtnut, NW.
                                            Wachington. D.C. 20036-5339




David J. Bardin                                 April 21, 1988
(202)657-6089




   Neal Brody, Esq.
   Office of Regulatory Services
   Division of Hazardous Waste Management
   Department of Environmental Protection
   401 East State Street
   CN 028                                                             -
   Trenton, New Jersey 08625
                                    Re: Princeton Gamma-Tech. Inc.
   Dear Neal:
           Our initial review of PGT data in Volume 3 of the RI/FS discloses the
   following two interesting and important errors:
                  Appendix B, Septic Tank Analyses, Trichlorethene (TCE), lists an 11/19/79
                  sampling date and an analysis of 8900 (ppb).
       *\
                  Appendix B, Septic Tank Analyses, Trichlorethene (TCE), lists no DEP
                  sampling on 1/17/80.
   These are both erroneous. DEP did sample PGTs septic tank on 11/19/79, as
   reflected in the Toluene and Benzene analyses, as well as the V.O. Scan, for that
   date in Volume 3, Appendix B, Septic Tank Analyses. However, DEP's analysis found
   no TCE. (See the attached copy of DEP's sample analysis sheet for 11/19/79.] DEP
   sampled PGTs septic tank a second time on 1/17/80 and, this time, reported an
   analysis of 8900 ppb of TCE. The only sampling data shown for that date (1/17/80)
   in all of Volume 3 is under the heading "V.O. Scan" and consists of "ND+" in the
   PGT column. "ND+" is defined as "not detected except for compounds indicated
   below" but no compounds are so indicated.
                                                                     •
            The errors are interesting because they raise the possibility that Woodward-
   Clyde Consultants misplaced a whole set of DEP sampling results from 1/17/80. They -
   certainly misplaced the results of the PGT sample. Now it seems implausible that
   DEP, having initially sampled some dozen or so septic tanks in November 1979 at the
   outset of its investigation (and doing so again, by another full round of sampling in 3
   February 1980) would, in January 1980 re-sample only one of those dozen or. so ^ »
   septic tanks. In all likelihood. WWC simply mislaid the other results of sampling all      :
   the other septic tanks on that day.             .                                     0
                                                                                         o
            Accordingly, PGT requests that DEP locate and share with us the other ^
   results of 1/17/80 samplings of all the septic tanks so that we may all learn from Q
    them.                                 i.                                              co
                                                                                          <^
                                                                                          *-+
            Telephone: (202) R57-6000 CaWt: ARFOX Tartx: WU 892672 ITT 440266 Telecopier (202) 6576395

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Arent, Fox, Kinmer, Plotkin &. Kahn
Neal Brody. Esq.
April 21, 1988
Page 2


         The errors are important because WWC seems to have concluded that —
many years before the isolated spill in 1980 (which appears to have been remediated
before any escape to the septic leach field, as reflected in DBF's own analyses of its
soil borings in the leach field Isee Volume 3, Appendix B, Soil Analyses]) — there
was a large prior spill event into the septic system at the PGT property. If DEP's
discovery of 8900 ppb of TCE had actually taken place on the first round of
sampling, on 11/17/79, it might conceivably have led WWC to its conclusions (Volume
2, pages 2-7) "that this (the PGT property] was the primary source location of TCE
contamination" and that:
              While an earlier septic tank sample identified the presence of
         TCE, recent samples found only residual TCE in the septic tank and
         none in the soil. This indicates the probability that some past
         discharge was the source of contamination found in the shallow •
         regions of the aquifer.
If these conclusions are based on the sampling of PGTs septic tank, we believe that
WWC would have had to have reached a different interpretation had it realized that
DEP's first sampling of that septic tank revealed no TCE •• quite inconsistent with a
past discharge (which should have left some residue in the septic tank in November
1979).

        As you will recall, WWC elsewhere concluded that the original contamination
must date back 25 years or more — that is, to 1963 or earlier. [See Volume 1,
pages 6-8.] Apparently, although not clearly stated. WWC has conceived the
erroneous impression that 8900 ppb remained in the septic tank in November 1979
from a past spill that had occurred at least 16 years before that 1979 sampling!
Correction of WWC's erroneous impression, and a concomitant reassessment of its
conclusions, is of the highest importance to correctly solving the issues.
        Accordingly, PGT requests that the DEP verify the errors and have WWC
supply a corrected substitute page or pages in Volume 3, Appendix B, Septic Tank
Analyses. Thereafter, PGT requests that DEP ask WWC to reassess their conclusions.
         Specifically, we request the following:
         1.   Please correct the errors and omissions:
              a.   On the TCE line dated 11/19/79, please delete "8900" and substitute
                   "•".
              b.   Have all the other 11/19/79 lines reviewed as to all sites to
                   determine whether other errors were made.

                                                                                         o
                                                                                         o

                                                                                         o
                                                                                         0>

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Arent, Fox, Kintner, Plotkin fit Kahn
    Neal Brody, Esq.
    April 21, 1988
    Page 3


                 c.   Add a TCE line dated 1/17/80 and insert the correct amounts for
                      PGT and for any other sampled septic tanks.
                 d.   Determine whether, in fact, no other site but PGTs was sampled
                      on 1/17/80. If other sites were in fact sampled, please supply the
                      analytical data for such sites.
          2. If no other site save PGTs was in fact sampled on 1/17/80 (as Appendix
    B now indicates), please advise us of the reason why.
           3. Please request WWC to reassess their conclusions in light of the fact
    that DEP found no TCE in the PGT property septic tank on 11/17/79.
                                                Faithfully,


                                                David J. Bardin
                                                Counsel for Princeton Gamma-Tech, Inc.
    Attachment
    cc (w/attachment):
      Kevin M. Psarianos, Site Manager,
      Bureau of Site Management
      Grace Singer, Chief
      Bureau of Community Relations
      Division of Hazardous Site Mitigation
      NJDEP
      CN 413
      401 East State Street
      Trenton, NJ 08625                             .
:
      Dr. Joseph Baicker
      Robert G. Rose, Esq.                                           *
      Harriett Jane Olson, Esq.




                                                                                                -C

                                                                                            o
                                                                                            o

                                                                                           o
                                                                                           00
                                                                                           o\
                                                                                           CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                             "**MB STATE DEPARTMENT OP MEAl*               "*
                                              «IEAM OR WASTEWATER ANALYSIS

                                                      IELD INFORMATION
PLCASC TVn OK MINT          NJ lit J f U.    ;   ..   i".-*         _         .n0ftim
WITH BALLPOINT PEN          HV WATER RliowdCES                      Date off PCollection


Sample No.                                                          Composite Period
                                                                    Collected by __
                                                                    Residual Chlorine:
                                                                             Immediate
                                                                             Developed
« ——                                                               How Rate -
                x
Location       - >y                                                Temperature
Description and Rcmirlu:                                  *&s9*4r7^L'f *
                                                             77
                                       ITEMS CIRCLED BELOW ARE UNSATISFACTORY
             Dilutions Requested              10     1    10.1 10-2    10.3  10.4                    10.S       10.6
               (Baeteriotocieal)
                                                 LABORATORY RESULTS
                                                      BACTERIOLOGICAL
Colifona MPN/100 ml. ____                             {Confirmed Test); Fecal Colifonn MPN/100 ml.
Fecal Streptococd:MPK/100 ml.                         ______________Other ——————




                                                                                                '
                            CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL ANALYSES (mjtJlittf. mlm othwwiw net^)

       Color (units)                   Chloride                     Sulfate                              Other Determinations
       Odor (cold)                     Suspended Solids             Grease & Oil      ^              r/^23 c^-*-— j'^^f «fcrf
       Turbidity (units)               Ash                          Cyanide                          L?/^^^ ^^
       PH                              Total Solids                 Chromium Total                   r                /x-^
       Acidity to pH 4
       Alkalinity to pH 4
                                       Ash
                                       Total PO4
                                                                    Chromium Hex.
                                                                    Ortho • FO4
                                                                                                :    . 'jfVltKL
                                                                                                         non^/ie
                                                                                                                             ISSO
                                                                                                                              l^2-
       Nitrite N                       MBAS                         Copper         ' >               -TTJLL4 f N«.            "715"
                                                                                                                - *      *
       NitnteN                         Phenols                      Lead                             4



       Ammonia N                       COD                          Arsenic                     -.   = r.<rrw..^. . .._

       Total KJeLN                     Iron                         Zinc                                 Lnticuua.iL'z^i •:
                                                                                                         DEC 2 013/3
                                            •IOCHEMICAL OXrCCN DEMAND
                                                                                                     CT v
     Field D.O.                         Ub.D.O.                Seed Required:          Yet                -    mWWB • t?&
   Sample Cone, %     &&££             0.1 0^          0.5     1.0   2.0    5.0        10            25        50  75     100
     BODs


     FART 1 .CHEMISTRY COFT        J
                                                                                                              001      0864

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                         •P. 3'4
  PV;V 23 '83 09^29 WOOE JAPD-CLYDE NJ.2B1 785 C323
                                     •8.JERSEY STATE
                                       . REAM OR WASTEWATfcR ANALYSIS

                                              FIELD INFORMATION
t TVPC                                                HwOt.Mi.-i/-t-.,. '-..tfi
                                                           OIV WA Rtf*pJ£Wl«£i«>n

                                                                 Composite Period^

ipality
                                          M



                            'i
otion and Remarks:                                                         /L
                             I   ITEMS CIRCLED BELOW ARE UNSATISFACTORY
         Dilutions!                               T'nbJEljQrSTT                    io.4
           (Bacteriological) i
                                         LABORATORY RESULTS
                                                BACTERIOLOGICAL

 mMPN/lOOmL                                    (ConHrmed Test); F«cal Col if or m MPN/lOO ml.
 Urj>tococci:MrN/100 ml.i_.                    _______________ Other ——————




                         CHfMICAL. AND PHYSICAL ANALYSES                    . unlett othtnwlu noted)

vfeolut (units)             i diloride                           Sulfato                     jOther Det*rroinatiofli
 bdor(co)d)
                            ^
                                 Suipendcd Solids                Grease & Oil             V '{§2*rr—i - * n^s-         4_


                            it
.Tuxbidity (units)            Ash                                Cyanide              '      6£&*>e ' S-S
 IpH '. '                   i Total Solldt                       Chromfum Total             r^lhdofeei-i I^J«
 "•Acidity to pH 4          t AA                                 Chiomfum Hex.              ^r* Vjf «jws^^»«t ?j 5^?
   AJValinfly to pH 4       ! Total PO4                          Ortho«?O4
  VitriUN                   1 MBAS                               Copper                                      •
                            1 PhenoU                                                                               *
' VitrateN                                                       Lead
   \mmcnla N                } COD                                Arsenic                                                    3:
                                                                                            Q — fniTT^TlT1?'1 ? w?1         o
                                                                                                 emtutinwu uitua * 4        -c
   PoUl Xjel. N             ? Iron                               Zinc
                                                                                                                            o
                                                                                                 MAR 31980                  o
                                    BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN OIFMANO <mtv/Ut»r> "                  .         mnn   mvrm
                                                                                                                            o
   d D.O.                         Lab. D.O.                  Seed Required:       Yet         »• WA«5JJ««» » W-             00
                                                                                                                            c^
                                                                                                                            en
   • Cone. %       cilcil        0.1    0.2      0.5        1.0    2.0    6.0     10       25    60    76    100
                                                       ^

                                                       .*

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                           CROUNDWATER                                                      Letter of Transmittal
                           TECHNOLOGY INC.
                Mftmv-ak Kl OM19

    (609)587-0300
                                                                                .11 Kav 19BI

    TO      /•>. Meal Brodi
            7J.J. Department of Ehviromentftl Protection
            r.'fico c.f RrgrJt-tcry Scrvioes_________
            4C1 last State Street, Cn-402, 7th Floor
            Trenton, New Jersey 0&625
     GENTLEMEN:
                WE ARE SENDING YOU O Attached D Undtr separate cover via_______                               _the    fellowinf items:
                O Shop drawing*            O Mrta             .    O Plan*             O Samples         D Speeifieationt
                D Copy of letter            D Change order         D______________

    conct       OATI               NO                                    OISCRirTtOM
     T       27 fay 19 'S               Evaluation of C«-«3iB2 Irvssticjation/Ftasibilitv Sti-3v
                                        .'•JW!t'jcrcr\* 7o.."?sr-in !Trt-.r irn rvw*lr«p"*"«t ar,-*
                                        P.r>r'.-y Hill !---r<f!-*1 r*H *<*:,» i?
                                        C'v^re.** rr.-^"^yx ?iv. • .Xt»r/»y




1                      \

     THESE ARE TRANSMITTED as checked below:
                O For approval                   O Approved as submitted          O ResubmK.                 for approval
                D For your use                   O Approved as noted               D Submit __     .copies for distribution
                O As requested                   O Returned for corrections       D Return__       corrected prints
                D For review and comment         O                                                                   '
                D FOR BIDS Bug              ___________It____ D PRINTS RETURNED AFTER IOAN TO US
                  Jchn Healy has rpouestej th? subnission of this review en
               of KIG.
                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                    -c
                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                    O


                                                                                                                                   O




     COFITTO.
                                                                           SIGNED: r- ._•-£
                                                                         M*M
                                                                                       'r*
                                                              Revived By:              .I

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       GROUNDWATER
       TECHNOLOGY, INC.                                   100 Youngs Road. Suite S. Mrrcerville. NJ 06619 (6ft9i 58T-0300
                                                                                                    F«x:<60<»i 587-7908




                          Evaluation of
            Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
           of Montgomery Township Housing Development
              and Rocky Hill Municipal Wellfield 12
                   Somerset County, Mew Jersey


                                27 May 1988




Prepared Fors                                  Prepared Byt
Mr. John L. Realy                              GROUNDWATER TECHNOLOGY, INC.
EO&0, Inc.                                     100 Youngs Road
45 William Street                              Mercerville, New Jersey 08619
Wellesley, MA 02181-4078



                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                    o

                    Officw rif««Aart Ar t'.£. CfcM* Mtf OwriMB                                                    O
                                                                                                                  CO
                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                  NJ

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                     Page

INTRODUCTION                                 _         1

     Background                                       1
     Findings                                         1

METHODS                                               I

    Document* Reviewed      '.                         1
    Site Visits                                        2

CONCEPTUAL ERRORS                                      2

    Inventory of Potential Sources                     3
    Groundwater Flow Directions                        4
    Baseline Contamination                             5
    Limitations                                        6
     '•\
PROCEDURAL ERRORS                                     7

    RI/FS Timetable                                   7
    Anecdotal Information                             7
    Well Installation and Sampling                    9
    Pump Test                                        10
    Nature and Quality of Groundwater Data           12
    Groundwater Divide                               13
    Analytical Data                                  15
    QA/OC issues                                     18
                                                 •


CONCLUSIONS                                          19     ^
                                                            o
                                                            -<
                                                            o
                                                            o
                                                            >-*
                                                            o
                                                            CO
                                                            c*
                                                             CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

INTRODUCTION

Background

     A Princeton Gamma Tech (P6T) facility located on Route 518
just east of the intersection with Route 206 in Somerset County,
New Jersey has been identified as a likely primary source of
trichloroethene (TCE) contamination of groundwater for the Rocky
Hill Municipal Well (RKMW) and the Montgomery Township Housing
Development (KTHD). This identification is 'the result of a
Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) that was
performed.

    The purpose of this report is to evaluate the RI/FS by
examining the scientific and professional rationale on which it
is based, and the validity of identifying PGT as the source of
TCE contamination.

Findings

     Based on an understanding of scientific principles, accepted
professional practices and the hydrogeologic characteristics of
the site, the RI/FS appears significantly flawed in a number of
areas. These flaws bring into question the validity of
identifying PGT as the source of TCE contamination.

METHODS

Documents Reviewed

     The following   documents have been     reviewed   for   this
evaluations

     (a) Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study for Montgomery
         Township Rousing Development/Rocky Rill Municipal 3
         Wellfield Site (April, 1988) Volume Is Remedial "
         Investigation, prepared by Woodward-Clyde Consultants, g
         Wayne, New Jersey.                                      ^
                                                                     o
                                                                     00

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     (b) Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study for Montgomery
         Township Housing Development/Rocky Hill Municipal
         Wellfield Site (March, 1988) Volume 2: Feasibility
         Study, prepared by Woodward-Clyde Consultants, Wayne,
           Mew Jersey.

     (e) Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study for Montgomery
         Township Housing Development/Rocky Hill Municipal
         Wellfield Site (April, 1988) Volume 3:      Appendices,
           prepared by Woodward-Clyde Consultants, Wayne, New
           Jersey.

     Supplemental information was obtained from the ECRA file
(Case ft85558) for the PGT site from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP).

     All   documents     were   reviewed   for    appropriate       problem
definition, accuracy in execution of methods, completeness,
documentation of cause-and-effect relationships and consistency
in interpretation. This review revealed a number of perceived
flaws that are individually described below.

Site Visits

     Messrs. John F. Bolakas and Emil Onuschak, senior
hydrogeologists with Groundwater Technology, Inc., visited and
photographed the site on 20 and 24 May 1988 for familiarization
and to clarify field relationships.

CONCEPTUAL ERRORS
                                                              *

     Perceived conceptual error* are those that relate to
inappropriate or incomplete problem definition, selective use of
data and failure to establish cause-and-effect relationships.


                                                 MGY   001   0870

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Inventory of Potential Sources

     The remedial investigation names 13 potential sources of
contamination, which are from 500 feet to 4000 feet away from
RHMW |2.    Six of these potential sources are in the northeast
quadrant of the intersection of Routes 206 and 518.

     The remedial investigation fails to identify or discuss the
Prineeton North Shopping Center, which is at closest approach 150
feet west of RHMW 12 and includes a six-bay Goodyear auto service
store (Prineeton Tire), a print shop offering offset printing and
copying services (Triangle Reproduction) and a dry cleaners (Mrs.
B's Dry Cleaning and Laundry) offering "cleaning done on
premises." An underground waste oil tank is located in front of
the auto service area at the Goodyear auto service store
approximately 150 feet southwest of RHMW |2. This potential
source, the age of the tank and the tank integrity are not
addressed in the RI. Since service garages also commonly use
waste oil tanks for a variety of mixed wastes, including
chlorinated degreasing solvents, this waste oil tank is a prime
candidate for further investigation.

     Mrs. B's Dry Cleaning and Laundry is the second-closest
known potential source of contamination to RHMW |2, located
approximately 200 feet southwest of the well. Zt is not known
whether the Goodyear facility or Mrs. B's Dry Cleaning and
Laundry have ever been connected to septic tank disposal systems.
This entire shopping center merits further close attention.

     On the west side of Route 206 in the same general area as
Prineeton Volkswagen is a second Prineeton Gamma Tech facility.
                                                      »
                                                                    2
     Northwest of the intersection of Routes 206 and 518 is the     -<
relocated Thul's Auto Supply store.                                 0
                                                                    o
                                                                    i-»
                                                                    o
                                                                    CD
                                                                    Nl

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Limitations         .

     The RI contains the stated assumption that the Brunswick
Formation acts as a porous medium equivalent and meets the
classical definitions of unconfined and semiconfined aquifers.
Without citing specific examples, it is simply Asserted that
"...evaluation of cores, field observation of water levels and
examination of the slope of curves from the pumping test imply
that the aquifer zones approximate a porous medium equivalent"
(page 7-3). This is followed by a general statement that as a
larger and larger areal extent of aquifer is considered, "...and
horizontal flow predominates'-over vertical flow, the system comes
closer to meeting the porous medium limitations. Thus, for the
site as a whole, analytical methods based on porous medium flow
can be appropriate" (page 7-4).

     In reality, although the boring logs indicate that the
Brunswick Formation is extensively fractured in the area, the
quantitative measure of fracture orientations presented in Figure
5-2 shows that the aquifer is very heterogeneous. More fractures
occur-in the northeast-southwest direction than in any other.

     Furthermore, the field observation of water levels during
pumping (Figure 5-5) shows a pronounced elliptical area of
influence rather than the circular, or nearly circular, area that
would be expected if the aquifer was homogeneous (a "porous
medium equivalent").

     And finally, the drawdown curves generated during the
pumping test present an assortment of slopes, curves and data
points that are vulnerable to selective interpretation, to say ~
the least.                                                       is  o
                                                                     <
     In one case, two drawdown curves are presented for MW-11D
apparently showing, via high correlation coefficients, that the      o
aquifer there is both fractured (drawdown plotted against square
                                                                     o
                                                                     00
                                                                     Nf

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                     I
foot of elapsed tine, correlation coefficient * 0.99) and
non-fractured (drawdown plotted against elapsed tine, correlation
coefficient * 1.00) at the sane tine.

     The statement of limitations in the HI is merely a general
disclaimer and several unsubstantiated assertions that the
methods used are correct, despite the existence of data
indicating otherwise.

PROCEDURAL ERRORS

     Procedural errors include reaching conclusions unsupported
by qualified data (anecdotal information), reaching conclusions
inconsistent with qualified data (cause-and-effect), mistakes in
data acquisition (poor monitoring well design, poor QA/QC) and
mistakes in data handling (selective use of data, mistaken use of
nomenclature,    inconsistent   interpretations,    typographical _
errors).

RI/FS Timetable

     The date on the Feasibility Study Volume 2 (March 1988)
precedes the date on the Remedial Investigation Volume 1 (April
1988). This suggests that identification of the source area is
biased since the Remedial Investigation apparently was completed
after the Feasibility Study.

Anecdotal Information

     Unsubstantiated anecdotal information regarding TCE usage
appears to be extensively relied upon to draw conclusions
regarding the source area. A reference to P6T on page 3-12
states "The lab had reportedly used (1*2 gallons per month) in
the past". This statement does not reference the source of this
information, nor indicate whether the 1-2 gallons was disposed
of properly, reused or recycled. The implication of TCE being



                                            MGY   001
                                                        0873

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

present in the septic system is that it was discarded down the
drain. A further correlation is inferred between TCE handling
practices and the septic tank, based on 8,900 ppb of TCE found in
the septic tank at one point in time. However, similar inferred
correlations are not drawn regarding TCE noted within other
select septic systems tested.

     No correlation was drawn regarding the adjacent former Mobil
Station which contained a septic system and waste oil tank. It
was a common practice to use chlorinated organic solvents (for
example 1,2-dichloroethene and trichloroethene) in service
station garages as an auto parts degreaser and trichloroethene in
machining. Further investigation should have been performed at
the former Mobil Station due to its common boundary with the PGT
property. An adjacent building and an apparent part of the Mobil
Station was the former Thul's auto parts store (now relocated
along Route 518). Based on the approach taken in the RI, the
anecdotal report (page 3-9), that Thul's Auto Body "was an auto*
parts store and there may have been some machining and use of
solvents or degreasers,H should have resulted in further
investigation in evaluating the potential sources.             In
particular, the high levels of 1,2-dichloroethene (14,000 ppb)
and trichloroethene (540 ppb) in the ECRA monitoring well MW-4
bordering the PGT property and the former Mobil/Thul property
should have lead to further investigation of the adjacent
properties.

     Similar anecdotal information exists throughout the
narrative of Potential Sources of Contamination starting on page
3-8. The narrative highlights multiple potential sources for TCE
but does not explain why these potential source areas were not
investigated further.
                                                                         3.
                                                                         O
     It appears that the XZ would have failed to uniquely •<
delineate the POT property as a source of TCE apart from the oo
other potential sources had it not been for the coincidental *-
                                                                    o
                                                                    CO
                               8                                    \f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

investigation of the PGT property performed tinder the NJDEP, ECRA
program. Zt is an inappropriate conclusion that since no similar
extensive data base of other potential sources exists beyond the
PGT property, that similar levels or sources nay not be
delineated at other industrial septic systems throughout the area
with further investigation. Additional data is needed to support
eliminating these facilities, which nay have used TCE in their
operations or nay have inadvertently used a TCE formulation in
past routine septic tank cleaning.

Well Installation and Sampling     \
                            •


     Ten of the thirty wells installed for the RI could not be
sampled during the first round because they were dry. Zt appears
that a significant number of wells were not adequately designed
for the scope of the project.

     MW-4S and MW-5S were dry during both rounds of sampling.
Based on the obvious purpose of sampling water from the upper
xone of the water table, these wells were not adequately designed
and/or .correctly installed to meet project objectives. A similar
assumption can be drawn regarding MW-6S which was dry during the
first round of sampling and had insufficient water during the
second round of sampling to analyze for volatile organic
compounds.

     MW-10S was not sampled during either first or second round
of the RI sampling program. During the first round, the well was
not sampled because it contained no water. Zt is not clear from
the chart on page 5-28 of the RI why the well was not sampled
during the second round.
                                        i              •

     Zn addition, monitoring wells MW-15S, KW-16, MW-17, MW-l
and MW-19 were not sampled during the first round of sampling
Zt is not clear if these wells were not sampled due to lack oi

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

water. MW-16 in particular would have provided particularly
valuable data for sampling round 1 because it is between the MW-4
and MW-7 well pairs.

     Groundwater temperatures in this part of the country
characteristically range from 10° to 12.7° C .(50° - 55° F).
Temperatures of groundwater samples taken for the two rounds of
sampling ranged from 5° C (41° F) to 23.0 ° C (73.4° F). This
excessively wide range suggests that either the thermometer used
nay have been faulty, not enough time was allowed for the
thermometer to reach equilibrium, or that the wells were
inadequately purged to provide a representative sample. The data
presented on page 5-28 of the RI does not reflect ranges expected
to assure an adequate QA/QC protocol during sampling. At a
minimum, the significant temperature range should have been
discussed and justified.

Pump Test

     The absence of significant drawdown in the shallow wells
indicates that the 6 -hour pump test was not of sufficient
duration since the well logs indicate that the deep/shallow pairs
actually monitor the same groundwater system.

     The elevations of the base of the shallow monitoring zone
and the top of the deep monitoring zone for each pair of
monitoring wells are listed in Table 1. With the exception of
well pair II, the shallow zone monitored by each well pair ends
at the same elevation where the deep monitoring zone begins.
Given the extensively fractured nature of the aquifer, which is
described in the boring logs, it must be assumed that the shallow
and deep zones are in hydraulic communication at each pair of
monitoring wells and that any data represented as "shallow*
versus "deep" must be interpreted carefully.
                                                                    o
                                                                    o

                                10                                  8
                                                                    vj

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               Table 1
            Summary of Monitoring Well Pair Construction

Monitoring      Base of Shallow Zone          Top of Deep Zone
Veil Pair         (Sampling Interval)        (Sampling Interval)
    1            79.5 feet (11'feet)         78.5 feet (129 feet)
    2            40.4 fet* (12 feet)         40.4 feet (129 feet)
    3            76.8 feet (23.5 feet)       71.8 feet (31 feet)
    4           102.8 feet (12.5 feet)      102.8 feet (130 feet)
    5           105.6 feet (26 feet)        105.6 feet (114 feet)
    6           105.9 feet (22 feet)        105.9 feet (60 feet)
    7           101.8 feet (23'.5 feet)     101.8 feet (108 feet)
    9           102.8 feet (22.5 feet)      102.8 feet (203 feet)
   10           104.7 feet (22.5 feet)      104.7 feet (203 feet)
   11           103.0 feet (21 feet)        103.0 feet (225 feet)
   13            90.6 feet (12 feet)         90.6 feet (230 feet)
   14            54.1 feet (12 feet)         54.1 feet (131 feet)
   15            97.9 feet (21.5 feet)       97.9 feet (224 feet)


     A 6-hour aquifer test cannot yield sufficient data for a
detailed analysis of aquifer characteristics. Because the
calculation of transmissivity (T) is dependent on the slope of
the drawdown curve, correct choice of slope is essential to any
interpretation. Six hours of pumping is not sufficient to see if
more than one slope is present.

      In the case of the pumping well, early data (0-100 minutes)
is "of ten affected by casing storage. Yet the RZ uses the early
data to calculate a transmissivity value for the aquifer. Early
data «50 minutes) was also used to calculate T for wells MW-9D _
and MW-10D but later data (50 minutes - 360 minutes) was used for
wells KW-11D, KW-15D and MW-7D. It appears that the choice of 2
data points was based solely on those points falling in a -<
straight line, without consideration of the hydrologic 0
characteristics which they represent.                             ^
                                                                    o
                                                                    0>
                                                                    NS
                                  11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     A drastic increase in drawdown occurred at 110 minutes in
all wells, yet pumping did not continue past 360 minutes to
monitor -any additional changes. This steepening of drawdown
curve could represent a sudden dewatering of fractures or
encroachment on an impervious boundary. Additional pumping and
monitoring may have yielded further data to determine what this
change represents.

     The pump test data shows that approximately 0.5 foot of
drawdown was observed at POT, which is 1,000 feet away from RHMW
12 and across structural trends, while at Princeton Airport
approximately 4.5 feet of drawdown was observed 2,000 feet away
along structural trends.       These data clearly show that
groundwater flow is anisotropic and is structurally controlled,
which is consistent with the fracture data summarized in the RI
(Figure 5-2). Based on these data, groundwater (and any
accompanying contamination) should be expected to move toward
RHMW |2 from a greater distance in a northeast-southeast
direction. Hydrogeologic characteristics of the area should
therefore inhibit (but do not necessarily prevent) the movement
of groundwater
       \
               flow from PGT to RHMW 12.

Nature and Quality of Groundwater Data

     With the exception of well pair 11, the shallow zone
monitored by each well pair ends at the same elevation where the
deep monitoring zone begins. Given the extensively fractured
nature of the aquifer, which is described in the boring logs, it
must be assumed that the shallow and deep cones are in hydraulic
communication at each pair of monitoring wells, offering man-made
pathways for deep infiltration of shallow contaminants, driven by
existing vertical gradients (Table 5-1). Furthermore, the
thickness of aquifer opened in almost every deep monitoring well
is quite large. Thus, groundwater samples from these monitoring
wells must be regarded as composite samples with possible
man-made impacts, and water quality data cannot be interpreted
with reference to its alleged vertical position.
                                \
                                12
                                         MGY   001   0878

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Round two sampling took approximately seven weeks to
complete (Table 5-6, Volume 1, page 5-28). This is too long.
There is no assurance that subsurface conditions at the beginning
of the sampling period were the same as at the end.    Therefore,
data from round two may not be internally consistent and
comparable.

Groundwater Divide

     The shallow and deep tone groundwater maps, conclusions of
potential sources and conclusion on the groundwater divide are
based on one round of liquid level data from wells with "assumed
static conditions". The RZ states (page 5-3) regarding liquid
level data that "These measurements were made just after RHMW ft 2
had been shut off for 14 hours, allowing water levels to recover
to their static or near-static conditions".

     Based on standard accepted pumping test criteria of 72 hours *
drawdown and 48 hours of recovery, a 14-hour recovery period is
considered insufficient time for complete recovery of a pumping
well prior to starting the actual pump test. Conclusions drawn
from the RHMW |2 pump test data should be considered suspect.

     Due to the importance of conclusions regarding groundwater
flow, and an inferred groundwater divide on site, accurate static
conditions and effects of RHMW 12 pumping are critical. The RZ
does not address the likely effect the intermittent pumping has
on the movement of the inferred groundwater divide. Due to the
relatively flat piezometric surface, intermittent pumping could
easily affect location of the groundwater divide.

     As far back as 31 October 1987,        there were* concerns
regarding actual direction of groundwater flow. Zn J.M. Sorge,
Znc. (JMS) 31 October 1987 ECRA Sampling Plan for Routes 206 and ?
518 facilities, Princeton Gamma Tech, Znc. page 15 - 16 states:
                                                                     o
                                                                     o

                                13                                   "si

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

              Zn    general, the      data   indicates
         groundwater flow towards the southeast. The
         available regional data, including a review
         of the recent regional study of the
         Montgomery Township Housing Development/Rocky
         Hill Municipal well field site conducted by
         the NJDEP consultant indicate that the
         •hallow water table aquifer flows toward the
         northeast.
              This apparent discrepancy between the
         Superfund investigation and this study cannot
         be resolved based on the site data currently
         available. Based on available hydrogeologic
         information, it appears that the active
         •eptic field has resulted in localized
         mounding of the groundwater table in the
         plant area. This condition can only be
         postulated at this time, since terrain and
         building interference may also cause this
         apparent discrepancy in flow data. JMS
         proposes to install two additional shallow
         wells to the west of the plant structure to
         clarify the groundwater flow to the west and
         south of the plant. The proposed well
         locations for wells MW-3 and MW-4 are shown
         in Figure 6. Well installation has been
         scheduled for November 11, 1987.
              A reasonable understanding of the
         groundwater flow direction is required to
         provide a scientific interpretation of
         groundwater campling data. Therefore, a
         reasonable interpretation of the groundwater
         quality data cannot be provided at this time.

     Based on ECRA data included in an appendix to the RI, these
additional wells apparently were installed. However, the
resolution of the groundwater flow discrepancy does not appear in
any of the Bureau of Industrial Site Evaluation (ECRA) public
records and does not appear to be addressed in the RZ.

     Resolution of this discrepancy is significant in tf
understanding where the groundwater divide may be and what   •
effects may be caused by intermittent pumping of RHMW 12.  o
                                                                    o
                                                                    CD
                                                                    00
                                                                     O


                                14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Analytical Data

   • The HI reports that MW-7S and MW-7D contained the highest
concentrations of TCE (650 ug/1) found during the investigation
and therefore must represent the source area. This is a
misrepresentation and misinterpretation of the data since the
second round of data reveals MW-4D contained 630 ug/1 TCE (the
highest level during the second round of sampling), and only a 20
ppb difference noted between the highest level throughout -the
study in 2 rounds of sampling. It is an inappropriate conclusion
that a 20 ppb difference for a selected compound (between MW-7
and MW-4) be used to justify* that the area around KW-7S i and MW-7D
as the source area, based on two rounds of sampling approximately
8 months apart. The inherent variability |n sampling groundwater
contaminants makes it difficult to draw firm conclusions from
small changes in concentrations. Take, for example, the
following data for TCE levels measured in monitoring wells at an
industrial facility (Brown et. al., 1985). (Ref. "Enhanced"
Bioreclamation: Designing a Complete Solution to Groundwater
Problems'1, R.A. Brown et. al., VPCF Industrial Wastes Symposia,
October 8, 1985, Kansas City, MO). The procedure used was to
purge three well volumes and then take four successive samples,
each by withdrawing a fresh bailer-full. Two adjacent wells,
each located within the defined plume area, were sampled. The
data shows the inherent variability in sampling a single well and
in sampling adjacent wells.

                     Well >1. ppb          Veil 12. ppb
                                               •

1st Sample              1510                  23,200
2nd Sample              1670                   5,210
3rd Sample              1880                  13,000 *
4th Sample              780                   24,000   ^
                                                                  o
                                                                  -c
Average                 1460                  16,352          0
Spread (max - min)      1100                  18,790          £
Std. Dev.               478                    8,958         0
                                                             CD
                                                             CD
                                15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Several observations about the individual wells should be
noted. First the levels of TCE vary randomly within a sampling
•vent. Second, the spread in the data can be greater than the
average concentration. Third, the standard deviation can be
significant enough so that even widely disparate data points are
equally valid. Applying the "2.5d" test for outliers to the well
data would exclude the 780 value for well II (780 > (2.5 x 123))
but not the 5210 value for well 12 (5210 < (2.5 x 4711)). Because
of the variability inherent in sampling, the values from the two
wells should be more aptly expressed ast

          Well ffl 1460 + 478 (982 to 1938)
          Well 12 16,352 + 8,958 (7,394 to 25,310)

     The random variability in values at a single well make it
difficult to predict trends between wells. If one takes the
ratio of the values between samples taken in the two wells there
is a tremendous ranget

          Sample I                        Ratio
     Well il     Well 12             Well 12/Well il
      '1            1                     15.36
       2            2                      3.11
       3            3                      6.91
       4            4                     30.76
       low         high                   30.76
      high         low                     2  . 77

  . Obviously a ratio of 30 would have a greater significance
than a ratio of 2.8. Yet both ratios would be equally likely if
only one sample were taken from each well and compared. A valid
comparison of levels can only be made with consecutive * replicate
campling. Zf an individual sample is used, the only legitimate
conclusion that can be made is that well 12 has more TCE than
does well 11.


                                16
                                                  oo,
                                                    1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Due to the inherent impurities and composition variations,
chlorinated solvent analysis of trends should have, at a minimum,
been based on the total chlorinated volatile organic compounds,
including tentatively identified compounds. Zf the RI had
reviewed total chlorinated volatile organic compounds, of first
and second sampling rounds, the data would indicate that MW-7S
contained a study high value of 717 ppb, MW-4D a study high value
of 714 ppb and MW-7D a study high value of 712 ppb for total
chlorinated volatile organic compounds. These values for total
chlorinated volatile organic compounds would indicate a 3 ppb
difference between MW-7S and MW-4D. Trend analysis is therefore
also subjective based on parameters chosen for analysis.

     The highest level of any compound noted in groundwater was
1,2-dichloroethene not trichloroethene and is within the ECRA
study area. On 21 January 1988, MW-4 contained 15,000 ppb of
1,2-dichloroethene and 540 ppb trichloroethene. This anomaly in
analytical results is not addressed, based on the trend analysis
presented within the RI.

     The review of the RZ groundwater analytical results for
domestic, industrial and monitoring wells suggest the TCE should
not be used as a single tracer. The inability to provide any
statistically valid trend may suggest that the chlorinated
compounds noted are highly variable and related to multiple
sources .

     The ECRA data presented suggests that if the P6T facility is
at 'the uppermost end of the plume, then the ECRA wells MW-3 and
MW-4 should not be elevated in concentration if they are on the
hydraulically upgradient side of the facility and the site is
within the influence of RHMW |2. As noted above, the* elevated
level of 1,2-dichloroethene relative to trichloroethene suggestr
that there are other sources upgradient of POT.

                                                                    o
                                                                    o
                               17
                                                                    8
                                                                    CO
                                                                    (.0

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 108 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Review of the data from the first and second rounds of
sampling were used in the RI to conclude that the PGT property
is the source area. This conclusion is in contradiction with the
data. In addition, the absence of critical data points due to
dry wells MW-4S, MW-5S, MW-6S, MW-9S, MW-10S, MW-15S and absence
of samples at MW-16, MW-17, HW-18, MW-19 and 1377-P result in
sampling round one data being inconclusive to determine a source.
The second round of sampling likely represents a more valid data
base (though not necessary internally consistent due to the
length of time taken to acquire the samples) for interpretation
since there are more data points in critical areas, specifically
MW-9S, MW-10S, MW-16, MW-17,'MW-18, 1377-F and Village Shopper.

     Based on the reasoning applied in the RI, the data from the
second round of sampling (page 5-29 of the HZ) indicates that
highest TCE levels were present around the former Polycell
facility in MW-4D (630 ppb, 590 ppb) and that concentrations
decreased in all directions from around the former Polycell
location. In particular, TCE levels decreased towards PGT, the
RHMW 12 and the KTHD.    MW-17 contained 100 ppb of TCE, MW-7D
contained 180 ppb of TCE, MW-7S contained 160 ppb of TCE, MW-9D
contained 3.75 ppb of TCE and KW-9S contained 6 ppb of TCE.
MW-3D, which is northeast of MW-4 pair and towards the MTDH,
contained 160 ppb of TCE. TCE levels also diminished from well
MW-4D (630 ppb, 590 ppb) towards 1377 Route 206 (150 ppb). By
the same reasoning used in the RI, it could be concluded that the
area around the former Polycell facility and the MW-4 pair are
the source area since concentrations diminish in all directions
from this point, including toward the RHMW, MTHD and PGT.

OA/OC Issues                                              •


    On the table labeled Round One Monitoring Well Samples
Tentatively Identified Compounds, the heading for "sample
location1* is listed as MW-4S and notes 2 compounds. MW-4S, which



                                                    MGY       001   0884

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 109 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

is located by what is identified as Poly cell is different from
MW-4S "airport," which is what the heading on this table should
have listed.

     During a visit to the site, MW-16 located in the Montgomery
Shopping Center parking lot, was found unsecured by a lock.
NJDEP regulations require locks on all wells. The locks promote
sample integrity, discourage tampering and accidental groundwater
contamination. The absence of a lock, and the integrity of data,
at this location is of particular concern since it is between
monitoring wells MW-7S, MW-7D, and MW-4S, MW-4D, which have had
elevated concentrations of 'contaminants, while monitoring • well
MW-16 has not.

CONCLUSIONS

     Zn conclusion the review of the RI indicates numerous
shortcomings, inconsistencies, and the absence of sufficient data
to conclude a source for the regional chlorinated groundwater
contamination. Zt should be concluded that before a feasibility
option is chosen that the potential source areas be adequately
defined. Potential responsible parties should only be designated
after adequate delineation and critical failures in the RI's data
base, findings, and conclusions resolved.




                                                                o
                                                                o

                                                               o
                                                               05
                                                               03
                               19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 110 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   Municipal Buildinj
                                                                 2261 Van Home Road
HEALTH. ENVIRONMENT. AND             '                       „    (Route 206)
                                                           BeU
VITAL STATISTICS       -                                     « Me»d-Nevk )«*>       08SM
                                                                    (201)559-8211

                                                 May 24, 1988
       Grace L. Singer, Chief
       Bureau of Community Relations
       Division of Hazardous Site Mitigation
       M.J. Department of Environmental Protection
       CN 413, 401 East State Street
       Trenton, M.J. 08625
       Dear Ms. Singert
             This is to be considered repeat and additional commentary
       related to the May 12, 1988 RIF public meeting and the draft
       Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study Report and the pro-
       posed Remedial Action Plan discussed that evening.
             The Montgomery Township Board of Health wants it on record
       that it prefers alternate 16, pump/carbon absorption, over alter-
       nate 17, pump/air stripping, for the following reasons.
              1. We do not want to trade off a groundwater contamination
                 problem for an air pollution problem. We are not con-
                 vinced that taking the chemical from the water and dis-
                 persing it into our air will not degrade the air. We
                 prefer chemical removal from our environment over chem-
                 ical dilution into our environment.
              2. We do want to be involved as a municipality with the
                 location and design processes of the selected alterna-
                 tive early on, and we do request public input into de-
                 sign decisions.
              3. If air stipping turns out to be the selected alternative
                 we have concerns in the following areas which we would-
                 like addressed.
                  a. We want assurances with rationale that the air strip-
                     ping units will not be noise nuisances.
                  b. We want assurances with rationale that odors from the
                     air stripping process will not be detectible.
                                                                                        -5




                                                                                    O
                                                                                 o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 111 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Grace L. Singer, Chief
Bureau of Community Relations
Division of Hazardous Site Mitigation
May 24, 1988



              c. VJe want assurances that our air will not be degraded;
                 we think, with the information at hand, that air
                 pollution control equipment will have to be utilized.
              d. We feel because of the nature of our community and its
                 ambiance that the air pollution control equipment
                 would have to have removal efficiency to a degree
                 which would produce results better than just minimum
                 standards.
              e. We feel that the .operation and maintenance manuals
                 should call for a vigorous air sampling and monitoring
                 program above and beyond minimum Department require-
                 ments .
              f. It is strongly felt that there has to be a Federal/
                 State immediate response to noise, odor, and emis-
                 sion quality complaints and violations. When resi-
                 dent complaints are received at the local level, we
                 would need to have someone at a higher State or Fed-
                 eral level to respond to the complaints and to inter-
                 act with the complainant immediately. The complainant
                 could be a resident or local officials.
         '\

      It is officially requested that all of our above concerns
and positions be addressed rod satisfied prior to any record of
decision.

                                              Very truly yours,


                                              Charles G. Searfoss
                                              Health Officer
CGS:lg
CCs   Peter N. Rayner, Administrator
      Montgomery Township Committee
      Louis Barry, Board of Health President                  *           5,
      David Tomlinson, Esq.                                               ^
      Xristina P. Hadinger, Esq.
                                                                           o
                                                                           o
                                                                           *"*
                                                                             o
                                                                             CD
                                                                              co

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 112 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 Arent, Fox, Kintner, Plotkin & Kahn
                           WMhlngtonSquu« 1050 Conrwcttcul AM*M. N.W.
                                   WuNngien.DC 200M-SU9




                                               81 1988
(202}SSV«iS9
                                                 *

                                                                                :
  Ms. Grace Singer                                                               -
  Chief, Bureau of Community Relations
  Division of Hazardous Site Mitigation                                              •
  New Jersey Department of
    Environmental Protection
  6th Floor (CN-413)
  401 East State Street
  Trenton. New Jersey 08625
                 Re: Comments on Proposed Remedial Action Plan for Two
                     Superfund Sites: Montgomery Township Housing Develop-
                     ment and the Rocky Hill Municipal Wellfield______
  Dear Ms. Singer:
         This firm, together with Pitney, Hardin, Kipp & Szuch, represents Princeton
  Gamma-Tech, Inc. CPGT") in matters relating to two Superfund Sites: NPL Site 413,
  the Montgomery Township Housing Development ("MTHD") site, and NPLSite 414, the
  Rocky Hill Municipal Well ("RHMW") site.
          In response to the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's
  ("DEP's") and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's request for public comments,
  enclosed are the comments of PGT on the Proposed Remedial Action Plan ("PRAP")
  and the underlying Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study ("RI/FS") for the MTHD
  and RHMW sites. Appended to these comments, and incorporated therein, are an
  Assessment of the RI/FS prepared by Geraghty & Miller. Inc., and a letter from Roy
  F. Weston. Inc. regarding certain aspects of the RL
         PGT appreciates tho opportunity to submit these comments. PGT has coop-
  erated with the DEP in the past and looks forward to continuing to do so. We
  would be happy to meet with DEP personnel to discuss these comments and we look
  forward to receiving DEP's responses to the significant comments provided.
                                                   Faithfully.

                                                                                             3:
                                                   David J. Baro/n                           ^
                                                   Counsel for
                                                   Princeton Gamma-Tech, Inc.                g

   Enclosures                                                                                o
                                                                                             o>
                                                                                             00
                                                                                             00
                : (202)S57.6000 C*Wt AftFOX Wtr WU M2672 m 440266 Tttacop*: (202) S5T S385

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 113 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

05/31/88     11:37 PRENT FOX K1NTKER PLOTK1N t KflKN   MO.510   P002/C15




                       COMMENTS OF PRXNCETON GAMMA-TECH, INC.
                                       ON TUB
                            PROPOSED REMEDIAL ACTIOH PLAN
                                        AND
                      REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION/FEASIBILITY STUDY
                                      POR THB
                      MONTGOMERY TOWNSHIP HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
                                        AND
                              ROCKY HILL MUNICIPAL WELL
                                   SUPERPUND SZTES




                                    Submitted byi
                                    David J. Bardin
                                    Jonathan R. Pavlov
                                    Arent, Fox, Xintner, Plotkin ft Kahn
                                    1050 Connecticut Ave.t N.W.
                                    Washington, D.C. 20036-5339 ..          2
                                                                            o
                                    Robert 0. Rose
                                    Harriet Jane Olaon                     o
                                    Pitnvy, Hard in, Klpp I, Scueh         2
                                    163 Madison Avenue
                                    Morristovn, Nev Jersey 07960            0
                                                                           00
                                                                           0)
           May 31, 1988

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 114 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

05/31/88     11:37       PRENT FOX KlMINER PLOTK1N t KflhN   ND.31W




                                      INTRODUCTION

                   Prineeton Gamma-Tech, Inc. ("PGT") appreciatea the
           opportunity afforded by the New Jersey Department of
           Environmental Protection ("DEP") to comment on the Proposed
           Remedial Action Plan ("PRAP") and the underlying Remedial
           investigation/Feasibility Study (-RI/FS") for National
           Priority List Superfund Sites 413 and 414, the Rocky Hill
           Municipal Well ("RHKW) site and the Montgomery Township
           Housing Development ("MTHD") site, both in Somerset County,
           New Jersey. Attached to these Comments, and incorporated
           herein by reference, are an Assessment of the RI/FS prepared
           by Geraghty ft Miller, Inc. ("GiM Assessment"), at well as a
           letter prepared by Roy P. We*ton, Inc. ("Waaton Letter*)
           addressing certain aspects of the RI.
                   On the basis of the record to date, including these
           Comments and attachments hereto, PCT recommends that the DEP
           adopt Alternative 2, Aquifer Isolation and Monitoring, for
           each of the two Superfund Sites. However, PGT earnestly
           draws attention to all its significant comments, both those
           set forth below and those presented in the two attachments.
                   PGT recognizes the great efforts invested by the DEP
           in the attempt to progress beyond the Remedial Action Master
           Plans ("RAMPs") for these two Superfund Sites which the U.S.
           Environmental Protection Agency ("USEPA") released in April
           1984 (MTHD) and August 1984 (RHKW) and upon which the USEPA
           and DEP based the Record of Decision ("ROD") of September 29,
           1987. Regrettably, however, the RZ/FS prepared by Woodward-
           Clyde Consultants ("WCC") it flawed and entirely inadequate
           to support the PRAP.
                   The RAMP for the MTHD (April 1984) indicated that "at
           present there is no reason to believe that the groundwater
           problems in Rocky Hill and Montgomery Township have been
           caused by different sources of contamination. The Rocky Hill
           Borough municipal well and the Montgomery Township homes with
           contaminated wells are about one-half mile apart.* (JACA
           RAMP at ES-2.) That hypothesis, born merely of proximity, is
           no longer tenable. The approach of the current WCC Remedial
           Investigation (*RX") — which tries to squeece all the
           diverse data by now collected into the mold of a single
           source of pollution — does not work. The RI ignores'and/or
           contradicts several aspects of the earlier RAMPs — without      ^
           explanation or, even, candid acknowledgment. The RI does not    5.
           face up to its own internal inconsistencies, which an
           objective review of the data now reveal. These internal          0
           inconsistencies negate the hypothesis of one, single source.      o
           Adherence to that hypothesis would guarantee aubjeetive,          ^
           inaccurate and arbitrary conclusions — and could lead only      „0
           to failure in implementing DEP'a environmental mission. The     <± ®
           DEP faces two distinct Superfund Sites, each with multiple      2. 5
           sources of TCE and other contaminants.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 115 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

05/31/88        11:33 PRENT FOX KINThER PLOTKIN t KflHN                   NO.510           P004/813




                                              . -2-                                               •
                                              '•                                 -         *•
                                                   COKXEKTS
                           A. Prineeton Gamma-Tech. Inc. —» the company
   IV V- 1. PCT did not contaminate the KTHD ground water. Xt is now
   *"' clear that PGT did not contaminate WTHD ground water at all.•
                   a. Hate of flow. The RI's own estimates of maximum
         rate of groundwater flow prove that PGT could not have
         contaminated ground water under the KTHD. PGT acquired its -
         property in 1972. TCE was'first discovered 7 years later, in
         1979, in residential wells throughout the MTHD.l' Even
         assuming the RI's maximum rate of flow (142 feet/year) and
         assuming (contrary to the data) that TCE contamination could
         flow northeastwards, in the direction of the MTHD, from PGT's
         property, and assuming (contrary to all available data) that
         a TCE spill occurred in 1972 and immediately reached ground
         water, the TCE could not have reached even one of the MTHD
         residential wells by 1979— or even to within 500 feet of
         the nearest such wellI (GfcM Assessment at 15 i Figure 10.)
         Yet : the group of MTHD wells most contaminated with TCE in
         1979 were thoses farthest awav from the PGT property, in
         Cleveland Circle. Even today, 16 years after PGT bought the
         property, a 1972 spill could not have reached such areas as
         Cleveland Circle even assuming a maximum rate of flow in the
         direction erroneously hypothesized. A 1979 or 1960 spill
         could not have reached any of the MTHD wells.
                   b. Direction of flow. Shallow ground water flows
         from the PGT property in a northwest for west-northwest)
         direction, under Route 206 — awav from the MTHD — and
         discharges near the Village Shopper to a tributary which
         flows north-northeastwards to Beden Brook. (G*M Assessment,
         Figures 1 and 7; pages 2, 11-12.) None of this shallow
         ground water could ever reach the MTHD residential wells.
         Available data indicate that deep ground water flow from the
         PGT property would be in the southeast direction — also away
           from the MTHD. (G&K Assessment at 3, 12.)
                   c. WCC's Inconsistent Selectivity in Using ECRA
           data. NCC's (and DEP's) reason for considering the PGT
           ^^^^^^^^"   .      •   •   •   •        .   •   ^   — - _ __      •       _ ^    . •       •- •
                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                             jT%
                                                                                                             CD
           property to be a primary source of TCE contamination rests on                                     -<
           shallow ground-water data collected by PGT itself in 1987 by
                                                                                                             o
                                                                                                             o
           i/ WCC estimated minimum and maximum rates of groundwater
           migration in the complex, fractured bedrock of the area as
           follows (Ri at 6-3)i 6 feet to 142 feet each year for deep
           flow and 11 feet to. 123 feet a year for shallow flow. (Water
           would move at those rates; TCE would move more slowly. GtM
           Assessment at IS.)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 116 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             - 3-

means of certain ECRA monitoring wells. Some samples from
these shallow wells exhibited TCC contamination from an
unknown source or sources. The water levels for these ECRA
wells also show that shallow flow from the PGT property is to
the northwest. HCC/DEP have made use of PGT's ECRA chemical
analyses but, inconsistently« disregarded PGT's water-level
analyses from these same ECRA wells. Now GtK has combined a
new round of water-level analyses for these ECRA wells with
simultaneous water-level analyses of the nearby WCC
monitoring wells to confirm that this shallow contaminated
groundwater could not poisiblv flow to the KTKO. He
respectfully ask DCP to explain why PGT's ECRA water-level
analyses were excluded from the RX/FS whereas the chemical
analyses are included (at Vol. 3, Appendix X).
2. PGT did not contaminate the RHMW. There is no evidence
that PGT contaminated the RHXW. The RZ did not seriously
atudy the RHKW's contamination, perhaps because of
preoccupation with tagging a single source of contamination
of both Superfund Sites, or perhaps because VCC regards the
problem as solved. (TCE and benzene were discovered in the
RKKW water in 1978. Since July 1963, an air stripper has
been used to remove VOC.)
      *
        •• Contaminated shallow ground water under PCT's
property flows naturally awav from the RKMW. See l.b« above.
        b. Pumping action does not draw the contaminated
water to the R H K W . W C C determined that pumping of the RKMW
did not influence the shallow aquifer. (RI at 5*5 4 6*3.)
Moreover, pumping draws almost all of its wster from along
the northeast-southwest strike (especially from the
southwest) — rather than from the northwest direction of the
PGT property. (GtM Assessment at 14 and Figure 9| RI at 3-4
ft S.) Significantly, after TCE was discovered in the RHMW in
1978, groundwater sampling of PGT's production well (which is
123 feet deep) showed either no detectable TCE or lower TCE
concentrations than did the raw water at the RHMW at the same
time, as the following table shows .2.'

i/ RKMW data In the Table are from WCC HI Vol. 3, App. B,
Rocky Hill Muncipal well 12 Raw Water Analyses. PGT Well
data are from the JACA RAMP for KTHD, at 4-11 and 0-25 (Table
0-15). We did not use the WCC version of the PGT Well data
(Vol. 3, App. B, Ground Water Analyses) because it is garbled
and incompletei (a) The data from the PGT Production well               ^
are mixed together with analysee of four samples of water               -<
from two shallow holes on the property and (b) the 3/25/13
sampling of the Production Well and the "HD- result are,           g
                                              (continued...)       <-
                                                                   o
                                                                   CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 117 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

95/31/83     11:39     PREHT FOX KINTKER PLOTKIN t KflhN    NO. 510   POQ&/C15




                                              •4 •

               Comparison ef TCB in KHMW and In FST ProductJen Well
                     Pate              RHMW            POT Wtll
                     11/9/78           160
                     9/78-5/79         214
                     4/78               38
                     11/5/79            79
                     11/6/79           102
                     12/18/79
                     1/8/80                                NO
                     1/11/80            70
                     1/12/80            99
                     1/13/80           126
                     1/14/60           150
                     1/15/80           141
                     1/16/80           130
                     1/17/80           152
                     1/18/80           137
                     1/19/80           163
                     1/20/80v          141
                     1/22/80           154
                     2/11/80                               25NO HC
                     2/21/80                               28.7
                     3/4/80             126
                     4/1/80             139
                     5/6/80              97
                     5/16/80                               91
                     6/3/80             122


                     2/24/82            161
                     2/16/83             49
                     3/25/83                               NO
                     2/9/84              32
           The clear implication is that contaminated ground water
           beneath PGT was not the cause of the contamination of the
           ground water at the RHKW. Each well was contaminated from a
           •ource or sources (possibly related, possibly not), ai were
           so many other locations in the vicinity. In no *fnpcould              O
           the lower TCB concentrations at the PGT property naw
                                                                                 O
                                                                                 o
               ••continued)
           mysteriously, left out altogether. (*ND* means not                    o
           detected.) Moreover, whereas the JACA RAMP treats the 25ND            o>
           result in the 2/11/80 hydrocarbon scan of the POT Hell sample
           as showing no TCE, WCC inexplicably omite that sample
           altogether — either as a TCE or as a V.O. Scan datum.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 118 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              - 5-

accounted for the «uch higher* contemporaneous TCB
concentrationa.of the water pooped by the RHKU.
        c. Welli between PCT and the RKMW were not
contaminated. Th« Town t Country Animal Hospital well (tee
CKM Assessment, Figure 2), in 1979 and 1983, and WCC
monitoring wells KM 9-S and .9-0, in 1986 and 1987, came up
clean (or virtually clean)!' of TCt. These wells are south
of Route 518 (that is, across from PCT) but north of the
RHXW. If TCE were moving from PGT's property to the RHMW,
one would expect some of the TCE to enow up in these
intervening wells. In addition, the PCT production well,
located just south of the PCT building, showed the relatively
low TCE concentrations set forth in paragraph 2.b, above,
from 1980 to 1983.
                              -
        d. What is the WCC theory of flow? It it hard to
conceive what flow model could lead WCC to regard the PCT
property as a probable primary source of contamination of the
RHKWi Given the NW flow direction of water in the shallow
aquifer (away from the RHMW) and the SE flow of water in the
deep aquifer, and given the low TCE concentrations recorded
in the KW-9 wells, the Animal Hospital well, and the PGT
production well, what is the WCC theory regarding the likely
 ath of flow of contamination from the PGT property to RHKW?
Eid it enter the shallow aquifer...flow NW away from the
RHKW...drop into the deep aquifer...sigzag through a
•minefield" of wells (KW-9S and 9D, Animal Hospital, PCT
production)...leaving hardly a trace...and reach the RHKW?
                        B. The PCT Property
3. Previous owners end occupants of the PCT site. The best
information now available to PCT is that Mr. George Sands
alone or with associates, as individuals or through
corporations ("Sands"), acquired the land now owned by PCT as
undeveloped land in 1961 or thereabouts. Sands also acquired
the large parcel to the north, a small part of which is used
by the septic leach field for PCT'e property. (That has
remained Sands' property, eubject to an easement for the        -j
leach field.) Sands built part of the present structure and     5
leased it out in 1962. Hercules, Inc. (or Hercules Powder)
leased one portion and Texas Butadiene and Chemical Corp.       0
leased the other from Sands. (Texas Butadiene was later         o
                                                                M
acquired by Sinclair Oil, while still • tenant. After the
tenancy had ended, Sinclair was acquired by Atlantic            0
___________^_______
.^__^___^_^________ -                                           03
                                                                ^


?value*
  / The HW 9-S results were 6 ppb in 1987 and not sampled in
  916f the KH 9-D results were 8.3 in 1986 and "3.7 estimated
        in 1987. RI at 5-29 (Table 5-7).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 119 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

K/31/88    . 11*48   flREHT FOX K1NTNER PLOTKIN & KflHN   NO. 510   P00e/B15




                                           •
                                               - £-

          Richfield Company.) Sands expanded the building for
          Hercules, adding the present rear (north) one-story portion.
          In the mid-1960s Sands sold the property to Frinceton Applied
          Research (-P.A.R.-), which also gained the easement for the
          septic leach field. In 1972, P.A.R. sold the property with
          the easement to PCX. During the early 1970s, PGT for a time
          leased the rear, one-story wing to Princeton Metal Systems,
          Inc., then a subsidiary of P.A.R. and subsequently acquired
          by Revere Copper ft Brass Company. Kuch of the analysis in
          A., above, applies to earlier
                                      «
                                         activities at• the PGT property.
                                                                    ' '.

                             C. Deficiencies of the RI/FS
          4. Deficiencies leave puttlinq questions. The two
          attachments outline many deficiencies in the RX/FS which we
          will not restate here. However, we note and ask the DEP to
          address the following significant questions.
          5. Public participation was not timely invited. Why did the
          DEP fail to Invite participation by knowledgable members of
          the public, suchsas PGT, during the preparation of the RX/fS
          instead of waiting until after all the planning, field work
          and analysis were done and the budget spent?
          6. Aerial photographs were not used effectively. According
          to the Rl (at 4-1) WCC used three sets of aerial photographs
          dated October 1956, October 1971, and March 1979 during a
          preliminary investigation conducted in 1985.
                  a. Failure to use EPA'e lab. Why did not WCC turn
          to the resources of EPA'S Denver facility for sophisticated
          analysis of aerial photographs?
                  b. Omissions. Why did WCC choose not to use the
          1961 and 1974 aerial photographs which Geraghty ft Miller,
          Inc. ("GfcM-), considered and on which G&M discovered
          disturbed areas east of the Fifth Dimension, Inc., and the
          Princeton Chemical Research (1377 Rout* 206) sites?
                  e. Disturbed areas. What indications of disturbed              o
          areas did WCC find on the aerial photographs it considered?           "*
          How did its findings influence decisions to sample or not to         0
          sample?       •                                                      o
          7. Spray waste irrigation area was not identified.
          According to the RI (at 3-10) discussion of Princeton ""             a>
          Chemical Research! 'There was a tank farm to the rear of the         $
          site and an area reportedly used for spray waste irrigation.*
                  a. Exactly where was the tank farm?

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 120 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

85/31/88     li>40     flRENT FOX KINTfCR PLOTK1N t Krt-N   NO.510   P809/B15




                                              - 7-

                     b. Where was the spray wait* irrigation-area?
                     e. What efforts did WCC nake to identify thest two
           locations precisely?
                   d. Is the disturbed area identified by GtM (Figure
           4) on* (or both) of those areas? •
                   e. Why were WCC'a soil samples takan and monitoring
           wells installed outside the
                                     •• disturbed area identified by G&M?
                   f. Did any DEP professional staff recommend sampling
           inside that disturbed area? If so, why was that advice
           rejected?
                   g. Why were no samples taken or analyses conducted
           in the tank faro or spray waste irrigation areas?
           I. A full DEP investigation of 1377 should be included. The
           RI indicates (at 3-10) that DCP "is engaging in compliance
           development under an administrative order" involving the
           former Princeton Chemical Research property at 1377 Route
           206. However, little of the relevant data appears in the
           RX/FS,.making it difficult to evaluate this critical aspect.
           (The JACA RAMP of the MTHD [at 4-t S 10 and 4-13],
           emphasised (a) the TCE and other pollution at 1377 and (b)
           that the highest TCE concentrations in the KTHD seemed to
           line up eastward of 1377, between 1377 and the Millstone
           River. The west-to-east pattern of TCE contamination was
           observed once more in WCC's samples, but was not discussed in
           the RZ. (Compare GtM Assessment, Figure 11.) We request
           access to the entire file of DEP's investigations of 1377
           Route 206, only selected portions of which appear to be
           included in the RX/FS.
           i. Residential septic systems were ignored. In if84, the
           JACA RAMP Of the MTHD noted (at 4-6 and 4*15) as an
           inadequacy that no residential septic systems had been
           sampled by DEP in the MTHD. Why did WCC sample us
           residential septic systemsi                         ••

                     a. in the MTHD? or,                                        |>
                                                                                 X.
                     b. in Rocky Mill Borough?
           10. Coodvear was ignored. The Goodyear facility appears to             ^
           be immediately adjacent to the RHHW and along the strike, in
           the southwest direction of the greatest drawdown by that               °
           well, when pumping. (G&M Assessment, Figures 2, t.)                     xo

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 121 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

95X31/53    -11:41     PREKT FOX KIHT*€R PLOTKIN t KPW   NO. 510   P010/815




                                             - 8-

                   a. Why was Coodyaar not identified •• • potentially
           reponsible party (-PRP-)?
                   b. Why war* no fiald samplings attempted at
           Goodyear? •
           11* Fifth Dimension and nearby facilities were ignored. •
           Information available to ue indicates that Fifth Dimension
           occupied a building (since burned down, but rebuilt on its
           old foundation) on Rout* 206 from about 1961-1969. (See GtM
           Assessment, Figure 2.) Our information also indicates that
           Fifth Dimension uied TCE — which it purchased in 55-gallon
           drums and disposed of down the drain and out the back door.
           Fifth Dimension vas located upgradient from the RHKW and
           within its capture tone (along the southwest portion of the
           strike that provides most of the water to the RKXM). GtM
           Assessment, Figure 9} HI at 3-6 and 5-5.
                     a. Why was fifth Dimension not identified as a PUP?
                     b. Why was its old septic system not ssmpled?
                           \
                   e. Did HCC identify the disturbed area to the east
           of Fifth Dimension (GtM Assessment, Figure 5)?
                   d. Why were no field samplings attempted at Fifth
           Dimension or the disturbed area to the east of it?
                   S). Why were none of the nearby facilities and their
           old septic systems investigated?
                   f. Why was not a monitoring well placed directly
           between Fifth Dimension and the RHMW?
           12. Nen»« was ignored. J. Nemes 4 Son, Inc. ("Scotti
           Muffler"), is also on the southwest portion of the strike
           from which the RHMW draws so copiously (CtM Assessment,
           Figures 2, 9| RX 3-6 and 5-5). Why was Nemes omitted from
           the PRPs and its old septic system not sampled?
           13. Montgomery Township Shopping Center was passed over
           liohtlv. The Montgomery Shopping Center la just north of the
           PGT property, on the parcel which includes PGT'e septic
           facilities. The shopping Center is just south of the                  o
           disturbed area (of seeming vegetative stress) identified in           o
           aerial photos. (GtM Assessment, Figure 4.)
                     a. What analytical assurance? did WCC or DEP secure         £
           thst the 15,000 ppb of "TCA" reported in the septic system as         Nl
           of 2/11/1960 was not in fact TCE?         (See Weston Letter at 5.)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 122 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

93/31/38     11141        flRSNT FOX KIHTKER PLOTKIN t KPKH   NO. 510   P011/B15




                                           - 9-

                   b. Why waa investigation of the Montgomery Shopping
           Center so sketchy? (See RZ at 6-10 ft 11.)
           14. Soil-oas surveys wera not conducted. Why were not cost-
           effective soil gaa aurveys conducted at 1377 Route 206,
           Polyeel, Montgomery Township Shopping Center, PGT, the old
           Thui's autobody shop and Mobil gas atation, Texaco gas
           station, old William Penn gas station, Names, Goodyear and
           Fifth Dimension? (See Weston Letter.) Such •urveys could
           have helped identify potential aources of contamination and
           aided in the selection of soil, septic and groundwater
           sampling locations.
           13*   Pollutant chemicals accompanying TCE were ignored. At
           aeveral sites in and near the MTHD, TCE has been founa
           together with heavy metals (such as lead) and VOCs other than
           TCE which are not found at the PGT property. These findings
           indicate that there are sources of both TCE and the other
           contaminanta in the area which are not associated with PGT.
           The RZ/FS fails to consider and pursue the Implications of
           these correlationa. (For example, the data aupport a much
           stronger interest in 1377 Route 206, the former Princeton
           Chemical Research site, than the RZ exhibits.)
           1C. The RI/FS doee not reflect the history of these sites.
           The RZ/FS is written from a static point of v i e w . I t faila
           to inveatigate aome PRP sites at all. And it does not
           disclose the history of the various PRP sites. Zt accepts as
           conclusive the recollections of a gas station attendant or
           auto body shop mechanic that they did not use "TCE* •• when
           most users of the 1960s or 1970s night be hard put to say
           exactly which degreaser or solvent they used. Zt ignores the
           sequence of chemical contamination findings. Zt seeks to
           define a steady-state condition which does not seem to exist
           in the ground water. A look back, before WCC'a 1986-87
           effort* illustrates the pointi
                   A. 1978. Rutgere university found TCI in the RHMW.
                       i. RHMW. The RZ reports (Vol. 3, App. •) four
           sampleat 38 ppb ofTCE (on 4/78), 160 ppb of TCE (11/9/178),             L?
           and 75 ppb of benzene (12/26/78), plus 214 ppb of TCE liated            -'
           under the date* "9/78-5/79.•
                                                                                   o
                        ii. Other sitee. The RZ indicates no other data            2
           for that year.
                                                                                   o
                   b.   1979.      DIP began ite sampling effort*.
                                                                                   00
                                              ort* 79, 102, and 57 ppb
                        i. RHMW. The RZ report*                     pb
           of TCE (on 11/5,, lITFT
                             lITFT «nd 12/18)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 123 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

05^31-88     11:42 <*ENT FOX KINT>€P PLOTKIN t KfiW    W.S1B P012'015




                                         - 10 -

                        ii. POT. The RX reports no groundwater or soil
           samples. The RZ raporti a tap tie tank sample with 7900 ppb
           of TCB on 11/19/79. This ia erroneous. A sample was taken
           on that data and no TCE waa in it. (Sea G&K Assessment, at
           10 and Appendix A.)
                             Other commercial/industrial. The RI
           reports that nine septic tanks were sampled on 11/19/79, but
           that all of them were "not analyzed for" TCE and "not
           analysed for" V.O.Scan. (One must wonder about the RI's
           accuracy. We have asked DEP for the lab sheets, but they
           have not been furnished.) The RI reports no soil sampling.
           The RZ reports ground water analyses revealing 37 ppb of TCE
           at Compo Industries (a former Hercules property south of
           Route 518) and up to 14 ppb of TCE at ingersoll Rand.
                        iv. MTHD residential. The RZ reports TCE in
           wells ranging from i.S ppb north of Sycamore Lane (one house .•
           east of Route 206); up to 110 ppb at Cleveland Circle; up to
           146 ppb at Oxford Circle; and up to 39 ppb at Robin Drive.
                ' c. 1979-85. The following Table summarises the TCE
           analyses of well water for TCE from 1979-1985 to the extent
           available in the RZ (Vol. 3, App. B) and the JACA RAKP (Table
           0-15) for the RHKW, the PGT production well, the XTHO
           (divided into four areas, Cleveland Circle, Oxford Circle,
           Robin Drive and all Else), 1377 Route 206 and Polycel.i/

                      TCE Measured in Wellwater Samples (PPB1
                       *. PGT       MTHD______.
           Tear    RHKW well ?lev Oxfd Rcbn Elae 1377 Pelv
                                               :                  •


           Ratio of NPiTCE fTCE analysed for but not deteetedtTCE
           found ft  .
            1979   Oi4 na ItC 3i9 Oi3                 na na             .
            1980   Oi21 1*2 2ilO 2i8 Ii3              Oil Oil                _
            1981   Ot21 na lilS lilO OtS              Oi3 2iO    ..          %
            1982   Oi4    na   111 Oil Ot2            Oi3 Ii2                -
            1983   Oil liO na na na                   Oil Oi2
            1984   OK   na liO Oil Oi3                 na na                 g
            1985    na na na na na                     na

               TCB in other commercial/induttrial well water during the
           period includedi 1991 up to 25 ppb at Compo industries; 1993
           up to 120 ppb at Thul's Auto Bodyshop, 9 ppb at Wn. Penn gas
           station, 3 ppb at the Texaco, and 46 ppb at Compo Industries.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 124 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

es/3s/ea     n<42      ARENT FOX KIKTKER FLOTKIN t KPHN    NO.510




                                             - 11 -

                    TCE Measured in Wellwater Samples fPPBi (cent.]
                           fCT           MTHD______
           ISIS     RHMW veil glev Ox{d Robn Elie 1377 Polv
           Average TCE analysis fvhere TCE detected!t
            1979    99 H a 5 2 43 15              Hi"" na
            1980     108   60     72    26   149          12S   40
            1981      51   na 101 45 161                  242   ne
            1982     125   na   S 249 603                 253   52
            1983      49   na na na" na                   160    9
            1984      44   na na 45 22                     na   na
            1985     aa    na     na   na     na          na    na
           Highest
           richest TCE analysisi
                   TCE analysist
           7979102"Hi            HO" 146       39     4    na   na
            1980     163   91    130    68   309    13    125   40
            1961     132   na    318 249 430        30    402   na
            1982     161   na      5 249 950        40    368   98
            1983    49 aa na na na na                     160   12
            1984    61 na na 45 34 41                      na   na
            1985    aa aa na na na na na aa
           The Table clearly shows higher TCI concentrations at 1377
           Route 206* at Polycel and at portions of MTHD than at PCT.
           If the PCT property were really the primary source, how could
           the concentrations increase as the contamination dispersed?
           17. No proper investigation has been made of PRPs. The RX/FS
           failed to investigate FRFs adequately or rigorously. Past
           ownership and tenancy records were not sought. Land use,
           industrial and commercial activities were not rigorously
           investigated or documented. WCC seems to report casual,
           anecdotal information, at best.                           •

           18. Has the TCB migrated from ite source? The JACA RAMP for
           the MTHD concluded fat 7-4)i "The test results indicate         r
           strongly that the TCB contaminants have migrated from the        ~
           area where they were originally located or introduced.* If
           that is the case, the TCE revealed by PCT'a ECRA monitoring
           in shallow ground water in 1987 migrated to the property from 2
           someplace else. (Moreover, the 1980-83 TCE readings of Mot         5|
           Detected to 91 ppb in PGT groundwater seem to confirm the         c
           JACA conclusion.) The RZ/FS fails to state whether VCC and    0
           DEP are today reaching a different conclusion, and, if so,       2 a
           why the change of heart.
                                                                           o
           19. Counterpumoinq is uniustifie^. Apart from the problems      ^ >
           with using counterpumplng technology in the kind of geology     § *
           involved here (fractured shale), the plan ie ill-conceived
           because numerous unidentified sources of VOC (including TCE);

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 125 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

05/31/88 •   11*43   fiRENT FOX KINTNER FLOTK1N I W*N   NO.518   FWl4/8i5




                                             • 12 -
                                                                  *

         likely are present still contaminating the around water. The
         likely (and potential) sources of additional contamination
         would put more VOC into the groundwater at one end as
         counterpumping tries to remove VOC at the other. Expenditure
         of considerable resources on counterpumping is unlikely to
         yield any net environmental or health benefit.
         20* The public health rationale of the FS underlying the
         PRAP does not make sense, it rests on the non-existent
         public health risk if people in the KTHD continued to drink
         and bathe in contaminated water for a lifetime (of seventy
         years). Of course, that will not happen becaues the remedial
         actions already ordered by USEPA'require these homes no
         longer to use contaminated water, 'completely eliminat(ing]
         risk due to exposure to contaminated groundwater•• [USEPA
         ROD at 25".] Well sealing would avoid any careless
         reversions. Nonetheless, the PRAP proposes trying to clean
         out the volatile organic compounds (VOC) from the groundwater
         by pumping and evaporation into the air for seven years (or
         likely more) instead of letting nature do the job.
                        >
         21. VCC failed to find TCB sources. This failure is a
         glaring weakness of the RX. Not having any idea of the
         sources, WCC is in no position to design a rational FS,
         beyond the measures already mandated and undertaken plus
         Aquifer Isolation and Monitoring, Alternative 2.
         22. Precedents for Alternative 2. A review of relevant
         Superfund Records of Decisons ("RODS*) which address
         situations similar to the KTKO and RHKW contamination has
         identified at least three instances,!/ in which the USEPA
         determined that placing affected residences on municipal
         water, performing additional studies to identify sources,
         doing remediation work to eliminate the sources of the
         contamination, and allowing natural restoration of the ground
         water was sufficient to address the health and welfare
         concerni raised by regional aquifer contamination. These
         RODs appear to be the appropriate models for addressing the
         concern at the KTHD and the RHKW Superfund Sites,
         particularly since the installation of air stripping at the   .2
         RHMW in 1983 and the 1987 ROD for the HTHD have already         5
         addressed and eliminated any public health concerns.
                                                                       o
         23. We incorporate by reference, all -of the comments in the  £
         G&M Assessment and in the WeEton Letter (both attached).
                                                                            o
         ____
         —————__———____              .   .                        •         \0
                                                                            o

         £/ Northwest 58th Street Landfill, Florida; Olean Wellfield,
         New York; and the Winthrop Landfill, Maine.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 126 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

85/31/88     11143 fiREMT FOX KINTKER PLOTKIN t KflhN   NO. 518   F815/815




                                           - 13 -
                                                                  *
           24. Given the serious flaws of the RI/FS set forth in the
           above Comments and in the attachments, we do not concede that
           the costs of preparing the WCC RZ/FS nay properly be
           considered "costs of response* under CERCLX or the New Jersey
           spill Act.
                                          ect ful lv. -submi


                                      Jonathan R/ Pawlow
                                     ARENT, FOX, X1NTNER, PLOTKIN § KAHN
                                      10SO Connecticut Avenue, U.K.
                                     Washington, O.C. 20036-5339

                                     Robert G. Rose
                                     Harriett Jane Qlson
                                      PITNEY, HARDXN, KIPP ( SZUCH
                                     163 Madison Avenue
                                     Morristown, N.J. 07960
           May 31, 1988 x




                                                                              O
                                                                              O


                                                                             O
                                                                             vO
                                                                             O

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 127 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  ASSESSMENT OF WDOEKAR1XLYDE CCKSUIZMOS
  FZHEDIAL JNVESTIGAITCN/FEASIBIIJTY STOW
FOR JCNTCaina TOWNSHIP HOUSING EEVHDHfflf
     RXJtf HTLi KINICZPAL KEIIJ1ELD SIZE


               May 1988




        C«r»5hty f Kill«r, Ins.                  ?
           7 Atlantic Stxwt
     Kadccncac3C| Nctf JCTMV 07601
                                             o
                                             o


                                            o
                                            CO



      CERAGHTY & MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 128 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  CPTTPTTS
                                                                                                     Page
X        Himjuuvp'AAVJ*. •••.••••...«••••.•••.•••••.••••••...•••••••••• .1
2        EXECUTIVE SUft&RY. • •••••••••••••••••••••«•••••••*••.•••• .....2
         2.1 Gxixmd-Watar Flow Conditions* •••••••••••••••.••••••••• .2
         2.2 Ground-Water Quality Conditions. ............ ...........3
         2.3 Soil Quality Definition............................... 4
         2.4 Septic System Sanpling.. «••••«••••••••••••••••••••••• ..4
         2.5 Potentially Responsible Parties.. .................. .. ..5
         2.6 Review of Proposed Cleanup Alternatives. .......... .....5
         2.7 Public Health1 Assessment Review.. .
                                                ...
                                                  ...
                                                    ...
                                                      ...
                                                        ... ......6
         2.8 Arf lifer T*"! ^!^^! t T t T - - - - T T T - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -~e
3        KLVILW OF REMEDIAL ZNVE5TXGA310N. . ...................... ....7
         3.1 General Cu^u-mS. ........ .
                                       ...
                                         ............
                                                    ...
                                                      ...
                                                        ...
                                                          ...
                                                            ...
                                                              .7
         3.2 Ground-Water Flow Conditions..........
             3.2.1 Shallow Ground-Water
                3.2.2 Deep Ground-Water Flow.... .
                                                 ...
                                                   ...
                                                     ...
                                                       ...
                                                         ...
                                                           ...
                                                             . .12
                3.2.3 Analysis of RZ Pusping Test.. ........ ......... .14
                3*2.4 Travel Time £stiffiates..................*.......15
         3.3 Discussion of Sampling Results. ....................... 15
                3.3.1 Ground-Water Quality; Volatile Organic
                      CcEipounds. ...................... ................ lo
                3.3.2 Ground-Water Quality; Heavy Metal expounds..... 17
                3.3. 3, Soil Quality.......... ..........................IB
                3.3.4 Septic Sairpluig. ••••••••••••••••••••••••••»•••• .19
     »
         v3»4 Data Gape. .••••..........••.....••••••••••••••••••••••20
         3.5 Potentially Responsible Parties.. . .............
                                                             .. .....21
4        REVIEW OF FEASIBILITY eivb/..... .
                                          ...
                                            ...
                                              . •••••••••••• •••••••23
         4.1 Review of Proposed Alternatives.. ...
                                                 ............... ...23
         4.2 Public Health Assessment Review.. ........
                                                      .............25
         4.3 Ko Action and Aquifer Zsolaticn Alternatives.......... 27
5        KuuuxmS..... ••••••*•««•••••••••«••••••••••••••••••••••• .29


1)       Woodward-Clyde Consultants Monitoring Well Construction Details.


1)       Study Area; Tributary Stream Drainages, and Topographic Divide. .
2)       Study Area; Sane Potentially Responsible Parties.
3)       location of Monitoring and Selected Domestic Walls Sanpled During                                        5
         theRZ.                                                               .                                   5'
4)       Disturbed Area East of 1377 Route 206 (Prinoaton Chemical                                            0
         Research) Frcn 1974 Aerial Photo end Nearby RZ Soil Sampling                                         o
         Locations.                                                                                           "
5)       Disturbed Area East of Fifth Dijamsion Site Frcn 1961 Aerial   °
         Photo.                                                       £
                                   CERAGHTV £> M11J.ER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 129 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    (continued)


6)    Watsr-Lavsl Contour Map, Shallow Well*; April 12, 1981.
7)    Watsr-Lavsl Centaur Kap, Shallow Hills; PCT Facility and
      Vicinity; May 4, 1988.
8)    Watsr-Lsvsl Contour Map, "Doep Halls"! May 4, 1988.
9)    Hoedward-Clyds Consultant* "Deep Well" Watsr novation* After 5
      Hours of Raping RccXy Kin Municipal Hall; Dacsobsr 13, 1986.
10) Ares of Hypothetical Migration Assuming Maxima Rats snd
    Hypothetical Direction of .flow. *
11) Trichloroethens Conotntraticns in Monitoring (Kovcoibtr snd
    December 1986) snd Dcmstie Halls (JUns 1986); First Round.
12) Itichlorocthsna Conoantrations in Monitoring snd Dcnctie Walls
    (April, Juns, and July 1987)i.Ssoend Round.
13)   Ground-Water Sample Conoantrations Bfcaerting Response Objectives
      for Selected Heavy Metal*.
14) location of Selected nrmwrrlal. Industrial, snd Residential
    Septic Sys^sos.
15) Location of Recovery snd Injection Halls for Alternative SB.
16) Location of Recovery and Injection Halls for Alternative 7.


A)    N7nn» Lab Sheet for JOT Septic Imnk Saapling en Hovsofesr 19,
      1979.
B)    Hatsr-Zsvsl Gats for Gsraghty ft Miller, Inc.'s April 12 snd May
      4, 1988 Maasursnant Events.
q     HOC Water-Table Contour Maps for Deep Monitoring Halls; December
      13, 1986 snd August 21, 1987.
D)    Sussnary of Hunan Cancer RisXs snd Hazard Index.




                                                                           o
                                                                           o

                                                                          o
                                                                          sO
                                                                          o


                      OERAGHTY ef MIUER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 130 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                ASSESSMENT OF NCODKRRD-CiyCE COSUIZANIS
                REHEBIAL IMVESTZGKTZCfVTZASIBILnY STOW
              FOR KHroCKSV TOWEHIP HOUS1NS CEVnfiPMBi
                   ROCKf KZZL MUNICIPAL VJELUTELD SHE .




     In Karen 1988, Gera$jty t Killer, Inc. vas ratainad by Pitney,
Hardin, Xipp ft Szuch to raviaw and umiamaL en tha various raports and
stuiies that have baan cenductad at tha Booty Hill Municipal Well
(RHMW) and Kontgcnery Township Housing Davalepnant (HDD) Superfund
Sites in Kontgcnery Township, Maw Jarsay. Figura 1 providas an
ovazviaw of tha study araa and show* tha location of tha principal
topographic divida batwaan Badan Brook and tha Killstona Rivar as wall
as tha locations of tributary straaa drainagas vithin and adjaoent to
tha study araa. Figure 2 shews tha locations of sane Potentially
Responsible Parties (PRP's) in the study

           preilfflinaxy report sunsnarizes Caragh^ ft Killer, Inc.'s
review of tha RcMdial Investigation/Feasibility Study (Kt/TS)
prepared by Wcedward-Clyde Consultants (WQC) for tha two fiuperfund
Sitas and identifies technical concerns and data gaps. Figura 3 shows
the locations of ncnitoring vails installed during tha RX as vail as
tha locations of donastie vails saspled during tha BZ. The report
eleo draws en liaitad additional data collected by Ceraghty ft Killer,
Inc.

      Other studies that have baan reviewed include tha two Renedial
Action Kastar Plans (RAMP) prepared by tha JAC& Corporation and
Rogers, Golden, C Kalpern, and an KS\ study prepared by J. K..Serge,
Inc. (1987) for the Prinoaten Ganna-Tech, Inc. (POX) site. Geraghty      ^
ft Killer, Inc.'s investigation focused priaarily on tha ccrpletaness    2
of the Remedial Investigation and conclusions drawn therefrcn and on
tha feasibility of the proposed remedial alternatives.                   o
                                                                         o
                                                                         ^>
                                                                         o
                                                                         o

                     CERAGHTY c> MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 131 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                 -2-




     The Rl/FS identified an area on the north side of Route 518,
including land now owned or used by Prineeton Gamma-Tech, Inc. (PGT),
as a probable primary source of trichloroathene (TCE) .contamination.
2his identification appears to be principally influenced by shallow
ground-water quality data developed by PSI for an ECRX proceeding.
This report focuses primarily on a review and analysis of broader
regional data in regard to the two Suparfund Sites.

2.1 ftrmi** M»fr»y flow Conditions

          3ne study area is underlain by a consolidated bedrock
          aquifer system. Ctnplex fracture systems vithin the bedrock
          provide for the storage and transmission of ground vatar.
          According to the XL, the principal fracture set is
          reportedly vertical and along formation strike (North 65
          ——t).
          HO clear delineation can be developed between shallow and
          deeper ground-vatar flow and quality conditions 1on the basis
          of WCC's study because WCC's so called "deep* monitoring
          veils have open intervals over almost the entire thickness
          of the bedrock aquifer to the depth that the veils are
          completed. Although the "shallow" veils are really shallow,
          the so-called "deep" veils are, in truth, a shallow-deep
          combination.
          3ne regional shallow vater-level contour nap (Figure 6)
          developed by Ceraghty ( Killer, Inc. indicates that ground
          vatar in the upper portion of the Brunswick Aquifer is
          discharging to local stream tributaries, ttiis nap (based en
          HOC monitoring veils only) is of insufficient detail to
          allow for a determination of the position of the shallow
          ground-vater divide in the vicinity of the PSI sits.
          The site specific shallow vater-level contour nap for the
          PST site and vicinity (Figure 7) (developed by Geraghty i
          Miller, Inc. using both nearby WOC and BCM monitoring
          veils) clearly indicates that shallow ground vatar, at and
          in proximity to the PCT site, flows to the vest-northwest —
          away from both MMD and RMf — and discharges to a                2; •
          tributary stream that originates vest of Route 206 and near     - \
          the Village Shopper and flows northwards to Beden Brook
           (Figure 1).                                                     o >
                                                                          o >

                                                                          o     >
                                                                          <±>   >
                                                                          o     >
                                                                          XI    •
                      GERAGHTY & MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 132 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               -3-


         3he WOC August 21, 1987 vatar-lcval contour sap clearly
         indicataa that tha direction of deeper ground-water flow
         under tha PUT aita is to tha southeast and away from tha
         KZHD.
         One WCC December 13, 1986 water-level contour «ap indicataa
         a ground-water divida that appaara to lia northvast of tha
         FGT aita; this implies that undar non-pumping conditions
         (RHMW off), deeper ground-watar flow undar tha FCT aita ia
         to tha aouthaast and away from tha HfflD.
         Ihe WOC definition of daap ground-watar flow perditions ia
         of insufficient detail to allow for tha identification of
         FBI* at either Suparfund Sita.
         She Geraghty t Killer, Inc. May 4, 1988 vatar-laval contour
         nap (Figure 8) ia aiailar in configuration to WOC's August
         21, 1987 contour nap and liJcaviaa ahewa that at the PUT aita
         deep ground-water flow is to tha aouthaast and not toward
         the MUD.
         The number and locatiena of data pointa (&cnitoring walla)
         ara insufficient to identify WP's en tha basis of tha
         ground-watar flow definition to data.
         The WCC December 13, 1986 pushing tact on tha RMf indicates
         tha development of an anisotrcpic cone of depression
         oriented along formation striJca. The water-level drawdown
         data indicate that tha principal hydraulic connection is
         along formation atriJca. Little effort was devoted in the RI
         to studying tha potential sources within tha capture cone of
         Haw.
         WOC's maximum travel tine estimate for a non-reactive
         (142 ft./yr) indicataa that tha maxima migration from tha
         FCT aita from start of PCI operations in 1972 to discovery
         of VOCS in KEHD walls (1979) would be less than 1000 feat.
         As such, even if daap ground-watar flow ware to tha
         northeast (which WCC and Caraghty t Miller, Inc. data and
         naps indicate is not tha case), and even if flow ware at tha
         maximum possible xata, it would be impossible for flow from
         tha PUT aita to have reached MUD walls, or even Mf-5.
2.2 Ground-Water Ouali<
         lha WOC "deep" monitoring wells ara inadequately constructed
         for tha purposes of assessing deep ground-water Quality
         conditions and tha vertical extant of contamination.
         lha ground-watar flow and contaminant distribution data              5
         indicata that tha FCT fiita is not tha source of TCE
         contamination in tha KfflD walls.                                0
                                                                          o
         In tha absence of ground-vatar flow data, tha presence of        ^
         a clean monitoring well (5-D) and residential wall               _
         (29002-28) between tha PCT Cits and many MDD walla              ':'
                                                                         o
                                  • __                                   o>
                     CERACHTY & MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 133 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        ' indicates other souroe(s) of TCE contamination to the MBO
         veils.
    o    The highest TCE concentrations in residential veils are
         oriented in a vest to east orientation that follows a line
         just north of 1377 Route 206 Site (Frinoaton Chemical
         Research) to Cleveland rlr***1*-
    o     The * available TCE and grcund-vatar flow data indicate
         nultiple TCE sources to RHMW because of low to un-detected
         TCE concentrations in veils between POT and the KMt (Mt-9-5
        and 9-0 and Town and Country Animal Hospital Well).
    e Arsenic, Chromium, and Xaad have been detected in aonitoring
        and residential vails at concentrations in excess of
        drinking jaiar standards. The principal area of concern is
        at and in proximity to Monitoring Wells 3-5 and 3-D.
    o A conparison of TCE and Heavy Metal distributions in
        residential veils also indicates that the highest
        concentrations are, for the sect part, oriented in a vest to
        east orientation from just north of the 1377 Route 206 site
         (Frinceton Chemical Research) to Cleveland Circle.
    o   The RI did not atteapt to identify possible sources of heavy
        metal contamination and only one roond of vater sanples vas
        analyzed for heavy natal constituents.
              \
2.3 sgH CualKy Definition
  * o   The RI soil sanpling piutfiaut -failed to identify any sources
        for the TCE in ground vater.
    o laboratory analytical results for sasples from soil boring
        SB3 (1377 Route 206 facility) showed the highest
        concentrations of VDOs, semi-volatiles, heavy netals and
        tentatively identified compounds.
    e A nearby aonitoring veil (M*-3-D) has shown the presence of
        some of the constituents found in soil at the 6B3 location
         (e.g., phenols at 63 ppb and fiis-(2-«thylhexyl) phthalata at

         Ho soil sanples ware taken vithin a disturbed area (possible
         vegetative stress noted en a 1974 aerial photo) just east ef
         the 1377 Route 206 facility (Frinoaton Chemical Research),
         vhich might have been that facility's spray vasts irrigation

         • -•""'    i                                                    O
                                                                         o
          Previous sanpling (Pre-RI) has documented VOC's in             ^
          cconercial and industrial septic systems in the study area.
                                                                         o
          Selected ccmriercial/industrial' septic systems that had       o ,
          previously shown VOC contamination were not sampled in the      ^ ,'
          •X.
                     GERAGHTY & MILLER.INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 134 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    o    Abandoned commercial and industrial septic systems south of
         Route 518 were not sampled during the HI.
    e    Ho residential septic systems were investigated or sampled
         during the RX, -even though pre-RI failure to investigate
         residential septic systems had been identified as a
         deficiency by the EPA's JACX RAMP.

2.5 Potentially Rfigpgngible Parties
    o    Ihe HI did not involve a review of past industrial and
         commercial practices in the study area.
    e    Geraghty & Miller, Inc. *• United overview of the study area
         indicates several PRP's including 1377 Route 206 (Princeton
         Chemical Research),' Polycell, Montgomery Shopping center,
         Fifth Dimension, Kernes ft Son, and Gccdyeari the latter three
         facilities are within the capture zone of the RHMW.


    o    The Proposed Remedial Action Plan indicates that
         alternatives SB and 7 are the NJTEP's preferred
         alternatives. Both alternatives involve pumping from
         extraction wells, use of air strippers for VDC treatinent,
         and the injection of VDC treated water.
    o    The proposed injection of VDC treated water could serve to
         spread contamination of untreated constituents (heavy metals
         and semi-volatiles) from areas of concern to areas that are
         currently unaffected.
    o    The continued disposal into a variety of septic systems
         represents potential continuing sources of VDC contamination
         to the ground-water resource both within and outside of the
         study area.
    o    Physical and operational constraints related to the
         injection of VDC treated water were not »*^r»f«f1 or even
         considered in the F5.
    o    Alternative SB shows injection well locations adjacent to
         known and possible areas of ground-water contamination; the
         proposed Injection could serve to spread cut existing            ^ .
         contamination problems.                              .           ^ i
    o    Alternative 2 appears to solvepublic health and welfare          0  ,
         concerns; however, if the NJED objective is resource             o >
         protection and cleanup for its own sake in excess of public      *" '
         health and welfare needs, it is imperative that the KJIEP
         eddress all ground-vater quality problems exposed by the         $ >
         RMfP and RI/FS. Specific problem areas and facilities            £ I
         includes heavy aetal contamination at 3-5 and SO and
         proximate residential wells, semi-volatile organic compounds
         at W 3-D and in the vicinity of the 1377 Route 206 site,

                     GERAGHTYj' MILLER. INC.                         '    _ ..

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 135 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             FCB contaminants in soil and ground-vater at the 1377 Route
                             206 aite, frean-relatad oonpounds in selected ncnitoring and
                             residential vails, TCE in one or acre Ingersoll Rand
                             production veils, and potential ground-vater quality
                             problens at and dovngradiant of the Ctupo Industries
                             facility.


•cr. „ v                     fna-rs
                             * •— »- * ^~ 4 I

                                                           ntratibns
                                                                                      ^driven
                                                                       ^selected "heavy-5fcaT
                                         tuentsr-vhich the ptppoyi^reiMdiaj^ _alternatives"^o'-
     ?.«     y «:
 ,»\-'-    v.* <v«-^<   o    A 'HigjiifiumL-portion"of the-rls)c"valoe
fV •,,•",''
   ,'•• V                                  • vay^only- pi esant -in •m'Tiq

                                                      associated.vith the
                             3 re&d vatar vas jp^HarJly'. attrUbutad 'to inorganic inatala^
                             Oha W\ did not addraas tha No Action or Aquifer Isolation
                             Alternatives; these alternatives should have been artrtr»»»ed
                             given that public health will not be impacted in any event
                             because of alterations in ground-vatar use at the tuo
                             Superfund Sites (Rftfif fitted with VDC traaboant systa and
                             MIHD connected to public-water supply systao).
                    2.8 Aouifer Tsolation
                             Uia Aquifer Isolation alternative varrants consideration
                             given tha alternatives in place for vatar supply, tha
                             questioned feasibility of the pixipunad aquifer cleanup, and
                             the aanv sources (documented and possible) that will remain
                             unreDedlatad, as vail as continued ispacts frcn septic




                                                                                                  c, •
                                                                                                  -< i
                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                  O




                                                CERAGim' i» MILLER. INC

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 136 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               -7-


                   3 REVIEW or K       INVESTTSMTCM

             en ths Remedial Znvastigatien (RZ) oonduetsd by
Woodward-Clyde Consultants ' (WOC) at ths subject Superfund Sites, ths
araa of ths VGT sits was intarprstsd by MDC to bs a primary souros of
contamination' in ths are* (RZ Vol. 1, Pags £5-2). WOC further
concluded "that ths POT sits is a potsntial souros of oontanination in
both FH-W and WHO." (Vol. 1, Paga 7-2). Shs identification of
Potsntially Responsible Partiss (FKP's) was based upon an assessment
of ground-water quality and flow conditions. No soil quality data
ware considered by WOC because their limited soil sampling program
failed to identify any volatils organic sources in ths unsaturatad
cone above the water table. Consequently, ths Geraghty & Killer, Inc.
assessment of WOC's conclusions focused on whether ths data support
WOC's characterization of ground-vatar flow and ground-vater quality
conditions*

    General
               \
     Sis principal general concerns in regard to ths completeness of
the WDC RZ include:

         She RZ doss not indicate that an historical aerial
         photograph analysis was conducted by WOC or SA for ths
         study area. Given the complexity of the study area and
         changing land uses (and IPX's capability to conduct an
         historical aerial photograph analysis at their Denver
         office), this type of analysis is critical and should have
         been incorporated into ths RZ, of necessity. Geraghty A
         Killer, Znc.'s preliminary review of historical aerial
         photos indicated areas of concern/interest at: • ths 1377
         Route 206 site (Prinoeton Chemical Research) (possible
         vegetative stress in ths spray waste irrigation area east of
         ths building (1974)) and ths former site of Fifth Dimension,
         Inc. (disturbed area east of ths facility (1961)).* -

1 Figures 4 and 3 show ths locations of areas of concern/interest at
the 1377 Routs 206 sits and at tha former site of Fifth Dinnsion.
Figure 4 shows ths WCC soil boring and sampling locations at ths 1377
Route 206 site which appsar to havs been placed outside this araa of
                                                                         o
                                                                         xD




                    GERAGHTY c' MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 137 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

One Rocky Kill Municipal Well (FBW) vas not sanpled during
the M.
     -fiir i.X4»^« < •»   ^-mlnlmim mmumar»*-*im**rr MSpl«S Should*-
     -been -obtained from this well .during. the_BI_f or.. an
analysis of Priority "Pollutant josnstituents plus 40 peaics.*
£1 aUflitlon7*auring the punpfrig tesTen TScembeSriJ', lyubj
    ' '        ' water
                     • •sajiples should fcave
                                           ""beta"
                                               " arillyied.:ifc
%§gess TCE -variations with the enlargement of .the .captarjp
          tha ROW over the duration of the pumping test.- -*
                              • ' • •   '



An historical overview of practices and operations at the
numerous ccnmercial and industrial establishments within the
study area does not appear to bavet been conrhicted in the XI.
In fact, Section 3 of the XZ ds, for the net part, a
reproduction of a similar section in the JAA MMP.
Moreover, several H$»'s hydraulically upgradient and within
the capture zone of the KHMW were not investigated. These
are principal deficiencies in the KZ.
WOC's geophysical and fracture trace investigations appear,
based en a review of the RZ report and Figure 5-1, to have
been conducted in areas t&ich are, for the most part,
physically remote from principal areas of concern in regard
to volatile organic compound (VDC) contamination.
Ihe well inventory (description of well construction de-
tails) for domestic wells in the JEHD and other wells in the
study area is inadequate in terms of domestic and production
well locations and pertinent well construction details. In
addition, no attempt was cade to identify active/inactive
production walls and the magnitude of pucpage at M™*^*^
and industrial establishments. Ihis is a principal consid-
eration in regard to pumping influences on ground-vatar flow
and contaminant migration. TJ\ addition, an overview of past
punping centers and stresses is critical to an understanding
of potential past influences en ground-water flow and
contaminant migration.
Water and septic quality tables contain inconsistencies,
errors and omissions! a few examples

a)   A water analysis for the TOT veil on March 25, 1983
     showed non-detectable concentrations of Irichloreethene
     (TCZ) as indicated in the JAOk RAMP; the ground-water
     analysis table provided in Vol. 9 Appendix B of the WX
     RZ dees not include this analysis.              •                         ^
                                                                               o
b) Ihe sumaary septic tank analytical results table (WQC                    ^
   RZ Volume 3, Appendix B) does not present a complete                    0
   list of oonpounds included in the analysis, nor does it                 o
   identify the analytical Mtheds used. Zt is,
   therefore, not clear whether ssnples from all tanks                 0
   were analyzed comparably.                                           -o


             GERAGHTY c* MlliER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 138 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                            I
                                        I

          e)   Ihe septic tank analysis table provided in Volume 3,
               Appendix B of the HOC XX shows a TCE oonoentraticn f or
               FCT's septic tank en November 19, 1979, although the
               KJTEP lab sheet shows none detacted (Appendix A) .
                . .     ,     _
               -boring"- locations, ""This Is 'a "critical element "and
         .d have been ccrtoined with an overview of past practices
          a^f abilities ifhare previous operations are of o
3.2 CiuuriJ-Wa^gr nowPgnfljfrjflpff

     9ne study area is underlain by the Brunswick Formation, a consol-
idated bedrock aquifer unit. Ihis formation is overlain by a shallow
layer of weathered rock and residual soils derived from the Brunswick
Formation. Based on the field investigations conducted to data, the
xgT«rnr«t aquifer unit primarily occurs within the weathered portion
of the Brunswick Formation*

     in most consolidated bedrock aquifer systems, fractures and other
openings in the rock provide the principal avenues for the storage and
transmission of ground water. According to the XX, the principal
fracture set Is reportedly vertical and is along formation strike
(North 65° East) and tha bedrock units dip to the northwest at 12° to


     Previous work in the Brunswick Formation in Hew Jersey at major
punping centers has indicated that pumping frcn production wells in
the Brunswick Formation results in an anisotropie cons of depression
that is elliptical in shape and oriented along formation strike. As
discussed in the XX, "Ihe practical implication of the directional
hydraulic behavior of the Brunswick aquifer is that the ground water
is able to flow mars freely in the direction of strike, and therefore     3
the facility for contaminant migration would be greatest along            5
striks.* (Vol. 1, Page 9-C) 3his factor is important and win be dis-
cussed in sore detail later in the report.                                    £

     During the field portion of the XX, thirty monitoring walls ware         £
installed in the study area at locations shown on Figure 9. According         ^
to woe's study, two types of wells were installed; shallow monitoring     _


                      GERAGHTY ^ MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 139 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                    -10-

veils vhich were intended to monitor ground vatar in the weathered
portion of the bedrock and deeper veils vhich vere intended to monitor
ground vatar in competent bedrock at greater depths. Based on a
review of monitoring veil construction details, the following major
concerns are evident:                                      ,-
* '             •

        o   No clear delineation can be developed between shallow and
            deeper ground-vatar flow and quality conditions based on the
            monitoring veils that WOC has 1installed. Although the
            so-called "deeper monitoring veils * range in depth froa 85
            feet to approximately 250 feet below gumd surface (bgs),
            the open interval (open hole) in the "deep veils" is
            significant in terms of length. For example, Monitoring
            Well 2-D is completed to a depth of 150 feet and is open
            hole from 21 feet to 150 feet bgs; Monitoring WaU 11-D is
            completed to a depth of 250 feet and is open hole froa 25 to
            250 feet   bgs. Therefore, the so-called "deep monitoring
            veils11 provide for an assessment of ground-vater quality and
            flow conditions over almost the entire thickness of the
            bedrock aquifer system to the depth that the veils are
            completed and do not serve to differentiate between shallow
            and deep conditions. Table 1 provides a sunaary of
            construction details for the WOC monitoring vails.
        o    Indeed, the "deep" monitoring veils may provide conduits for
            the migration of shallow contamination to daepar portions of
            the bedrock aquifer. This migration is possible because of
      - v   the long open intervals in the "deep1* monitoring vails and
            observed downward hydraulic heads in most monitoring veil
            clusters.
        o   The number and location of the so-called shallow and deeper
            monitoring veils do not allow for precise definition of
            either shallow or deep ground-vater flow conditions. This
            is evidenced by the sparse number of veils in the northern
            and eastern portions of the study area; for example,
            Monitoring Walls 1-S, 2-S and 3-S are the only veils that
            can be used to provide information regarding Shallow
            ground-vater flow conditions at and in proximity-to WHO.
             (Monitoring Wells 4-5 and 9-S are dry and cannot be used for
            an assessment of shallow ground-vatar flow conditions.)
                                                                                  •-^.
        e   The integrity of Monitoring WaU 3-D has been questioned by
            WX (page 6-5 of the HI) I as such, this data point may be of
            questionable value in assessing grcund-viter now ccndi-          2
            tions. Unfortunately, this veil is tha only so-called                $ r
             "deeper" monitoring veil that is not open bole but is                 I
                    ~ over an interval of 20 feet from 65 to 85 feet bgs.    0



                                                                            o
                                                                            ••£
                                                                            ^
                                                                            OT

                        GERAGHTY £> MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 140 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Geraghty a Killer, Inc. in April and May of 1988 collected two
synoptic zounds of vatar-lsvel aeasurements from HOC acnitoring vails
which ware Bade available oourtesy of the K31EP (however, KTECP's Xeys
could not unlock valla 14-5 and 14-D) . These measurements ware used
to construct water-level contour nape for both shallow ground-water
flow conditions (ahallow acnitoring walls) and for deeper flow
conditions (so-called "deeper aonitoring wells"). Tha water-level
aaasurement data are provided in Appendix B.

3.2.1 Shallow Grcund-Wa^y now The shallow water— level tmt.^*Tr
for the April 12, 1988 aaasurement event, involving only HOC
sanitating wells, is provided, on Figure 6. In addition, a site
specific water-level contour Bap for the Hay 4, 1988 naasureaents was
developed for the JCT cite and prcodnata area (Figure 7) . This
water-level contour aap (Figure 7) incorporates aeasurements from
Monitoring Walls 4-5, 7-5, 9-S, 16-5, 17-5, 18-5, and the four £CRA
aonitoring walls that have been installed by POT at their facility.

      Tha assessment of shallow ground-water flow also involved a
determination of surf ace-water conditions in tributary stream* that
drain to Bedan Brook and tha Killstona River. Six tributary streams
 (shown en Figure 1) were traversed in April/May 1988 to determine the
elevation at which flow originatad in each tributary. It was deter-
ained that, during dry weather conditions, flew originated in nest
tributaries between an elevation of 80 to 100 feet relative to asan
sea level (HSL) • The only tributary drainage in which fiow originates
below en elevation of 80 feet HSL is the tributary to the north of
Cleveland

     One consideration in the development of the shallow water-table
contour aap for tha study area (Figure 6) was surface-water fiow
conditions (dry weather fiow conditions observed during ApVil/May
1988) in that the source of water to the tributary streams is shallow
ground-water discharge or hnsffflnw. The available field data (water     ?,
levels and stream origination) indicate the yieiaime of local            ~~c
ground-water fiow systems for the shallow bedrock aquifer wherein        o
                                \                                        o
                     CERACHTY^ MILLER. INC.                              ^

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 141 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   -12-


local topographic high and low pointa represent, respectively, tha
recharge and discharge areas for shallow gxound-vatar flow system.

     An intarpratatlon of Figuraa 6 and 7 (shallow vatar-laval contour
aapa) indicataa tha following: i

     o     Ground water in tha upper portion of tha Brunswick Aquifer
           is discharging to load atraaa tributaries aa avidanoad by
           tha origination of tributary straana during dry vaathar
           conditions and tha collected vatar-laval
           lha regional ahallow v*ter-level contour sap (Figure 6)
           indicataa a principal Shallow ground-water divida between
           Hillatena River and Baden Brook that appear* to be
           coincident vith tha topographic divida (Sea Figure 1 for
           location of topographic divida). However, this contour sap
            (Figure 6) is of insufficient detail to allow for an exact
           cateaBiasticn of tha position of tha shallow cjround-vater
           divida in tha vicinity of the PUT sits.
           3he site specif ic ahallow water-level contour nap (Figure 7)
           clearly indicates that shallow ground vatar, at and in
           proximity to the PGT aita, flows to tha vast-northwest away
           from MKD and FHMW and discharges to a tributary stream that
           originates vast of Route 206 and south of tha Village
           Shopper; tha site specific data suggest that tha shallow
           ground-water divida lias east-southeast of tha POT sita.
           fhe— nunber-^uid -locaticn^f--vatar-level-»easurcnent points
           Ifienitoring -valla) -that- fora tha basis of the RI at the WHO
           is ''insufficient for an assessment of shallow gxound-vatar
                           in this area.               . — — •• -— '~"
                                      Garaghty ft Killer, Znc. study of
deeper gxound-vatar flow conditions involved a review of water-level
data generated by W3C, A review of vail construction details and
geologic logs, and an overview of a punping test conducted on the
SHOT by HOC on Decanter 13, 1916. In addition, Garaghty ft Miller,
Zne. oonpiled their own vatar-level data.
                                                                             ^
     As a result of this study, the following sajor concerns are             5
evidenti                                                                     o >
                      lled "deep venitoring valla" have open intervals       o '
                        uncased) in tha bedrock over alrost tha entire
           -thickness of tha Brunswick Aquifer to the depth the veils        0   0
           ''were drilled. This nethod of vcnitoring veil construction       ^ >>
            does not allow for an assessment of ground-water flow            ^ 2
            conditions in the deeper portions of the Brunswick Aquifer
            System.
                      GERAGHTY & MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 142 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

I
j
j        o   ^BH'"depths are .highly.variable..(85..to.250 feet), further
             rfrnyflj eating an assessinent of deeper flow conditions.*
                        concerning the depth (s) to aajor. water-bearing
                       • -in -the "deeper" aonitoring wells are poor or
              non-existent. Ihese data ara critical .to an assessment of,
               flow and 'contaminant aigration in a cenplex fractured
              tBBrock aquifer system such as the Brunswick Formation which*
             ^^tforllTf the study
         WOC constructed two vater-level contour aaps (ncn-pu&ping) based
    on water-level aeasurenents aade on nenenfrier 13, 1986 and August 21,
    1987| these two water-level contour aaps ara provided in Appendix C.
    Die August 21, 1987 aeasursaent event did not include aonitoring vail
    W-14-D1; in aiVltlm woe did not indicata punping conditions (Rfl«
    wall on/or off) for this Beasuraoant avant. _
                             •


         One August 21, 1987 water-level contour asp (WX's SX Figure 5-8)
    clearly indicates that the direction of deeper ground water under the
    P5T sits is to the southeast and away from the KfflD.

          3ha r*"r*rr 13, 1986 water-level contour aap (WX's KL Figure
    5-4) indicates a ground-water divide that appears to lia northwest of
    the fOS site, fids would iaply that under non-punping conditions
     (RHMf off) deeper ground-water flow under the JCT site is to the
    southeast and away frcn the HDD sita. 3na data points ara
    insufficient to establish the exact position of the ground-vater
    divide with any degree of certainty. Consequently, the generated
    water-level contour asp is of insufficient detail to allow for VKP
    identification for either the ROOT and KfflD Cites.

         The Geraghty ft Killer, Inc. May 4, 1988 water-level contour aap2
    (Figure S) is similar in configuration to WX's August 21, 1987 aap
    and liJcsvise shows that at the P5T sita, deep ground-water flow is to
    the southeast and not toward the MSB.


    1 Geraghty AMiller, Inc. also was unable to obtain a water-level              g
    neasurenent in 14-D as the KJEEP did not have a key for this well.        ^
    2 The so-called "deep1* water-level contour aap is presented in           o
    response to WX's "deep" water-level contour aaps in spite of Ceraghty     if
    t Killer, Inc. 'a concerns about the validity of the WOC "deep" wells.    «

                         GERAGHTY ^ MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 143 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               -14-



Zn summary,
    o    Tha WOC and Geraghty & Killer, Inc. deep vater-lavel contour
         maps indicate that daap grcund-vatar flow under the PCI site
          is to tha southeast.
     o    The number and location of data points (deep monitoring
          vails) ara insufficient to identify jRP's on the basis of
          ground-water flew definition to data.
     e Tha "deep11 monitoring vail network is suspect for the
          reasons discussed previously.
3.2.3 Analyill pf ^ Pumping T»*tt WOC conducted a pumping tast on
tha JWW on December 13, 1986. This wall was pumped at 241 gallons
per minute (gpm) for a pariod of five hours during which water-level
measurements were taken in both shallow and deeper monitoring vails.
Tha pumping of tha KHMW resulted in tha development of an anisotrcpic
cone of depression (Figure 9) along formation strike (North 65° Cut).
Tha RHMW pumpage resulted in significant vatar-laval drawdown impacts
along formation strike (for example, Monitoring Wall 10-D experienced
a water-level drawdown of approximately 17 feet ever the 5-hour
punping period; Manitoring Well 9-D, 52 feetf and Manitoring Wall 11-D
approximately & feat)* Zsss significant drawdown impacts were
observed down dip from the pumping cantar (Manitoring Well 74) shewed
approximately 0.4 feat of drawdown while Manitoring Wells 5-D and 4-D
either did not draw down at all or showed an increase in water-level
elevation).

       The WX pumping tast clearly indicates a much greater hydraulic
connection along formation strike (southwest to northeast) and far
lass of a hydraulic interconnection down dip of tha punping cantar
(Monitoring Wall 7-0 and tha F5T facility ara down dip from RMQ.
Other pumping tast studies in tha Brunswick Formation have also
    nstratad a graatar hydraulic connection along formation strike.      -2.
           TOC- pumping tast results and their statananV that
•facility .for oontaninant migration would be greatest along strifes*
 (5x7 Page 3-«), it is surprising that tha WX stuaV did not
concentrate en studying potential sources that lia along formation
striioa' in proximity to KW.



                     CERAGHTY fr MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 144 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                -15-


                              fj*   The RX developed travel tire
(ground-*Atar valoeity) estimates that ranga from a ^"li"*™ of 6 ft/yr
to a aaxiaum of 142 ft/yr (HOC RI Faga 6-3) for tha *de*p" portion of
tha Brunswick Aquifer unit. The traval time estiaates for shallow
portions of tha Brunswick Aquifer xanga from 11 ft/yr -to 123 fVyr.
These traval -tin or valoeity estiaates would ba for a non-reactive
tracer; VX acvaoent would ba at a soneuhat lower valoeity.

     The Pi's TMxinim traval tins estimate (ground^ntar flow valoeity
for non-reactive traoar) indicates that ground water froa under the
PST Site (deep portion of the Brunswick Aquifer) would, at tha audaum
rat* of flow, have aigrated less than 1000 ft. from tha initiation of
PST operations (1972) to discovery of VOCa in WHO walls (1979).
During this period from 1972 to 1979, even if deep ground-water flow
wara to tha northeast (which both WQC and Geraghty ft Killer, Zne. data
and Baps indicate is not the case) , it would ba impossible for flow
from the POT Site to have reached HMD walls, or even Mf-5. Figure 10
shows "arcs* of hypothetical migration from hypothetical sources at
POT, 1377 Routs 206 (Frinoaton Oismical Besearch) and Folyoall to
      assuming The ^m^^m" possible rate of flow.
    N

3.3 Pi*r?jffffi?n of Sampling Results

     As part of tha RZ, in addition to tha collection of a few soil
and septic sasples, two water-quality sampling events wara perfor&ed.
Tha first sampling svent (November, Deonfoer 1986) included tha
sarpling of 23 WX acnitoring walls; tha second sampling event (June,
July and August 1987) involved tha saapling of 30 WQC scnitoring
walls, a scnitoring wall installed by the KJEEP, and a production wall
at tha 1377 Rout* 206 sits (Prinoatcn Chemical Fssaarch). Thirty-five
domestic and Qizabethtcun water Ocrpany walls wara saspled in June
1986. A second confirmatory round of dcnestie wall saspling was            o
parfoxmd in April 1987 «hich included six KDO walls and two domestic
walls in Rocky Hill Borough. Figure 3 shows tha location of               8
Bonitoring and selected domestic walls that wara sanpled during tha
                                                                          °
                                                                          \o
                                                                          KJ
                                                                          O




                      GERAGHTY & MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 145 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                -16-


     Pricr to this study, vatar-quality analysas had been perforad on
saaples frcn salactad public, privats, industrial and nmr«m1al veils
and industrial/oaaBarcial saptie systems. No sampling avants included
all sampling points (walls) in tha study araa; as such, an overview of
ground-water quality oonditicns at ona point in tiaa (at all vails) is
not available*

     The analysas part onnad en vatar samples for tha RZ ineludad
priority pollutant canpounds plus 40 additional peaks (first sampling
want) and priority pollutant volatila erganios (WCs) plus 15
additional peaks (saccnd sampling avant) . Littla or no documentation
vas raadily available regarding sampling, chain-of-custcoy,
analytical, or QVQC methodologies used for prior or for NX's
ground-water, soil and septic saspling.

3.3.1 Groutimister Quality? Volatile Organic Q^pffTQJg The principal
RI ground-water quality focus is on Trichloroethene (TCE) apparently
because this vas tits most vidaspraad VX found in monitoring,
residential, and irdustriaVccrnercial veils both within and outside
of the araa of the XX focus. TCE concentrations in monitoring and
rasidantial veils for the two WQC grcund-vatar sanpling events are
shewn on Figures 11 and 12.

     A coipariscn of the vatar-level contour saps on Figures 6 and •
vita the TCE distribution shown on Figures 11 and 12 indicates the
following:
     e    She graund-vatar flow and contaminant distribution data
          indicate that tha PGTsite is not the source .of TCE
          contamination in the KZHD veils. Even absent gxcund-vater
         flow data, the presence of clean monitoring and residential
         veils (W-5-D and 29002-28) and residential veil 29002-30
          (86 ppb TCE) between tha POT sit* and aany MHO vails
          indicates other possible sources of TCE ccntaainaticn to the
              veils.
    e    One highest TCE concentrations in residential veils are
         oriented in a vest to east orientation that follows a vest
         to east line just north of the 1977 Route 206 site
         (Flincetcn Qiamical Research) to Cleveland Circle.               0
                                                                           o
     e   Kany potential TCE sources along formation strifes and within
         the BMW capture tone have not been investigated or even         ,-,
         considered in the KZ study. -                                   £
                                                                         fo
                                                                         (—*

                       GERAGHTY & MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 146 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               -17-


     o   Available aonitoring points between the POT site and FHHM
         (JW-9-S and 9-D and Animal Hospital well) have shown very
         low to non-detectable TCE concentrations.
     Although the principal focus of the RX vas TCE contamination,
several other VOC constituents were detected within tha study area
during sanpling mnducted during tha RX and prior sanpling events.
The principal occurrences include:

    o     The presence of benzene in a sanple from the JHMW (75 ppb)
          during a 1979 sanpling event.
     o A March 23, 1982 sanple from the Town and Country Aniaal
          Hospital showed the presence of petroleum-related compounds.
          Freon-related constituents have been detected in aonitoring
          vails 15-D and 16-5 at concentrations greater than 100 ppb
          and in selected domestic wells in the KfflD.
          The presence of TCE and other VX's in acst industrial
          production wells (Ocrpo, Thuls ( Mobil Gas Station, William
          Pern Gas Station, Texaco Gas Station, Xngersoll Rand,
          Folyoell, 1377 Route 206 (Princeton Chemical Research), and
          PG7T) during pre-RI sanpling events.
3.3.2 GmiujiJ Ka^*7* CMfllltvt Hcy^Y Mft^^ ftTffCJriy The XZ Involved
tha sanpling of WOC aonitoring vails and selected residential vails
for Priority Pollutant heavy ratals (November and Dantniher 1986
aonitoring vail sanpling event and June 1986 residential vail sampling
event).

     This sarpling identified the presence of arsenic, chromium, and
lead in excess of drinking water standards. A review of tha heavy
a*tal ground-water quality data indicates tha following!
     e The principal area of concern is at and in proxinity to
          Monitoring Walls 3-S and 3-D as shewn en Figure 13.
          However, if the drinking water standard for lead is lowered
          from 50 ppb to 10 ppb (under consideration by tha U.S
          Environmental Protection Agency), then a broader problem
          area is present for lead as shown en Figure 13.
1    The laboratory reports for tha P»W hava not reported VX
constituents other than TCEi it is cur understanding that tha Rocky
Hill Borough only requests Td results.
2 The POT production veil vas sanpled on four occasions between           0
1980 and 1983; the VDC analytical results showed non-detectable TCC       2
levels for two sanpling events and TCE at 28.7 and 91 ppb for two
sanpling events.                  ;                                       0
                                                                          vO
                                                                          ro
                     GERAGHTYc* MILLER. INC.                          '   ^

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 147 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                  -18-


     o    A comparison of Figures 11 end 12 (TCE concentration) with
          Figure 13 indicates that the highest heavy netal
          concentrations are, for the most part, oriented in e wist to
          east orientation that is similar to the orientation of high
          TCE occurrence* in the MOD walls.
     The KZ did not atteopt to identify possible sources of heavy
natal contamination and no additional water-quality sampling was
conducted in tha RI to better define the possible extent of haavy
natal problems in ground water.

a.3.3 Stf\\ ffiialitYi The KZ soil sampling prcgrum only focused on
selected PRPs. The investigation did not identify any source area for
TCE. The location that showed the highest concentrations of VXs,
semi-volatiles, haavy natals, and PCB's was the 1377 Route 206 site
 (Princeton Chemical Research). Prior soil saspling at this location
has also shown the presence of selected VXs and PCBs in soil.

     Soil ban. ings at the SB3 location (1377 Route 206 Site) showed the
highest VDC (Toluene), semi-volatiles (phenolic cm pounds and
Bis-(2-Ethylhexyl) Phthalate), end heavy natal concentrations in
addition to very high concentrations of nany tentatively identified
compounds which appaar to be petroleum related.

     A nearby monitoring wall (Mf-3-D) has shown the presence of
of the same constituents (e.g., phenols at €3 ppb and
Bis-(2-Ethylhexyl) Phthalate at 58 ppb) as wall as high concentrations
of selected heavy natals.

     The high Toluene oonoantrations in sasples from soil boring SB3
(up to 250,000 ppb) nay have required saaple dilution; tills nay have
resulted in the masking of other VOCS present in the soil sample.

     The soil boring/source identification piuyian does not appear to       ^
                                                                            K
have nade use of the nany historical aerial photos available for the
study area. An axaaple of this is shown en Figure 4 where KZ soil          o
                                                                           o
borings are located outside of a large disturbed area (pees
vegetative stress) just east of the 1377 Route 206 facility.                    o
                                                                           to


                      CERAGHTY & MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 148 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                 -19-


     The principal deficiency in the RI is the failure to identify any
scurce(s) in the soil that would account for the TCE in ground water.

3.3.* Septic Sampling! Curing the RI, samples were obtained from
septic systeas at seven ccnoercial end industrial facilities north of
Route 518 (1377 Route 206, P3T, Friendly* Restaurant, Print Shop, 1501
Route 206, Village Shopper, end William Pann Gas Station). Wiile the
RI sampling did not identify any TCE1 source areas, selected VOCs were
found by WX in septic samples at all seven locations. Moreover,
prior sampling of active septic systeas north of Route 518 by the
JODEP end others identified the presence of VOCs in septic systeas at
the Montgomery Shopping Center, P3T, Princeton Chemical Research (1377
Route 206), and PolyceU facilities. The RI septic sampling, however,'
did not include the sampling of sens indurtriaVcoroercial
establishments which had documented VOC contamination in past sampling
•vents (JACA RAKP)| these facilities include PolyceU, Cccpo
Industries, and Montgomery Shopping Center. In addition, the RI did
not involve any type of investigation/sampling of residential septic
systeas in MHO), despite the identification of that failure as a
deficiency by the DA'S JACA RWP (Page 4-26).

                                                     industrial septic
systeas south of Routs 518 even though several past and present
sources may be in that area. As such, possible past source areas have
not been investigated. Figure 14 shows the locations of several
industrial and •"••""•rel*! septic systeas in this area tlisrlfaod by a
brief Geraghty t Killer, Inc. review of the Montgomery Township Health
Department files.

     Fren a ground-water cleanup and resource protection perspective,
all active septic systeas (residential, industrial, and eommarcial)
represent potential continuing active sources of ground-water             o
contaainaticn. A principal concern is that disposal to these systeas
is unregulated and has, for many sites, not been investigated.            o
                                                                          o
1 Die suRcrary septic tanX analytical results (HOC RI Volume 3 Appendix
B) does not present a complete list of compounds included in the
analysis, nor dees it identify the analytical mthods.

                     GERAGHTY & MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 149 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              -20-




    de following principal data gaps vere noted in the XZs
    o   Uncertainty with respect to1 the vertical extant of
        contamination in that tha "deep * scnitoring veils are open
        hole for aignifieant lengths. Given the MX nonitoring veil
        construction, it is not possible to determine the vertical
        extant of contamination.
    e   Ihe laboratory analytical methods used in both the XZ and
        previous studies have, in most instances, not been specified
        or documented. Neither hava tha nathods of sample
        collection, chain-of-custody, and quality assurance/quality
        control
    e   Sampling locations' (axact sampling points) for tha
        residential vails ara not idantifiad for saaplaa obtainad
        during pravieus studiaa. As an example, xasidantial vaU
        sampling locations could ba a) bafora prassura tank, b) at
        an cutsida tap, c) bafora or aftar treatnant system, ate.
        Zt is poasibla that tha rasidantial veil rasults say ba
        inoonsistant bacausa sanpling points nay hava variad between
        diffarant sanpling avants and quality control/quality
        acsuranca procedures nay also hava variad.
    o   While WOC sampled aaptie systems at savan r****rrl*l/
        industrial establishments, rasidantial septic tanks in tha
        MZHD Nvara not sacplad. Bus, potential impacts from
        rasidantial aaptie systems to ground-water quality hava not
        baan artrtrattart. Koraovar, pravieus KJDEP vork did not
    ^   involva sanpling rasidantial aaptie systaaa avan though tha
        JACA RAMP idantifiad this as a data naad.
    e   Oha facilities south of Xouta Sit vara on saptie systaaa
        until about 1974 ; howavar, abandonad aaptie systaas at tha
        aany eonnarcial and industrial facilities vara not saaplad
        during tha XI, and no soil sampling was conducted in saptie
        drainfialds (except for Prinoeton Volkswagen.) As PFP's in
        this area (Prinoaton Volkswagen, Fifth Dimension, Naoes ft
        Son, and possibly others) have abandoned saptie systaas (no
        documentation was readily available regarding raaoval of old
        aaptie systems) , septic and soil sampling say ba necessary
        to negate responsibility.
    e   Although numerous volatile organic conpounds, in t*m»«*** to   f,
        TCE, vere detected in aonitoring, production and residential   -<
        veils in tha study area, tha XZ does not consider their
        iipact. Zn addition, several heavy natal constituents vere     g
        detected at concentrations in excess of primary and             ^
                                                                       o
                                                                       ^
                                                                       r\>
I Based on Geraghty ft Killer, Zne., telephone eannunicaticn vith
Stony Brook Millstone Sewer Authority.

                              - c' MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 150 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                -21-


          secondary drinking vatar standards and PCS'* van identified
          in both aoil and ground vater at 1377 Bout* 206 (Prinoaton
          Chemical Research) prior to completion of tha RZ.
          Ths area north of Route 518 say be severed in tha future but
          at present there are no new connections allowed to the
          Montgomery Township System. Thess residential and
          ccRsnercial/industrial septic systems will continue to be
          active potential sources of ground-vatsr contamination.
          Because of this, a coiprehensive sampling program of resi-
          dential, caraercial and industrial septic systems is
          critical for problem identification and resource protaction.
          One soil sanpling analytical results in the VI did not
          Identify any sources of TCE contamination in the unsaturated
          zone, but the RZ failed to collect samples at several
          suspect locations. 'Given the composition of the soil in the
          study area, it is unlikely that all volatile organic and
          heavy metal contamination has, ever the past 30 years,
          volatilized or migrated through the soil to tha ground
          vatar. A major deficiency of the study is that no souroe(s)
          have been identified from the results of soil sampling in
          the unsaturated tone, and little attempt was made to locate
          past or present active sources.
3.5 Potentially P^TTTTnffifrfl* Parties

     As is evident from Figure 2 , there are many industrial and
rr**rHil facilities that may have contaminated or are presently
contaminating the ground-vater system at HfflD and ROW.

1377 Routs 206 (Prinoeton Chemical Research)! Ihis facility has
documented soil and ground-vater quality problems (pre-RZ studies}.
In addition, during the RZ, high TCE concentrations (630 ppb) were
found in Ifanitoring Well 4-D. Given the distribution of high TCE and
heavy metal concentrations along a vest to east orientation just north
of the 1377 RouU 206 facility, additional investigations are
warrants* at this facility.
FolyoaUi The discussion for the 1377 RouU 206 facility is also
applicable to the Polyoall facility.
POT Sits: Tha RZ, as dfsmtmrl previously, did not involve an                 c
historical overview of prior industrial and ecranercial land uses
within the study area. A prime axampla of this study deficiency is
the POT sits. This sits was first occupied (early to mid-1962) by        V
Hercules Powder Company and Texas Butadiene and Chemical Company,        ^
_^____»,______
1 This figure, is by no means oonplets, in that little or no
information is readily available for commercial and industrial
facilities south of Fifth Dimension.

                       GERAGHTY ? MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 151 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               -22-


later called Sinclair Oil which has been acquired by Atlantic
Richfield Coqpany. Frinceton Applied Research had operations at this
location prior to JCT. Even today, a part of the aita (including the
septic leach field) is owned by Mr. George Sands C Assnrlutes.
Montgomery Shopping Canter? Ihia facility reportedly uses two septic
systems. Pre-Ri sampling has shown the presence of selected VDC'a in
septic system samples at high eoncentrationa.
Fifth Diaensiont TCT acquired in 55-gallon drums, was reportedly used
at this facility which was in operation in Montgomery Township frcn
1961 to 1969. Because the facility used a aeptie system for disposal
prior to about 1974 and is within tha capture tone of tha RH«W (Refer
to Figure 9), the absence of any investigation or discussion of
oparationa at this facility is a aajor study deficiency.
Joseph J. Kernes I Sens: Ihis facility reportedly used a septic
system until about 1974 and is within tha capture zone of the
Goodyeart Goodyear operates A service facility (four service bays)
adjacent to tha ROOT. During ft sits visit in April 1988, three to
four drums ware present at the rear of this facility (close to FKMH);
soil staining was evident where the drums ware located. Ihe absence
of investigation or aention of this facility during tha RI is another
major deficiency of the study given Goodyear's proximate location to
the ROT.
     Tnis discussion of facilities and activities that might have
affected grouncVwater quality is baaed on the following factors;
  . e    2ha current, albeit liaitad, understanding of shallow and
         deep ground-water flow conditions.
     o    3ne present, again scnauhat liaitad, understanding of VOC
          and heavy natal contamination in ground water.
     e    Septic syataa usage both north and south of Bouts 511.
     o    The orientation and dimensions of the capture cone for tha
         RMf.




                                                                        o
                                                                        o




                     CERACHTY & MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 152 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                 -23-


                                OF FEaSIBIUIV STOW


4.1 Review ef Pfooos«*1

     Based en a review of Woodward-Clyde Consultants Feasibility Study
(FS) and the Proposed Keaadial Action Plan, it is evident that
alternatives SB and 7 ax* tha preferred HJEEP altamativac. Both
alternatives leuummeid punping and the use of air stripper(s) for VDC
treatment vithin what is oonaidarad to ba tha primary source araa.
Proposed pimping would ba at a rata of 350 gpn par vail and tha pmyad
vatar is proposad to ba injected into a sariaa ef injection valla
aftar treataent. 3he principal oaanants will ba focuaad en
altamativaa SB and 7 which involva punping frca thraa racovary walla
and injacting tha traatad vatar into inj action walls. Figuraa 15 and
16 shew tha locations of racovary and injaction walls for altamativaa
SB and 7 raapactivaly.

     lha aajor ccnoama that naad to ba aflrtrtttart ooncaming tha
proposad rcnadial altamativaa includa:
              \
  . o lha prcpcsad altamativaa involva tha traatanant of raccvarad
   ^      ground watar for VDC raocval. Ona injaction of tha VDC
          traatad watar could saxva to apraad oontanination ef
          untraatad ccnatituants such as haavy natals and
          scmi-volatilas frca araas.of conoarn/racovary to araas that
          ara prasantly unaffactad by such contaadnants.
    o     Injaction into tha Brunswick Formation is difficult givan
          tha ganarally low aquifar hydraulic charaetaristics in this
          badrccJc systan. Othar atsori atari prcblana ralats to tha
          potantial for air antrainmant and consaquent hydraulic
          capacity lossas frca tha injaction ef air strip sad watar,
          and potantial ancrustaticn problems and associated hydraulic
          capacity lossas. This typa ef cparation will raguira
          axtansiva wall-head naintananoa and rehabilitation. This
          will result in frequent setup of drilling rigs for injection
          wall redevelopment and will ultimately impact project costs.
          Zf tha traatad watar does not aaat applicable drinking watar   K
                                                                          o
          standards, injection wy ba prohibited by the K3EGP
          injection well regulations.
                                                                         o
          The proposed cleanup of ground-water contamination at the       ^
          subject Superfund Sites has a nurtber of shortcomings, sost
          notably tha continued disposal into septic systen              §
          (oatnarcial, industrial and residential) north of Route 518    w
                                                                         CD
                     CERAGHTY & MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 153 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               -24-


         within tha study area. As such, uncontrolled disposal
         activities will continue that Bay in the present and future
         continue to ispair ground-water quality conditions.
         Alternative SB has injection wells within tha capture zone
         of tha P»W and at locations where site specific
         investigations have not been f****.^^ at PBP's (Figure 15).
    o    Alternative SB also has injection vails adjacent to tha 1377
         Route 206 and Polyodl Facilities (Figure 15). Prior
         studies have identified soil and ground-water contamination
         at these facilities (VOCs and PCB's). Injection adjacent to
         these facilities «ay serve to spread cut existing
         contamination problems.
     Tha principal technical deficiencies in tha IS include:
     e Tha absence of a technical rationale for recovery veil
          placement vis-a-vis a capture tone analysis.
     o    Tha absence of an analysis of punping rates that aay be
          required to contain the supposed primary contaminant plume.
     o Tha failure to consider potential iapacts of injection en
          contaminant migration from a hydraulic and ground-water flow - -•
          prospective.
     o Tha seaming lack of consideration of inherent PJ
          uncertainties (such as shallow and deep ground-water flow,
          vertical distribution of contaminants, non-identification of
     x
          source areas, ate.) with respect to feasibility of
          remediation using alternatives SB and 7.
     Logically, alternative 2 appears to solve all tha public health
and welfare concerns. If tha objective of tha K7EEP is resource
protection and cleanup for its own sake, in excess of p-ih1ip health
and welfare needs, it is imperative that tha KJDEP ifVlrrtut all of
tha ground-water quality problems exposed by tha PJ/F5 so that an
effectual resource cleanup can be conducted. Specifically, such a
cleanup would, of necessity, need to address:

    e    Heavy natal contamination found in Monitoring Walls 3.-Sand
         3-D and in proximate residential vails (Figure 13). *
     o   Semi-volatile organic ccrpounds found in JW-3-0 and also in          f,
         tha vicinity of tha 1377 property.               .                   •<
     o   PCB contamination that has bean found both in soil and                g
         ground water at tha 1377 Scute 206 property.                          ^
                                                                                  o
                                                                                  ro

                     GERAGHTY c> MILLER. INC.                                 ^

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 154 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                -25-


          Jreon-related ccrpounds that hava teen found in vonitoring
          vails W-15-D and W-16-S and in several residential vails.
          Potential ground-water quality problem doungradiant of tha
               Industries. facility.
     e    Ground-water Quality prdbleans awcintert vith tha IngersoU
          Band facility (TOE has been detected in era or sera of tha
          Ihgersoll Rand production vails) •
      jh summary, tha IS is at bast praconoaptual. No assessment has
been Bade of the hydrcgaologic and hydraulic feasibility of the
pi ope* ad remedies. The RX supposedly developed an understanding of
ground-water flow and contaminant migration as vail as an
understanding of aquifer hydraulic characteristics. The IS should, of
necessity, have incorporated this understanding into the evaluation of
alternatives. A great deal of additional vorJc vill be necessary to
first understand the types, sources, and distribution of contamination
in ground water and shallow/deep flow conditions, and second to aiteit
the hydraulic feasibility of pusping, containment, and injection as
veil as to assess potential problems that could develop as a result of
injection.
                \
4.2 PuE               fesgvent Review

       As an introduction, uiuund water use at the subject Superfund
 Sites has been altered over the past few years in that a) a treataent
  system has been operative on the RHMW for the past few years and b)
 hcnecvners in the HUD are already or will •eon be connected to a
  public water supply system. As such, no health risks exist in terms
  of use or contact vith contaminated ground water. Accordingly, the
• WOC assessment, described below, is not realistic.                          •


     A review and recalculation of the health risks in the Public
Health Assessment (HA) was performed to compare the findings *of the
PiA with the selection of remedial alternatives. A review of the RA
showed that the authors followed the basic steps outlined in the HA      i
public health assessment guidance document and that tha approach used
to calculate cancer risk and hazard indices was very conservative in     §
that naxisum concentrations were used in the HA calculations.            ^
                                                                         CO
                                                                         o
                      CERACHTY ^ MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 155 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   -26-


     Sacalculation by Geraghty 6 Killer, Inc. of tha human cancer
risks (lifatina for adults and 12 years for childran) associated with
tha ingestion, dermal contact, and inhalation of contaminants in
ground vatar auch as thoaa found in tha study area showed that tha
increased cancer risk associated with ingestion is 8.0 x 10-2 (adult)
and 2.4 x 10-2 (child) ; deraal contact, 1.7 x 10-6 (adult) and 1.2 x
10-6    (child)i and inhalation 1.4 x 10-5 (adult) and 1.3 x 10-5
(child) . Overall, tha total cancer risk associated with ground-water
exposure is 8.0 x 10-2 (adult) and 2.4 x 10-2 (child) (Table Dl in
Appendix D).
                               ••

     The cancer risk from ingestion of ground vatar containing tha
described contaminants is greater than the USERA target risk range of
10-4   to 10-6. For this reason, the risk associated vith ground-vater
ingestion vould have to be artlressfifl in the feasibility study. The
aajor portion of the cancer risk value vas attributed to arsenic vhieh
vas only present in one monitoring veil (duplicate sanple from
MW-3-D1) at a concentration above drinking water standards.

       da cancerNrisk associated vith A*™*] contact and inhalation of
such .ground vater (for exazple, vhile vashing or bathing) vas within
the USEPA target risk range and by itself vould not necessitate
remediation even if the public were to use the ground vater, vhieh it
win not.

     The non-carcinogenic risks associated vith metals and volatile
organic chemicals reported in ground-vater samples were also
recalculated. As stated in the HA, the hazard index is a ratio
between calculated dose intake (GDI) in the numerator to the reference
dose (RfD)in the denominator. The RfD represents the highest dosage
that vill not elicit a harmful effect. Hazard indices that exceed one
suggest that a harmful affect aight be observed in the population.

     The hazard indices that corresponded to ingestion, dermal            o
contact, and inhalation of ground vater were recalculated (Table IB in    —
                                                                          a
       The other tuple from W-3D showed non-detectable levels of
       arsenic.
                      GERAGHTY 0* MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 156 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Appendix O). The hazard indax associated with tha ingesticn of water
exceeded one in 6 of 11 indicator chemicals. The highest indices were
arsenic (110 (adult), 190 (child)}; lead (62 (adult), 110 (child)},
and chromium (3.4 (adult), 4.0        (child)) which tha proposed
alternatives do not address at all.
                                                     +


     The total hazard indax associated with tha ingesticn of ground
water was 1BO (adult) and 316 (child) • The contribution of organic
chemicals to tha total hazard indax was 3 (adult) and 5 (child) with
tha remainder attributed to tha inorganic aatals. These values isply
that tha nan-carcinogenic risks ara vary high and exceed acceptable
eritaria.

     All other calculations of tha hazard indices asvriatert with the
dermal contact, and inhalation of ground water ware lass than one.
These values iaply that tha non-carcinogenic risks associated with
exposure would be below acceptable criteria levels.

     The carcinogenic risks and hazard indices associated with the
ingesticn, dermal contact and inhalation of ground water pose cancer
risk levels greater than tha USLPA target risk, range and hazard
indices greater than accepted dosages. These results suggest that if
active remedial alternatives ara chosen, they should address both
types of health risk and include nethods to remove organic chemicals
(volatile and semi-volatile) and heavy metals from tha ground water
prior to use.

                          Isolation

     The Rft did not address the No Action (that is, 'no further
action, beyond the EP\ BOO action) and Aquifer Zsolaticn alternatives
in any detail. Tha Aquifer Zsolaticn alternative warrants
consideration for tha following reasons:                                2
                                                                        -<
     o   Bomeounars ara already or will be connected -to a public
         water supply system.                                           o


                                                                        CO
                                                                        N)
                     CERACHTY P MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 157 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             -28-


         Bdsting dcnaatio valla vill ba aaalad urdar this
         altamativa.
         Mb nav valla ara allowed in tha "af factad" araa.
    o    Attasptad aquifer claanup ty tha p^'cpoaad altcrnativac is
         quastionabla in thatt
             .Many aourcaa (documentad and poaslbla) vithin and
              outaida of tha "af factad" araa vill raoain

              Continuad input fmu rasidantial t cxmiuarcial and
              industrial aaptic eystama vill continua to **r*ir
              grcund-vatar quality.
              Oia pi-opoaad traatnent aathod doaa not addraaa haavy
              natal and aami-volatila contamination in tha ground
              vatar.
              Oha injaction of VDC txmatad vatar aay rasult in tha
              •praading out of haavy natal contamination to
              unaffactad araaa.
                                  Raspactfuny Subnittad,
                                           t XZLZSl, INC.


                                  carol 8. Grazf
                                  Principal Sciantist
                                       \/ \^ VJ*^
                                   r
                                  viinoW H. T9ilf Jr.
                                  Vioa Prasidant
NP0885PHV051288.KPT




  __^_____
   EPA study (1985) haa danonatratad tha introduction of VX'a into         ~<
   idantial aaptie ayatana, particularly on vaakards.
                                                                       o


                                                                      CO
                                                                      CO
                      CERAGHTY ^ MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 158 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                 -29-




       01 mental Protection Agency, Determination of Toxic Chemicals in
       Effluent frcn Household Septic Systems. EPA/600/2-B5/050, April
       1985.
JACA Corporation, Remedial Action Master Plan, Kontgonery Township
    Housing Develcpnent, Somerset County, Hew Jersey. ' April 1984.
J.M.    Serge, 'inc. Sanpling and Analysis Plan Result* and Additional
       Sanpling Plan for Routes 206 end 518 Facilities, Princetcn
       Gama-Tech, Inc. October 31, 1987.
Rogers, Golden t Kalpem and EMC Martin. Remedial Action Master Plan,
     Rocky Kin Municipal Wellfield, Rocky Kill, Somerset County, New
     Jersey. August 1984.
Woodward-Clyde Consultants, Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
     for Montgomery Township Housing Develcjnent/RocXy Hill Municipal
     Wellfield Site. Volume 1, Volume 2 and Volume 3. April 1988.




                                                                          3:
                                                                          CD


                                                                          o
                                                                          o

                                                                           o
                                                                           vO
                                                                           w


                       GERAGHTY & MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 159 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   Apppmrx x
'                          «%
    X7ECP Zab Shaet f er PCT Septic Tank Saapllng
               en KOvnibtr 19, 1979.




                                                    o
                                                    o




          CERAGHTY & MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 160 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                          STREAM OR MASTEWATER ANALYSIS

                                                          INFORMATION
                                                   11
                                      •sVr*                        Dtu of Collection
                                                                   Hour r?<V
Simple No.                                                         Composite Period
                                                                   CollKUd by__
                                                                   Reilduil Chlorine:
runt
Stmm
Loatlon                                                            Tempentun'
DucripUen tnd Rtmtriu:                             ^a^
                                     ITEMS ClUCHO IEIOW AMI UNSATItPACTOMY
             Dilutioni                                               0 2                        10.f
                                                            10.1      -
               (Btcuriolofiaj)
                                             LABORATORY RESUin
                                                   SACTI BIOLOGICAL
Collfom MPN/100 ml.                                (Confirmed Tctt); Ftai Celiferm MPN/100 ml. .
      StrtptoeoccduMPNAOO ml.                                                Other



                           CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL ANALYSIS dn|iJVur. •nlm MMnrfu wutf)




       Turbidity (unlti)             Aih
                                     TeUl Solids                   Chroadura Total                  t/
       Acidity to pK 4               AA                            ChromhMB Hex.                           1550
       AIki!!nltytepH4                                             Ortho-PO4
                                     MB AS                         Copptr
       NItnUN                        Fhnob                         Utd
       ABmonU N                      COD                           Amnle
       ToU!Xj«1.N                    bm                            tine
                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                           DECS 0*19/9            o
                                        HOCHEMlCAL OXVOtN
                                                                                                                  o
    ruid o.o.                        Ub.D.O.                $**d Kequlrtd:           Y«   m
                                                                                            - * Wi^^U 1 00.       V0
                                                                                                                  CO
  UnpleCene.%        W^              04   OJ        O.I     1.0   2.0    S.O         10   2S     SO   71    100
   BOOt


    PAXT1 .CHEMtSTKT COPT        J


                                                                                                   *Ci»T     iw

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 161 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                     •P. 3/4
 IV.V    Z3 '88 09:29 WOODWftPD-CLYDE NJ.201 7B5 0C23
                                 ^JERSEY STATE OEPAfcSrMINTOF.Hli
                                  : • REAM OR WASTEWATtR ANALYSIS
                                           *             KM 7 Buffl'Hir*' •
                                          FIELD INFORMATION
         OK PRINT
                                                         iSftlfc''--^ "-•!-'&•
                                                                                         njtlm   ^vJC«(MM « «M* ,


I* NO.                                                         Composite Period ^C«^Ll^Iftt«ivaI.
                                                               Collected by.
                                                                        Immediate,
                                                                        Developed.
                                                               Flow Rate       ..
                                                               Temperature,
?Uon and Remiriu:


                              ITEMS CIRCLCD BELOW ARE UNSATISFACTORY
         Dilutions R»<            Ua, r~r"i67i
                                         i
                                               j^2                      10.3     tp.^J 10.&. 10*
                                                                                     1
           (Backrriolc
                                     LABORATOHY RESULTS
                                           BACTERIOLOGICAL

 »MPN/100mL •
                  ____                     (Confirmed Teit); Fecal Coliform MPN/100 ml.
 lr«}>toeocci:MrN/lOO ml..                ,_____________ Other ——————



                         CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL ANALYSES               tMr. unlcu oUitrwiM Mtotf I

 Colut (unlu)                 Oilorlde                        Sulfato
 Udor (coM^                   6u&pended Solids                Grease & Ofl             * -<^cf«^f . J n^«-                  I*


 Ttubidity (units)            Ach                             Cyanide                     ofK^f            • aV
 PB '. -                      Total Solids                    Chromium Total             rt^(KA»(dt«i          I^JO
  Acidity to pH 4             AA                              Chsomium Hex.              ht;tWo4L«s^ f fy^C96C
  Wk.tlnfty to pH 4           Total PO4                       Ortho>?O4                  f«c^ro£.                  •
                                                                                                                       ir
  VitriteN                    MBA8                            Copper
                                                                                                                                      -c
  VitrateN                    Phenol*                         Lead                                             •
  %mmonia N                                                                                                                       o
                              COD                             Arsenic                    n -» try •., ;.' .'iiTf- 1 1 ran         o
  PotMlKj*l.N                 Iron                            Zinc                               tutcuct uuiu u na # 4
                                                                                                                                 o
                                                                                                 MAR 31980                       ^
                                                                                                                                 CO

                                 •IOCHCMICAL OXYGEN OCMANO (matJVMr)

  dD.O.                       Ub.D.O.                     Sted Required:         Yet       W. MoVrJiiaiU 1 00.
  • Conc.%          B&&      0.1 0.2           0.5       1.0    2.0    S.O       10     25    60     75     100
  >B                                                 .

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 162 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         £3 '08 09:3)    WOODWARD-CLYDE NJ.S01 785 0023                                                      P. 4/4
                                       rJEpfrSlSTATt DEPARTMENT OF HE*         \
                                        »TREAM 0« MAiTEWATiK ANALYSIS


II TV^I Ort MINT
•AlLFOiNT MN
                                    " t) ^ fc



                                                              Composite Period^/
                                                              Collected by,__
                                                              Residual Chlorine:
                                                                        Immediate
                                                                    Developed
                                                              FlowRaU -'——
lion                                                          Temperature
ription and Remarks:


                                  ITEMS CIHCLEO BELOW ARE UNSATISFACTORY
         Dilutions Requested                            JLfl-J. Jftl TToT^loT               IQ.&I iQ.61
             (Bacteriological)
                                            LABORATORY RESULTS
                                                BACTERIOLOOICAL

arm MPN/100 ml. ____                            (Confirmed Test); Fecal Collform MPN/100 ml.
 Streptococci :MPN/100 ml..                     ————————————— Other                              •



                            CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL ANALYSES <m|tJlittr. wnlttt •thcrwist *ot«rf>

j Color (uniU)                    Chloride                    SulfsU                       Other Determinations I
1
    Odor (cold)                   Suspended Solids            Crease ft Ofl             < V0^«-^, ^S^atJ^
    Turbidity (units)             Ash                         CVanlde                   - rt^0;7!&! ^Sfff
    PH                            Total Solids                Chromium Total                •      ^/^       •
    Acidity to pH 4               Ash                         Chromium Hex.                DfUi^ff^.     [SS O I
    Alkalinity to pH 4            Total PO4              .    Ortho-POi                      Oprvt/)^                   t^2-
    Nitrite N                     MBAS                        Copper                        •toijLittJe-                1*15
    Nitrate N                     Phenols                 .   Lead                                                             c
    Ammonia N                     COD                         Arsenic                   p
    Tottl Kiel. N                 Iron                        Zinc

                                                                                             DEC2 0 1379
                                    • BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (mft^iter)          •                                              (.0
                                                                                                     *rn«i tti^f-r fm              CD

Field D.O.                       Lab.DX>.                S*«J RMMired: ''      YM           «». tf MW6»ryjo I OB.
npleCone.%          ft^ff        04   OJ         0.5    14) 2.0 5.0            10           25          50        75     200
*ODs

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 163 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 1.       Woodward-Clyde Consultants Monitoring Well
               Construction Details
                    Well          Screen
Well                Depth         Interval
Number              (ft bgs)      (ft bgs)
Shallower
1-8                   20           9.5    19.5
2-8                   21             11   21
3-8                   65          44.5.   64.5
3-D                   98             68   88
4-8                   20           9.5    19.5
5-8                   36             16   36
6-8                   40             20   40
7-8                   42          21.5    41.5
9-8                   4?          26.5    46.5
10-8                  47          26.5    46.5
11-8                  25             5    25
13-S                  20            10    20
14-S                  19             9    19
15-S       v          26           5.5    25.5
16                    82          58.7    80
17                    82          58.6    80
                      80          57.7    79

                                  Open Hole
                                  (ft bgs)
Deeper Hells
1-D                   150           21 - 150
2-0                   150           21 - 150
4-D                   150           20 - 150
5-D                   150           36 - 150
6-D                  100            40 - 100
7-D                  150            42 - 150
9-D                  250            47 - 250
10-D                 250            47 - 250
11-D                 250            25 - 250
13-0                 250            20 - 250
14-0                 150            19 - 150                o
15-0                 250            26 - 250                -<
19                   151           29.4 - 151
                                                            o
Not*:                                                       o
ft bgs • feet below ground surface

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 164 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  OCHAONTY * MUCH. MC.
               rruor ARC* TMBUTARY STREAM
               OftAMAOeS * TOPOOMAPMC MVRME




0^60   TOO ,

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 165 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 166 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 167 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

N

          • SB-4




                              •SB-3

                                        SB-1*
                                        SB-2*


                                                o            •DISTURBED AREA




        LEGEND

•SB-4    SOIL BORING AND NUMBER


D        DISTURBED AREA
                                                    GERAGHTY ft MILLER, INC.
                                           DISTURBED AREA EAST OF*1377 ROUTE 206
         1377 ROUTE 20»                        (PRINCETON CHEMICAL RESEARCH)
         POLYCELL                                PROM 1174 AERIAL PHOTO AND
                                              NEARBY Rl SOIL SAMPLING LOCATIONS
         MONTGOMERY SHOPPING CENTER

                                                PITNEY, HARDIN, KIPP * SZUCH
0   100 200      300 400   600    600
r=^                                                                            SMQWM

SCALE                                   A: Millet. In. hrr   .*   guft*          I'll

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 168 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

N




    FIFTH DIMENSION




                                  DISTURBED AREA




              0     100 200           300 400   500   600
                                                  =3
                                                  FEET



                      GERAGHTY * MILLER, MC.
                          DISTURBED AREA
                                                            o
                    EAST OF FIFTH DIMENSION SITE            o
                      FROM 1M1 AERIAL PHOTO


                  PITNEY, KARDIN, KIPP A SZUCH
          . tirraplm                  MAY        tHOWH
          A: Millet, liu
                           *** ^
                           • '• • •
                                      PADULA
                                      (MA'M        I'M   51

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 169 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

•f   t   r

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 170 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         GERAGHTY A MILLER, INC.
        WATER-LEVEL CONTOUR MAP
        PGT FACILITY AND VICINITY
             SHALLOW WELLS
                 MAY 4,1988

    PITNEY, HARDIM, KIPP & SZUCH
   Gerafhly                           SHOWN
                    PAPULA'
A Miller. Inc.          - '             •/It




        MW-4S




                                      •CALC

                                       FEET




                                LEGEND

                   ,„,•.» MONITOR WELL AND
                          NUMBEH

                     105     LINE OP EQUAL
                             WATER-LEVEL
                             ELEVATION (MSL)
                           (DASHED WHERE MFERftEO)

                                                     -c

                                                 o
                                                 o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 171 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 172 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 173 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             MGV   001   0949
  MOOZS t MM iNNlHVN'AJNiM
MO"U JO MOU33MM
  ONV lUtt NONIXVW ONMOSSV
NOUVUOM TOUaMAMAM JO S3MV

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 174 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   omtncNc cmcciniMnoMS «
                            * MO OUXMKN




OS60   TOO   A9W

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 175 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

t   •   •   r   r

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 176 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          MGY   001
                                      0952
K30ZS » MM 1MUVN 'A3IUM

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 177 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   SCUCTCO COMMCHCIJM..




CS60   TOO   A9W

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 178 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 179 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 180 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Water-Urvel Data for Geraghty t Killer, Inc. ••
April 12 and May 4, 1988 teasurcntnt Events.




                                                  3:
                                                  CD


                                                  o
                                                  o

                                                   o



            CERAGHTY ^ MILLER. INC

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 181 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Appendix B.   Ground Water Elevation Measurements
              Gereghty ft Miller, Inc. - April 12, 1968
                                 Measuring Depth       Water
                Measuring          Point       to      Level
Well              Point          Elevation Water    Elevation
Number         Description       (ft smsl) {[ft bmp) (ft amsl)

MW-1S          Outer Casing        141.97      10.65   91.32
MU-1D          Outer Casing        101.93      34.63   67.30
MW-2S          Inner Casing         61.09      12.44   48.65
MU-2D          Inner Casing         -61.34     20.64   40.70
MU-3S          Inner Casing        142.64      47.13   95.51
MW-3D          Outer Casing        143.42      47.96   95.46
MW-4S                            —————— DRY —————— 003.30
MW-4D           Inner Casing       122.91      20.44  102.47
MW-5S                            ——————— DRY ——————— 005.60
MW-5D          Inner Casing        142.07      43.64   98.43
MW-6S          Inner Casing        146.94      35.74  111.20
MW-6D          Outer Casing        148.17      37.61  110.56
MW-7S          Outer Casing        146.04      31.87  114.17
MW-7D          Outer Casing        145.50      35.29  110.21
MW-9S          Outer Casing        151.63      38.34  113.29
MW-9D          Inner Casing        151.88      48.86  103.00
MW-10S         Outer Casing        154.41      38.55  115.86
MW-10D         Outer Casing        153.02      49.07  103.95
MW-11S         Outer Casing        no. 35      21.87  108.48
MW-11D         Outer Casing        129.81      25.15  104.66
MU-13S         Outer Casing        113.37      11.32  102.05
MW-13D         Outer Casing        112.42      20.06   92.36
MW-15S         Outer Casing        126.25      18.98  107.27
MW-15D         Outer Casing        125.20      21.13  104.07
MW-16          Inner Casing        125.42      17.25  108.17
Mw-n           Outer Casing        141.45      34.16  107.27
MM-18          Outer Casing        115.97      10.85  105.12


Notes:
ft amsl   feet above mean sea level
ft bmp    feet below measuring point
                                                                 o
                                                                 o


                                                                 cn
                                                                 -si

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 182 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Appendix B. Ground Water Elevation Measurements
(continued) Ceraghty « Miller. Inc. - May 4*. 1988
                                 Measuring Depth      Water
                Measuring          Point      to      Level
Well              Point          Elevation Water   Elevation
Number         Description       (ft am«l) (ft bap) (ft amsl}

 MW-13         Inner Casing        100.60      8.94      91.66
 MW-1D         Inner CM ing        101.45     36.32      65.13
 MW-2S         Inner Casing          61.09    12.96      48.13
 MW-2D         Inner Casing        , 61.34    20.82      40.52
 MW-3S         Inner Casing        142.64     48.17      94.47
 MW-3D         Inner Casing        143.02     48.57      94.45
 MW-4S                           ——————— DRY ....... . <103.30
 MW-4D         Inner Casing        122.91      21.16    101.75
 MW-5S                           ——————— DRY ——————— <105.60
 KW-5D         Inner Casing        142.07      44.99     97.08
 MW-6S         Inner Casing        146.94      35.60    111.34
 MW-6D         Inner Casing        147.74      37.94    109.80
 MW-7S         Inner Casing        145.26      32.45    112.81
 MW-7D         Inner Casing        145.26      36.31    108.95
 MW- 95        Inner Casing        150.29      39.30    110.99
.MW-9D         Inner Casing        151.88      49.44    102.44
 MW-10S        Inner Casing        153.50      39.11    114.39
 MW-10D        Inner Casing        152.75      49.58    103.17
 MH-11S        Inner Casing        129.98      23.57    106.41
 MW-11D        Inner Casing        128.64      25.63    103.21
 MW-13S        Inner Casing        111.81      11.70    100.11
 MW-13D        Inner Casing        112.13      22.30     89.83
 MU-15S        Inner Casing        125.50      19.74    105.76
 MW-15D        Inner Casing        124.88      22.54    102.34
 MW-16         Inner Casing        125.42      17.96    107.46
 MW-17         Inner Casing        141.20      34.56    106.64
 MW-18         Inner Casing        115.64      11.15    104.49



Notes:
ft amsl   feet above nean sea level                              o
ft bi»p   feet below measuring point
                                                                 o
                                                                 o

                                                                 o
                                                                     vO
                                                                     CP
                                                                     CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 183 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Appendix B.       Ground Water Elevation Measurements
Icontinued)       Princeton Gamma-Tech Site
                  Geraghty t Miller. Inc. - May 4, 1988
                                       Measuring Depth     Water
                  Measuring              Point      to     Level
Well                Point              Elevation Water   Elevation
Number           Description           (ft am»l) (ft bmp) (ft amsl)

PCT-1S                PVC                142.04    31.11   110.93
PGT-2S               Steel               144.22    31.51   H2.71
PCT-3S               PVC                 141.89    31.58   110.-31
PGT-4S               PVC                 143.92    34.19   109."73
WCC-7S                PVC                145.40    32.45   112.95




Notes:
ft amsl   feet above mean sea level
ft bmp    feet beloH measuring point




                                                              o
                                                              o

                                                            o
                                                            •0
                                                            (J1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 184 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

VCC Wat«r-Tabl« Contour Map* for Deep ttnitoring
 Wall*; n»~mK.r 13, 1986 and August 21, 1987.




                                                   -<

                                                   o
                                                   o

                                                   o
                                                   vO
                                                   0^
                                                   o


           CERAGHTY fir MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 185 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

1
    • • ii
:*#r;        7r

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 186 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 187 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

fiissnary of Human Canosr Risks and Hazard Index.




                                                     12
                                                     c>
                                                     -a
                                                    o
                                                    o

                                                    o
                                                    o
                                                    (>
          CERAGHTYc* MILLER. INC.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 188 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            fw»it Ce-ncer tick*

••vtt •!        CvnstltiMiit/IURl                  A 1 t I                                         Cancer        Cancer
!••••<"•       •••••rtc-tf C*nee-iitr*tl*«      (••/kf/dey)                  CM                    lick          lick
                                              Malt       CMM            (•fl/kt/4ay)              «tf«lt        CM 1 4


fr«mc? Vattr

                Artvitic       .1f4      5.S R If**       1.4 R If
                                                                   •J
                                                                          1.5 R   If1       f.f R If*2          1.4 R If
                                                  .4               •4
                CkUr*4»na .fffS          f.4 R If         1.4   R 1f      1.41              1.4 R If"           4.1    R If


                1,1-fCI                                            •4
                               .f44                                                                                      If

                »CI            .•51          1.5 R If**   4.5 R If• 4    5.1 R If*
                                                                                        2
                                                                                            r.? R If*' t.i R If
                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                    •
                                                                   •5
                tci                                                                                                      If

                tffil flfK VIA Ifflffltf                                                    f.f R If*2          1.4 R If

 Mrac-t Cc-ntvct

                              .1f«       1.1 • 1f* f      f.f i 1f" §     1.5 • if1         i.r « If            l.t ii H

                               .ft*)     l.f     « If' 1 * l.f • If'1' 1.41*                S.X • If        1
                                                                                                            ' 1.4 • If        1
                                                                                                                                '

                1,1*fCf       .*44 1.5 R If**             l.f   • If*'    5.f • I f * 1 1.5 • If*               l.f    « If**

               •M             .*»)       S.1 ii U**       ».! ii If**     5.1 • 1f* 2 1.4 • If*                 1.1 • If**
                                              7
               tM            f . 4 5S.f R If*              f.f R fVf      |.l    i It* 14.*        R If         S.f R If'*
                                                                                                                f
               ttf*l flfK VI* fltNAl CfltACt                                                l.f    R If*            *f ' f***

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 189 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              C«ne«r


••«t* »f      C»«ttlt««M/IUiiU««             • I t I                     .        Ccitecr    C»nc«r
                                                                                  RUk
                     (M/ll            Melt             CkIM      (••/hf/4»r>     Atfvlt     Chlltf


             ••/•'

              cki»r»oiit .MM» 1. 1 • it*' r.r « it'1 i.*i                      i.s « it*7 i.r « it*r
              1,1 -»et       .tisi   1.1 • it*' 1.1 • it* 9        i.u          1.4 • it* 9 i.s • it* 9
              »CI            .tilt   I.S • It* 9   1.4 • It* 9     1.? « 1t*S 1.4 • It* 9   1.4 • It'1
                                                                                  •


              TCI            .tits   i.t • it*9    i.r « it*9      4.4i « it* s i.s » it*' r.t '•• it*'
              tttdt RISK fid ItMUTItt                                          1.4 • It*9   I.S • 1C*'
                                                                                      t

rtm cocci us*                                                                  t.t • it** 2.4 • it* 2



  C«nc«r Mlcncir Pcctvr



•Mf.RlUt

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 190 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                      C*n««lti*«itt/IU.I«m          C t. I
   ••«tt »ff         MMrtvd C»m*ntratl«ii         CM/H/day)                   IFt
   !•»•••'•               (M/D                Adult        Child           (M/kt/d«y)               *tf«lt              Child




       iMMttm         Ar**nl0     I        s.s . It*1      ».s .It*1       S.t R     It*'       1.1 .        It'    l.t     . It'

                                                                      .<                .»                                    t




                      Mrlm        l.S      4.4 . It*2      1.1 • It        S.t .It          *   l.S                 S.S
                                                                                        .§
                                  t.t17                                                                                      It'


                                  t.tttS   t.4 . It**      l.S • It*'
                                                                    .»
                                                                           S.t .     It*'
                                                                                        .«
                                                                                                1.7*.        It*'   S.t . It*         1




                      Chrralm     t.4      l.S . It*
                                                       2
                                                           l.t   .It *     S.t .It          *   S.4                 4.t
                                                                      .t                .«                     .1
                       1,1-tCI    t.t44                                                                                      It*1

                                                                                            1
                                 ' t.17    •.1 . I t
                                                       2   1.1 .1t*1       l.t .     It*        «.S . It'           1.1 . It      2




                       • lOtl     t.S4 t.7 . It*1          1.7 .It*2       S.t .It*
                                                                                            2
                                                                                                4.t . It*'          t.s .    It*1



                                           S.I . It*
                                                       1
                                                           t.t .It*1       S.t .     It*1       1.7                 S.t
                                                       1                   S.t .1t*S
                                           l.S . It*       1.7 .It*1                            7.S . 1t*      2
                                                                                                                    l.S . It*         1




                      rci            • • - ..•t
                                  t.4$                     • •    ..•*     •   «     ..•J       •    d              t   m         *




                                                                               ttm              Itt                 S14

                                                                               trffvnU            S.t                 S.t
                                                                                                177                 Sit




9960   TOO     A9W

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 191 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         . is:
                                                         •   ! ••
                                                         !




                                         •
                                         i r
                                         i i
o
o     <•<•«••
      - * " 5                                                        i
(I?




                                                             V   ^



                                                             1. :




             •   •   • • •   •   *   •       •   •   •




         S

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 192 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ATTACHMENT D




               O
               o

               O
               vO
               ^
               0>

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 193 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  to Discuss
          Complttion of the Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
                                    for tha
                    Montgomery Township Bousing Development
                                    and tha
                        Rocky Hill Municipal Vt11fieId
                                Superfund Sites
                           Thursday. May 12. 1988
                                   7:00 PM
                   Montgomery Township Municipal Building
                               2261 Routs 206
                       Montgomery Township. Mew Jersey



1.   Opening Remarks and          Ma. Grace Singer. Chief
     Introductions                Bureau of Community Relations
                                  Division of Hazardous Site Mitigation
                                  NJDEP
     Site History and             Mr. Kevin Psarianos, Site Manager
     Project Overview             Bureau of Site Management
                                  Division of Hazardous Site Mitigation
                                  NJDEP
     Statua Report on             Ma. Kathy Stryker* Project Manager
     Water Line Connections       Mew Jersey Remedial Action Branch
                                  Emergency & Remedial Response Division
                                  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
4.   Presentation of the          Mr. Robert Gaibrois, Project Manager
     Remedial Investigation       Woodward-Clyde Conaultanta
5. .• Presentation of tha         Mr. Thomas Baxter
     Remedial Alternative*        Senior Project Scientist
     (Feasibility Study)          Metcalf and Eddy, Inc.                   -3.
                                                                           &
6.   Preferred Alternative        Mr. Kevin Psarianoa
                                  The floor will be open for comments      o
7.   Comments/Questions                                                    o
                                  and questions at this time.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 194 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                     (STATEWIDE)
                                                     No. 86/90
Montgomery Twp. & Rocky Hill (Somerset County)       Immediate release:
DEP TO HOLD MEETING JAN. 14                          December 16, 1985
ON WELL CONTAMINATION STUDY       .

          TRENTON—The state Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) will
hold "a public meeting Tuesday, Jan. 14, on the start of a Remedial Investigation/
Feasibility Study of contaminated well water at two Superfund sites in Somerset .
County — the Montgomery Township Housing Development and Rocky Hill Municipal
well field.                   •                -
          The meeting will be held at 7:30 p.m. by DEP's Hazardous Site Mitigation
Administration in the Montgomery Township Municipal Building, Route 206, in Belle Mead.
          Woodward Clyde Consultants of Wayne was awarded a $946,513 contract in
July and is expected to start field work for the study next month. The study will
determine the extent of contamination, whether the source is continuing and recommend
                x
remedial measures.     '
         A cooperative agreement between DEP and the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency was signed in 1984 providing funds for the study which is expected to be
completed in the fall.                                                •
          The Montgomery Township Housing Development consists of 71 homes with
private wells of which about half had been found to have varying levels of                o
                                                                                          o
trichloroethylene (TCE). Although public water lines have been installed, some of
 he homeowners still have not hooked up to public water supply. In addition, the
 <ow of contaminants In the fractured rock aquifer Is difficult to predict and
                                         - •               " »            •   '"'
  ture samples may show contamination In previously clean wells.
          The Rocky Hill Municipal well field 1s a two-acre tract located south
                                                      \
   Washington Street and east of Route 206 which supplies-water for about 1,000
                                  (more)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 195 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 1EETING
,.dd 1                                             ;

residents. The well had been closed due to elevated levels of TCE and reopened in
1983 after the installation of water pollution control devices reduced the concen-
                                                                    •

trations. DEP has installed a monitoring well and is investigating the sources of
contamination and direction of groundwater flow.
           For further information contact DEP's Office of Community Relations at
(609) 984-3081.




                                    • -dep-




                                                                                     _
                                                                                     d

                                                                                         o
                                                                                         o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 196 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

MEETING
Add 2

          Written comments will be accepted during the designated 30-day period
and may be mailed to:
                          Jeffrey Folmer                             •
                          Senior Area Coordinator
                          Bureau of Community Relations
                        ' Division of Hazardous Site Mitigation
                          NJDEP
                          CN 413
                          401 East State Street
                          Trenton, N.J. 08625
          A final decision on the recommended alternative will be made following
a review of all public comment. For more information contact Jeffrey Folmer at
(609) 984-3081.




                                   -dep-




                                                                                   o
                                                                                   o

                                                                                   o
                                                                                   vD
                                                                                   \!
                                                                                   N>

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 197 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Montgomery Township (Somerset County)                    (STATEWIDE)
DEP TO HOLD PUBLIC MEETING JULY 25                       NO. 88/14.
ON MONTGOMERY TWP. HOUSING DEVELOPMENT SITE               Immediate release:
                                                         July 16. 1987

    TRENTON—A public meeting will be held Wednesday, July 29, on the completion of an
Interim Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) for private potable wells at the
Montgomery Township Housing Development Superfund site 1n Somerset County, the state
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) has announced.
     A comprehensive RI/FS that encompasses an approximate two square miles In Montgomery
Township and Rocky Hill Borough was awarded previously at a cost of more than $950,000
to Woodward-Clyde Consultants of Wayne. That RI/FS will Investigate the source of
trichloroethylene (TCE) and other contaminants 1n the two municipalities and 1s expected
to be completed by the end of this year or early In 1988.
    The RI/FS \contract was amended earlier this year, however, to provide an Interim
report that exclusively addresses the drinking water supply for residents of the
Montgomery Township Housing Development. The Interim report was contracted for at a
cost of approximately $42,000.
     The site 1s ranked 65th of 100 New Jersey sites Included or proposed for Inclusion
on the National Priorities List (Superfund).
     The wells, which have been found to be contaminated or threatened by contamination
                                                                    •
with TCE and tetrachloroethylene. are on the properties of 77 homes on Sycamore Lane.
                                                                                            G>
Robin Drive, Oxford Circle, Cleveland Circle and Montgomery Road.
                                                                                            O
     While TCE contamination originally force the closing of the Rocky Kill Borough         O
                                                                                   *
municipal well, a treatment system has been In j>lace In that municipality since July
of 1983.
                                         (more)

Sfeffi£!&S^^

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 198 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      MEETING
      Add 1
  *           •
                  In Montgomery Township, 39 of the total 77 resfdences whose wells are
 ontaminated or threatened by contamination have not hooked up to a public water
supply.                                                                          -
        The RI/FS for the private Montgomery potable wells evaluated remedial alternatives.
Including no action, Individual well water treatment, provisions for temporary drinking
water supplies, a new centralized community well with treatment, and hookups to an
Ellzabethtown Water Company line.
        The alternative recommended by the DEP and the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) Is residential hookups to the Ellzabethtown Water Company line. This
alternative will effectively eliminate the possibility of residential exposure to ground-
water contamination in a cost-effective manner.
        Ellzabethtown Water Company already has water mains available on Sycamore Lane,
Robin Drive, Oxford Circle, Cleveland Circle and a portion of Montgomery Road.
       The federal government would pay for any future hookups or water line extensions
that would be necessary under this recommendation.
        The public meeting on the recommended alternative will be held Wednesday, July 29,
at 7:30 p.m. in the Montgomery Township Municipal Building, 2261 Route 206, In Montgomery
Township.


                    Public comment on this recommendation will be accepted from July 15 through
      August 14, and copies of the RI/FS will be available for review at.the following
      locations:
      Town Clerk's Office                               Jtary Jacobs Library '
      Montgomery Township Municipal Building            64 Washington Street
      2261 Route 206                                     Rocky Hill. N.J.
      Montgomery Township, N.J.                          (609) 924-7073
         201-359-8211                                                                               -<
      •lew Jersey DEP              .                     Somerset County Library           •
      Division of Hazardous Site Mitigation             "Main Branch                               o
      6th Floor                                          North.Bridge Street ft Vote Drive          -
      401 East State Street                              Brldgewater, N.J.
      Trenton, N.J. 08625                                (201) 526-4016
      (609) 984-3081                                                                              \f
                                                                                                  -Ck
                                               (more)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 199 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       (STATEWIDE}
                                                      NO. 88/136
          , ROCKY HILL REMEDIATION FLANS              Immediate release:
TO BE REVIEWED AT MAY 12 PUBLIC MEETING               April 22, 1988

           TRENTON—Seven alternative remediation proposals for Superfund sites
in Montgomery Township and Rocky Hill Borough, Somerset County, will be
                                   •

discussed at a public meeting May 12 at 7 p.m. in the Montgomery Township
Municipal Building, 2261 Rt. 206. The meeting sponsored by the federal
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and state Department of Environmental
Protection    (DEP) is      to   discuss        the   results   of   the   Remedial
Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) and to receive public carments.
           Camissioner Richard T. Dewling of the DEP said the sites are the
Montgomery Township Housing Development and the Rocky Hill Municipal Wellfield.
       \

In both cases ground water contamination with trichloroethene (TCE) is the
problem.
           A single RI/FS was performed for both sites by Woodward-Clyde
Consultants of Wayne at a cost of $990,000 because of their close proximity,
Dewling said. He added that, copies of the proposed remedial action plan and
RI/FS documents are available for examination at five locations.
           The alternative favored by DEP and EPA, "is the most appropriate site
remedy, effectively protecting public health and the environment in the most
cost-effective and direct way, while best meeting all appropriate regulations,"
                                                                                      o
Dewling said.    This alternative calls for extracting and purifying ground           o
water, after which it would be reinjected into the ground; sealing affected
                                              /
                                       (more)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 200 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Add 1

private wells; and connecting one residence in the southwest section of the
site to public vater.                                         __
                                                              «•
         The veils in Montgomery Township affected by or threatened with TCE
are on properties of 77 hones on Sycamore lane, Robin Drive, Oxford Circle,
Cleveland Circle and Montgomery Road. The sealing of many of these wells has
been addressed separately in a decision issued by EPA and DEP in September 1987
which also includes hookups of the residences to a public supply.
         The Rocky Hill municipal well, which had been shut down due to TCE
contamination, went back into service in 1983 after installation of a water
purification system which is still in operation, Dewling observed.
          The proposed remedial action plan and study documents are available
for public review at these locations:
                         Clerk's Office
                         Montgomery Township Municipal Building
                         2261 Route 206
                         Montgomery Township, N.J.
                          (201) 359-8211
                         Mary Jacobs Library
                         64 Washington Street
                         Rocky Hill, N.J.
                         (609) 924-7073
                         Somerset County Library        ;
                         Main Branch
                         North Bridge Street at Vogt Drive
                         Bridgewater, N.J.
                         (201) 526-4016
                         New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
                         401 E. State Street - 6th Floor
                         Trenton, N.J.
                         (609) 984-3081
                         U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Region II
                         Emergency and Remedial Response Division                 j*
                         26 Federal Plaza                                   .     K
                         New York, N.Y. . .
                          (212) 264-2515""                                        o
                                              .•                        •         o


                                 (mare)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 201 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Add 2


           Both written and oral comments may be presented at the May 12
meeting.    In addition, written comments may be submitted untilTthe close of
business on May 23, 1988. Comments should be submitted to:
                         Grace L. Singer, Chief
                         Bureau of Community Relations
                         Division of Hazardous Site Mitigation
                         Department of Envirormental Protection
 -                       401 E. State Street - 6th Floor
 ~"                      CN 413
                         Trenton, N.J. 08625
           Further information on the plan may be obtained by writing to the
above address or by calling Jeffrey Folmer, Connunity Relations Coordinator, at
(609) 984-3081.
           Brief descriptions of the seven evaluated remediation alternative
follow:
Alternative 1; No Action
No activities would be carried out to provide control measures to mitigate the
contamination or isolate the public from the contaminated ground water.
Contaminant levels and distribution would be monitored on a regular basis to
observe possible changes that may warrant additional measures.
Alternative 2: Aquifer Isolation
This alternative requires that present private wells be sealed and future well
installations be restricted in order to isolate the aquifer from uncontrolled
potable water usage. In addition, residences within the contamination plume,
including one additional residence not previously identified, would be provided
with public water. The monitoring elements from Alternative 1 would also be
performed.
Alternative 3: Pump and Air Strip from the Bitire Plume
In addition to the water connection and well sealing component identified in
Alternative 2, this alternative employs an aquifer flushing system using
approximately 13 extraction wells. The alternative is further divided into
three sub-alternatives, which differ in the possible discharge locations for
the treated ground water (3A-oconomical combination of surface water and uround
water discharge} 3B-groundwater injection; 3C-use as a potable water supply). ~
Alternative 4: Pump and Treat with Carbon Adsorption from the Entire Plume
This alternative is identical to Alternative 3 and its sub-alternatives except
that activated carbon adsorption is the central unit process.              ..     ^
Alternative 5: Pump and Air Strip from the Source Area                            ^
This alternative includes the water connection' and well sealing components of    Q
Alternative 2 and an aquifer flushing system using approximately three            o
extraction wells located in the most contaminated areas of the site. The          ^
alternative is further divided into three sub-alternatives, which differ in the
                                                                                  "Xl
                                                                                  Nl

                                  (more)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 202 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Add 3                                                                                 \


possible discharge locations for the treated ground water (5A-ground water
injection downgradient; SB-ground water injection upgradient; 5C use as a
potable water supply).                                       _r-
Alternative 6; Punp and Treat with Carbon Adsorption from the Source Area
This alternative is identical to Alternative 5 and its. sub-alternatives,
except that carbon adsorption is the central unit process.
AltexTiative 7; 'Pu,p and Air Stripping of Source Area with Vicinity Injection
This alternative is a variation of Alternative 5B. It uses the same three
source area extraction wells outlined in Alternative 5 and 6 however, instead
of incorporating a single centralized treatment unit, individual air strippers
are installed at each punping location. Discharge is from each unit to two
injection uells located at nearby points selected to enhance flushing.




                                                                                 2
                                                                                 a

                                                                                 o
                                                                                 o


                                                                                 GO




                                                                                      J

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 203 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ATTACHMENT E




               CD


               O
               O

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 204 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         £3 '08 B9:X WOODUftRD-CLYBE NJ.201 785 0023                                                    P. 4/4

                                    .iTREAM OH WA$T6WATtH ANALYSIS
                        DEC 26 2i9P^,NFORMATJON
SE TYPE OR PAINT
 CUULPOIMT UN
                        «J *#?**>'! *«: • - • "'N            Difc of Cc nection


                                                            Composite Period^
                                                            Collected by__
                                                            Residual Chlorine:
icIpRUty_4                                                            Immediate




                                ITEMS CIHCLEO BELOW ARE UNSATISFACTORY
         Dilutions Requested        T To T"i" [ 10.1' 10.3 10-3 -lfl-1                               1Q.6
           (Bacteriological)

                                       LABORATORY RESULTS
                                              BACTERIOLOGICAL
ormMFN/lOOml.                                 (Confirmed Test); Fecal Coliform MPN/100 ml.
 SUcptoeocei:MPN/100 ml..                     ————————————— Other ————;——

                   •\

                        CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL ANALYSES <mj».Ait«f. unto I otherwise noted)

; Color (uniU)                 Chloride                     Sulfatc                          Other Determinations
' Odor (cold)                  Suspended Solids             Crease & OO               „ < V^>5-^^. *^S* <*«
  Turbidity (units)            Ash                          Cyanide.                       QfrfffTtTJft   S^f
  PH                           Total Solids                 Chromium Total               i ^ .        */^  '
  Acidity to pH 4              Ash                          Chromium Hex.                   UfAj^ft^*                l££ O
^Alkalinity to pH 4            ToUl PO4                 .   Ortho.PO4                       OOlVT/>£                   I&2-
 Nitrite N                     MBAS                         Copper                         •\OlJUttJ4-               1°lS
 NitrmUN                       Phenols                  .   Lead
 Ammonia N                     COD                          Arsenic                    r   __ —— rr, ___r ^ j m ^^

 ToU) Xjel. N                  Iron                         Zinc                             fcwrctnai.:i:raf c               o

                                                                                            DEC 2 019/3                     o
                                                                                                                            o
                                 • BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (m^./Nttr)           '
fold D.O.                      Lab. OX).               Seed Required: '      Ye*           W. ff l^^ncu J po.
npleConc.%         f ittl      04    0^        0.8    IX)    2.0    64)      10            U      60 . 75 100               0)
                                                                                                                            o
%OD8


VAVT f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 205 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                 P.3'4
     23 '83 09:29 MOODUflRD-CLYTE NJ.2Q1 785 M23                                                                   i
                                  ^JERSEY STATE OEPAS
                                                                                                                  Time A feu IttcKtd.
                                       REAM OR W A S T E W A t R ANALYSIS


                             4
                                             FIELD INFORMATION
    OR HUNT
                                                               OIVWA


                                                                          Composite Periods
                                                                                            V~*.^ y£»-^/"
                                                                          Collected by_ ' J&4>*^
                                                                               M \ Viic
                               ^                                                   Immediate,
                       .AA^>*jf         +                                          Developed .
                                                                          Plow Rate       .
                                                                          Temperature,
    and                                                                             /*


                            ITEMS CIRCLED BELOW ARE UNSATISFACTORY
    Dilutions Requested            rio i                                                                           1Q.S       LQlJ
      (Bacteriological)            f            I

                                         LABORATOnY RESULTS
                                                BACTERIOLOCICAL

mMPK/lOUroL ____                               (Confirmed Test); Ftcal Coliform MPN/100 ml.
(rvptococci:MrK/300 ml..                       —————————————— Other ——————



                      CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL ANALYSES (g|i./IU«f. unlm ethtiwitt iwtttf)

Color (units)               Chloride                                     Sulfata
Odor (cold)                 Suspended Solids                             Grcue t Oil                             Y> -Sglfrs^ * * n^-                         *
Turbidity (unite)           Ash                                          Cyanidt                             '      6e4h*>* ' 3Lg
pB ' '                      ToUlSoHd*                                    Chromium Total                            ^(^jefet^ ia*o
Acidity to pH 4             Ash                                          Chromfum Hex.                             KireUf^^irf^^ C9dC
                                                                                                                          *           i/                 _
Alkalinity to pH 4          Total PO4                                    Ortho.?O4
VitriieN                    MBAS                                         Copper                                                                      •
                                                                                                                                                                 £7)
                                                                                                                                                                 -<
MltreteN                    Phenol*                                      Lead                                                              *


Immonia N                   COD                                          Arsenic                                   W •• im.%^??TI3! f» 1 T CTI^T
                                                                                                                                                                 O
                                                                                                                                                                 O
roUJKjd.N                   boa                                          Zinc                                             BflttiACLf IfliWX fi VC*9 0 A
                                                                                                                                                                 O
                                                                                                                        MAR 31980                                vO
                                                                                                                                                                 CO
                                 •F^-—• -—•- -•^••i- -^-— -^ W* • «^%«v i^^.---- »-.- u^ «" y   ii Jiwi e'                        ^_ ••ew^wwe*


 dD.O.                      L«b.D.O.                           Seed Required:                           Yes          W. tIaVJHilUlIS 1 00.
 • Conc.%      Bftf        0.1   0^                 0.5        1.0   X.O    6.0                         10        26   BO      76      100
 >6                                                       »
