LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: RECORD OF DECISION (ROD), SYNCON RESINS-02. (9/27/00 COVER MEMO ATTACHED)
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/58824
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 8c3e1d3843a0d3446f1e55a9c8af9d16032b6094150447f63a3c01369ea9370b
Source PDF pages: 92
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY             / ? /
                                           REGION II                                 '
                                                                       *58824*
  DATE:
                 7
                  '                                                     58824
SUBJECT: Record of Decision for Operable Unit 2 of the Syncon Resins
         Superfund Site, Hudson County, New Jersey
 FROM: Richard L. Caspe, Director       //^-.
       Emergency and Remedial Response Division
    T0:
          Jeanne M. Fox
          Regional Administrator •


          Attached for your approval is a Record of Decision (ROD) for
          Operable Unit 2 (OU-2) of the Syncon Resins Superfund site. The
          site is located in Kearny, Hudson County, New Jersey. This site is
          a fund lead, State lead site.

          EPA signed a ROD in September 1986 which selected an interim remedy
          under Operable Unit 1. That remedy included removal and disposal
          of the contents of storage tanks and vessels, lagoon liquids and
          sediments, and grossly contaminated surface soils; decontamination
          of buildings and tank structures; installation of a permeable cover
          material over the site, to eliminate exposure to contaminated
          subsurface soils and to allow for natural flushing of underlying
          soil and ground water contaminants; and construction of a collec-
          tion and treatment system for remediating contaminated ground water
          from the shallow aquifer, with discharge to the Passaic River.
          That portion of the work was completed by the New Jersey Department
          of Environmental Protection in October 1993.

          In addition to the remedial measures described above, the selected
          interim remedy included a provision to conduct supplemental studies
          to evaluate methods to enhance the effectiveness of the flushing
          and/or treatment of contaminated soils. That work was conducted
          under OU-2 and is the subject of this ROD.

          The major components of the OU-2 remedy include:

          1.   Excavation and drainage of approximately 30,000 cubic yards of
               contaminated soil from an area of about 2.5 acres,
          2.   Removal and disposal of buried debris and other obstructions
               from the excavated areas,
          3.   Installation of a drainage layer at the bottom of the excava-
               tions,
          4.   Treatment/disposal of drained free product from the excavated
               material,
          5.   Addition of soil amendments to the excavated soil before
               backfilling,




                                                                       500026

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Possible restoration of natural hydraulic conditions, and
     discontinuation of the contaminated water treatment system
     operation, and
     Establishment of institutional controls to ensure continued
     commercial/industrial use of the property.


The estimated present worth cost of the OU-2 remedy is approxi-
mately $3 million.    The State of New Jersey has reviewed and
concurred with the OU-2 remedy.

If you have any questions concerning this OU2 ROD, I would be happy
to discuss them at your convenience.

Attachment




                                                             500027

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        RECORD OF DECISION

          DECISION SUMMARY




    Syncon Resins Superfund Site
   Town of Kearny, Hudson County
             New Jersey




U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
              Region II
         New York, New York
           September 2000




                                       500028

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                DECLARATION FOR THE RECORD OF DECISION


SITE NAME AND LOCATION

Syncon Resins
Town of Kearny, Hudson County, New Jersey
STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

This decision document presents the selected remedial action for
the Syncon Resins Superfund Site, which was chosen in accordance
with the requirements of the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act, as amended, and to the
extent practicable, the National Oil and Hazardous Substances
Pollution Contingency Plan. This decision is based on the
Administrative Record file for this Site.
The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection concurs
with the selected remedy.
ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE

The response action selected in the Record of Decision (ROD) for
Operable Unit 1 (OU-1), and as enhanced in this ROD, is necessary
to protect public health or welfare or the environment from
actual or threatened releases of pollutants or contaminants from
the Syncon Resins Site which may present an imminent and
substantial endangerment to public health or welfare.
DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY

The remedy described in this document represents the second of
two planned operable units for the Syncon Resins Site. It
addresses contaminated soil and ground water at the Site.
The major components of the. selected remedy include:
1.   Excavation and drainage of approximately 30,000 cubic yards
     of contaminated soil from an area of about 2.5 acres,
2.   Removal and disposal of buried debris and other obstructions
     from the excavated areas,
3.   Installation of a drainage layer at the bottom of the
     excavations,
4.   Treatment/disposal of drained free product from the
     excavated material,
5.   Addition of soil amendments to the excavated soil before
     backfilling,




                                                         500029

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

6.   Possible restoration of natural hydraulic conditions, and
     discontinuation of the contaminated water treatment system
     (CWTS) operation, and
7.   Establishment of institutional controls to ensure continued
     commercial/industrial use of the property.
DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

The response action selected in the ROD for Operable Unit 1, and
as enhanced in this ROD, is necessary to be protective of human
health and the environment, to comply with Federal and State
requirements that are applicable or relevant and appropriate to
the remedial action, to be cost-effective, and to utilize
permanent solutions and alternative treatment (or resource
recovery) technologies to the maximum extent practicable.
As part of this ROD, EPA conducted a review of the remedy
selected in the 1986 ROD in accordance with Section 121(c) of
CERCLA, the National Contingency Plan, and OSWER Directives
9355.7-02(1991), 2a(1994) and 3a(1995). The remedy selected in
this ROD enhances the previously selected remedy and constitutes
the final remedy for the Site.
Because this remedy will result in contaminants remaining on the
Site above levels which allows for unrestricted use and unlimited
exposure, a review of the remedy will be conducted no less than
every five years pursuant to Section 121 (c) of CERCLA. The next
review will be completed within five years of the date of this
ROD.




                                              f/7/t
                                            Date
               „„   .
Jeanne l^f FOJ
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Region II




                                                         500030

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            Table of Contents
                                                  Page
Site Name, Location, and Description               1
Site History and Enforcement Activities            2
Community Participation       .                    3
Scope and Role of Response Action                  4
Summary of Site Characteristics                    5
Current and Potential Future Land                  9
    and Resources Uses .
Summary of Site Risks                              9
Discussion of Uncertainties                       13
Remedial Action Objectives                        14
Description of Remedial Alternatives              15
Summary of Comparative Analysis of Alternatives   22
Principal Threat Wastes                           27
Selected Remedy                                   27
Statutory Determinations                          29
Documentation of Significant Changes              31

Appendices
Appendix I        Figures
Appendix II       Tables
Appendix III      Total Risk Summary Tables
Appendix IV       Responsiveness Summary




                                                         500031

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Appendix V    Administrative Record Index
Appendix VI   NJDEP's Letter of Concurrence




                                              500032

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                R E C O R D     O F   D E C I S I O N

                    Syncon Resins Superfund Site
                   Town of Kearny, Hudson County
                            New Jersey
                           September 2000

Site Location and Description

The Syncon Resins Site encompasses approximately 15 acres and is
located in a heavily industrialized area of Northern New Jersey. The
Site is located in Kearny, Hudson County, at approximately 40°44'
north latitude and 74°06' west longitude (Figure 1) . It is bounded
on its western edge by the Passaic River. Adjacent to the northern
and southern boundaries are two licensed waste haulers. The Site is
bounded on the eastern side by Jacobus Avenue and is across the
street from a lacquer manufacturing facility (Figure 2).
The Syncon Resins Site is situated on a narrow peninsula of land
bordered by the Passaic River and Hackensack River, whose confluence
1.5 miles south of the Site forms the upper reaches of Newark Bay.
The Site is relatively flat with minor topographic variations. The
elevation at the Site ranges from five to ten feet above mean sea
level. Both rivers are tidal water bodies with a mean spring tidal
range of approximately six feet. Newark Bay, the Passaic River, and
the Hackensack River are major components of the Hudson ^River-New
York Bight estuarine system.
The narrow peninsula on which the Syncon Resins Site is located is
heavily industrialized. Various chemical plants, hazardous waste
transporters, manufacturing companies, petroleum facilities, and
storage terminals are situated within the immediate area.        The
closest residential areas to the Site are located approximately one
mile due west in Newark and one and one-half miles due southeast in
Jersey City. The shallow aquifer in the.area is not utilized for any
purpose. Ground water from the confined or deeper aquifer within the
area is utilized solely for industrial purposes. All potable water
for the area's users is supplied by municipal water purveyors.
The Syncon Resins Site and the surrounding area are situated within
the Hudson River drainage basin. The material overlying the bedrock
comprises primarily alluvial sands, silts, clay and detritus.




                                                             500033

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Immediately beneath the Site are four major stratigraphic units
within the alluvial material, as follows:
1. a surficial fine to coarse sand layer approximately ten feet thick,
2. a highly plastic clay layer approximately eight to ten feet thick,
3. a medium sand layer approximately ten feet thick, and
4. a deep layer of silty clay and very fine sand approximately fifteen
   feet thick.
All four stratigraphic units are continuous across the Site.
The two sand layers are separated by the clay layer, which acts as an
aquitard, thereby forming two aquifers beneath the Syncon Resins
Site; a shallow, water table aquifer above the clay layer, and a
deep, confined aquifer beneath the clay layer. Over most of the
Site, the water table is one to two feet below ground level, and
gently slopes to the west toward the Passaic River. The confining
layer of clay underlying the Site begins approximately 10 feet below
grade.    Ground water velocity within the shallow aquifer was
calculated to be 31.2 feet per year.       The deep aquifer has an
estimated ground water velocity of 2.1 feet per year.
Site History and Enforcement Activities

The origin of the Syncon Resins Site is obscure.       The earliest
evidence documenting the existence of the Site consists of 1951
aerial photographs of the area. In May 1977, the owners of Syncon
Resins filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Act.
In November 1981, the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection (NJDEP) investigated the Site and ordered its owners to
control and contain the hazards at the Site. In December. 1982, the
Site was added to the National Priorities List. In 1982, the company
ceased all operations.
The Syncon Resins facility produced alkyd resin carriers for
pigments, paints, and varnish products. The processes that produced
these resins• were carried out. in closed stainless steel vessels.
Cooling water utilized in the production process was recycled within
the system. In the production process, excess xylene or toluene was
separated from the waste water and reused in subsequent reactions.
The remaining waste water was subsequently pumped to two unlined
leaching ponds (lagoons), where it was allowed to evaporate or
percolate into the soil.       Apparently, much of the company's
operations consisted of the reprocessing of off-specification resins
purchased from the manufacturers.




                                                              500034

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The Site consisted of at least two reactor buildings containing
stainless steel vessels, various other buildings and structures,
numerous large bulk storage tanks, two unlined lagoons, and an
unknown number of underground tanks and associated piping systems.
A total of 12,824 55-gallon drums of off-specification resins, raw
materials, wastes and solvents stored at various locations on the
Site were removed in 1984, under a cooperative agreement between
NJDEP and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), at a cost
of $2.4 million.
The two unlined lagoons at the Site had been used for discharging
process waste water. Lagoon 1 was the larger of the two lagoons,
with approximate dimensions of 40 feet by 135 feet. Lagoon 2 was
approximately 40 feet by 15 feet in size. The depth of each lagoon
had been estimated at 4 feet.
Six main buildings and seven ancillary structures that were used in
process-related activities exist on the Site.
In 1983, the United States filed a proof of claim in the Syncon
Resins bankruptcy action. The Chapter XI bankruptcy was converted to
a Chapter VII liquidation; however, the only asset in the bankruptcy
estate was the property comprising a portion of the Site (Lots 13 &
13R) . On July 25, 1996, the Bankruptcy Court granted the trustee's
motion to abandon the property-and dismiss the bankruptcy case.
The United States also filed a cost recovery action in 1986 against
Benjamin Farber, the former owner of the entire Site and present
owner of a portion of the Site. In addition, the United States later
named Disch Construction Company ("Disch") and Essex Chemical
Corporation ("Essex") as defendants in that action. Mr. Farber filed
a contribution action against 17 additional parties. After many
years of litigation the case was resolved, and as a result of
settlements with six of the parties, including Mr. Farber, Disch, and
Essex, the United States received $2.69 million in reimbursement of
past costs incurred at the Site.
Community Participation

The Focused Feasibility Study (FFS) and Proposed Plan for the Syncon
Resins Site, were made available to the public on October 28, 1999.
They can be found in the Administrative Record file and the
information repository maintained at the EPA Superfund Records Center
in Region 2, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
and at the Kearny Main Public Library. The notice of availability of
these two documents was published in the Jersey Journal on October




                                                            500035

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

28, 1999. A public comment period was held from October 28, 1999 to
December 9, 1999. In addition, a public meeting was held on November
4, 1999 to present the Proposed Plan to a broader community audience
than those that had already been involved at the Site.       At this
meeting, representatives from EPA and NJDEP answered questions about
problems at the Site and the remedial alternatives. EPA and NJDEP
also used this meeting to solicit a wider cross-section of community
input on the reasonably anticipated future land use and potential
beneficial ground water uses at the Site. NJDEP's response to the
comments received during this period is included in the
Responsiveness Summary, which is part of this Record of Decision
(ROD).
Scope and Role of Response Action

This ROD addresses a provision of the original (1986) ROD for the
Syncon Resins Superfund Site. The interim remedy selected for this
Site on September 29, 1986 included removal and disposal of the
contents of storage tanks and vessels, lagoon liquids and sediments,
and grossly contaminated surface soils; decontamination of buildings
and tank structures; installation of a permeable cover material over
the Site to eliminate exposure to contaminated subsurface soils and
to allow for natural flushing of underlying soil and ground water
contaminants; and construction of a collection and treatment system
for remediating contaminated ground water from the shallow aquifer,
with discharge to the .Passaic River.     In addition, the selected
interim remedy included a final provision to conduct supplemental
studies to evaluate methods to enhance the effectiveness of the
flushing and/or treatment of contaminated soils. The second operable
unit (OU-2), the subject of this ROD, was created to conduct these
supplemental studies required as part of the remedy. Accordingly,
this ROD summarizes the efforts under OU-2 and describes the selected
remedy that both agencies believe will satisfy the final provision of
the 1986-ROD for the Syncon Resins Site.        The initial remedial
investigations and the existing remedy selected under the 1986-ROD
are designated as operable unit one (OU-1).
Hazardous substances that were originally found on-site during
remedial investigations conducted from 1982 through 1986 still remain
on-site in subsurface soils and shallow ground water at significant
concentrations.   These substances consist primarily of volatile
organic compounds (VOCs), total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPHs), and
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). Low-level inorganic compounds,
primarily arsenic and lead, are sporadically detected in some
monitoring wells, treatment plant influent, and subsurface soils.
The supplemental studies performed from 1994 to date have determined




                                                             500036

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

that further remedial action is warranted to expedite the cleanup of
ground water and soil at the Site. Based on the results of these
studies, several site-specific options for remedy enhancement were
developed and evaluated in a Focused Feasibility Study. Under this
OU-2 effort, EPA and NJDEP are proposing to implement Alternative 4A,
which was described in the Proposed Plan and consists of: Excavation
and Drainage of Contaminated Soils, Removal of Buried Debris,
Restoration of Natural Hydraulic Conditions, Addition of Soil
Amendments and Installation of a Connecting Drainage Layer to enhance
ground water flow. Pilot scale testing of this option will be
conducted during the remedial design phase to develop site-specific
design criteria, and to determine if additional on-site treatment or
off-site recycling of some materials might improve the effectiveness
and efficiency of this option. The agencies anticipate that this
enhancement of the existing remediation system will expedite cleanup
of this Site and allow for industrial reuse, and will shorten the
duration of active ground water remediation.       This ROD provides
further details on this OU-2 effort for the Syncon Resins Site.
Summary of Site Characteristics
OU-1 Remedial Investigation
In   1982,      a limited site investigation         showed widespread
contamination. Within the deep aquifer, six contaminants (benzene,
methylene   chloride, tetrachloroethylene, chloroform',        carbon
tetrachloride and PCBs) exceeded adjusted ambient water quality
criteria (AAWQC). Shallow ground water was grossly contaminated with
24 organic compounds, of which fourteen exceeded AAWQC. Thirteen of
these contaminants were found at extremely high concentrations
[greater than 760 parts per million (ppm) ], with nine of them present
in the ground water at percent levels (parts per hundred). Seven
contaminants found in the shallow'ground water could not be compared
to the water quality criteria since no criteria existed for these
compounds.
The chemical contamination present at the Syncon Resins Site is
apparently restricted from vertical movement due to the clay layer
beneath the Site. However, it appeared that lateral movement of
contaminants within the shallow aquifer is not restricted.       The
ground water flow within the shallow aquifer can transport these
contaminants to the Passaic River. This ground water movement is one
of the principal means of off-site transport of contaminants.




                                                            500037

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Chemical constituents were present in the confined aquifer beneath
the clay layer. These constituents, however, appear to stem from an
off-site source or sources. •
Gross chemical contamination was found in soils at the Syncon Resins
Site. Soil samples were collected from test pits that were excavated
at the Site. Ten base/neutral compounds in excess of 400 parts per
million (ppm) were found in these samples. Concentrations of toluene
up to 3,100 ppm and methylene chloride up to 670 ppm were found in
the soils from these test pits. PCBs (greater than 33,000 ppm), DOT
(in excess of 1,400 ppm) and high concentrations of arsenic,
chromium, lead, mercury, and zinc were als.o present. Many of the
compounds found in the test pit soils are suspected carcinogens.
From May 1985 to April 1986, NJDEP's contractor conducted a remedial
investigation at the Syncon Resins Site.    The sampling performed
during the remedial investigation indicated extensive on-site
contamination in all of the matrices sampled (i.e., vessels and
tanks, soil, ground, water, and building dirt/dust), except for
ambient air. Four general classes of chemical contaminants were
found on-site: organic compounds (volatiles and base/neutral
extractables), pesticides, PCBs, and metals. The organic compounds
present were common raw materials and/or resin components, and the
metals detected in samples were probably from metallic oxides or
organo-metallic compounds utilized as pigments or catalysts in the
production processes.
Materials found at the ground surface of borings done during
subsurface investigations were sand, concrete or man-made fill
material depending on the locations on the Site. Sands at the ground
surface of a number of borings were visibly contaminated giving a
black and oily appearance. In some of the well borings, a concrete
slab prevented sampling for the first foot of drilling, while asphalt
and fill material of various thicknesses were encountered during
drilling for the installation of some of the monitoring wells. These
obstructions would most likely impede ground water flow.
Following the investigation, an FS was completed in 1986. Based on
the findings of the FFS/ a ROD was issued by EPA on September 29,
1986. The selected remedy in the ROD included removal and disposal
of the contents of storage tanks and vessels, lagoon liquids and
sediments, and grossly contaminated surface soils;, decontamination of
buildings and tank structures; installation of cover material over
the Site to allow for natural flushing of underlying soil and ground
water contaminants; and construction of a collection and treatment
system for remediating contaminated ground water from the shallow




                                                             500038

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

aquifer, with discharge to the Passaic River. The ROD also called
for supplemental studies to evaluate methods to enhance the
effectiveness of flushing and/or treatment of the contaminated soil.
NJDEP's contractor prepared the remedial design to implement the
selected remedy.
OU-2 Focused Feasibility Study
A Focused Feasibility Study was performed under OU-2 which included
soil and ground water sampling, a Cone Penetrometer investigation,
and a Pilot Scale Field Test to study the movement of contamination
in the ground water.
A.   Soil and Ground Water Sampling
The levels of contaminants in the collected ground water showed a
significant decline during the period that the CWTS has been in
operation. Monitoring of the influent to the contaminated water
treatment system (CWTS) in 1994 indicated that contamination in the
soil and ground water at the Site was not reaching the extraction
trench. An extensive sampling event was conducted in the summer of
1994 to determine if contaminant levels in soil and ground water were
still high.
Twenty-two soil samples were collected directly from trenches with
the bucket of a backhoe. Soil samples were gathered at depths of
approximately two.feet and six feet below existing grade. Samples
were analyzed for VOCs, pesticides/PCBs, base neutrals, arsenic, and
chromium. Ground water was also sampled from eleven monitoring wells
for the above analytes. The results of the analysis of ground water
samples showed that several constituents were found to exceed current
New Jersey Standards for GW-IIA class aquifers (Table 2) . These
constituents included the volatile organic compounds benzene,
ethylbenzene, toluene, xylenes, and chlorobenzene; the metals lead
and arsenic; and PCB (Aroclor 1248).           The detected maximum
concentrations of benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene, xylenes and
chlorobenzene were 250, 2,700, 110,000, 14,000, and 88 micrograms per
liter (ug/1), respectively.     Total lead and total arsenic were
detected at maximum concentrations of 374 and 316 ug/1, respectively.
The maximum concentration of Aroclor-1248 was 88 ug/1.
Soil sample results for xylenes, toluene, benzene and ethylbenzene
(fuel constituents) were found to exceed the New Jersey Soil Cleanup
Criteria (Table 1). The maximum concentrations of xylenes, toluene,
benzene and ethylbenzene detected in the soil were 3,500, 23,000, 29
and 850 milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg) , respectively. Thus, it




                                                            500039

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

appears that the highly contaminated soils have impacted the
underlying ground water and are an ongoing source of contamination to
ground water.
B.   Cone Penetrometer Testing
In February and March 1997, a Cone Penetrometer (CPT) investigation
was conducted at the Site. A CPT was used to probe the shallow
subsurface at approximately 70 locations. Above the tip of the CPT
was a Fuel Fluorescence Detector (FFD) module. The CPT tip, FFD
module, and rods were pushed into the soil with a rig designed to
apply downward pressure to the rods and instruments. As the FFD
module passed through the soil, an ultraviolet light source and
sensor measured total petroleum hydrocarbon (TPH) in the soil and
ground water. TPH. molecules fluoresce. when struck by ultraviolet
light. A continuous output of total fluorescence was recorded over
the entire depth of the area of investigation. The results of the
FFD investigation are qualitative, but can delineate where the
highest concentrations of TPH are located. Measurements made with
the tip of the CPT can be used to determine the type of soil being
penetrated. The results of this testing revealed that widespread
free and/or residual product containing high concentrations of TPH
was still present throughout the Site.
Depth of free and residual product at many of the probe locations was
found to be about six to eight feet below existing grade. Based on
the results of the CPT investigation, it is estimated that about
30,000 cubic yards of soil are contaminated with free and/or residual
product. This contaminated area is estimated to be approximately 2.5
acres (see Figure 3).
C.   Pilot Scale Testing for Flushing Enhancement
In the summer of 1997, a pilot scale field test was initiated near
the existing collection trench on the Site. The purpose of this
testing was two-fold: (a) to confirm through excavation that areas of
high FFD readings truly represent free/residual product, and (b) to
determine if flushing could be enhanced by installing a connector
trench (backfilled with coarse material at water table) from the
product "hot spot" to the existing collection trench.
An approximately 50-foot long trench was excavated from the existing
collection trench to the closest product 'hot spot1 in an up-gradient
direction. The trench was excavated to a depth of approximately 1.0
feet. The presence of free product was confirmed at the high FFD
location.   Three monitoring wells were set up within this trench




                                                             500040

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

using four-inch diameter PVC pipes to obtain ground water samples.
The purpose of excavating this trench was to observe the movement of
contamination in the ground water.       Ground water samples were
collected at monthly intervals from the three locations. Four rounds
of samples were collected. The analytical data did not indicate any
rapid movement of contamination from the surrounding areas through
ground water in the excavated trench. Influent contamination levels
at the CWTS also showed no significant change.
In January 1998, L.R. Kimball and Associates was contracted by NJDEP
to perform a Focused Feasibility Study of the Site using the data
collected during the investigations noted above. The results of this
study are summarized in the July 1998 Focused Feasibility Study
Report for the Syncon Resins Site, which has been included in the
Administrative Record for this Site.
Accordingly, these Ot>-2 efforts are directed at improving the
efficiency and effectiveness of the existing OU-1 remedy by
excavating and draining contaminated soils, removing buried debris,
and installing a connecting drainage layer to enhance ground water
flow. This process will assist in enhancing the natural flushing
component of the existing remediation system.
Current: and Potential Future Land and Resource Uses

Land Dses: Currently, the Site is abandoned. The narrow peninsula on
which the Site is located is heavily industrialized.         Various
chemical plants, hazardous waste transporters, manufacturing
companies, petroleum facilities, and storage terminals are situated
within the immediate area. Adjacent facility owners have expressed
interest in purchasing the property to be developed for commercial
and industrial use.
Ground and Surface Water Uses: Currently, the ground water is not
used for drinking water, and it is not anticipated to be used for
drinking water in the future. Currently, the effluent from the on-
site treatment facility discharges into the Passaic River.
Summary of Site Risks

Human Health Risk Assessment
The baseline risk assessment estimates what risks the Site poses if
no action were taken. It provides the basis for taking action and
identifies the contaminants and exposure pathways that need to be
addressed by the remedial action. This section of the ROD summarizes




                                                            500041

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

the results of the baseline risk assessment for the Syncon Resins
Site.
The reasonable maximum human exposure is evaluated. A four-step
process is used for assessing site-related human health risks for a
reasonable maximum exposure scenario: Hazard Identification
identifies the contaminants of concern at the Site based on several
factors such as toxicity, frequency of occurrence, and concentration.
Exposure Assessment - estimates the magnitude of actual and/or
potential human exposures, the frequency and duration of these
exposures, and the pathways (e.g., ingesting contaminated water) by
which human beings are potentially exposed. Toxicity Assessment -
determines the types of adverse health effects associated with
chemical exposures, and the relationship between magnitude of
exposure (dose) and severity of adverse effects (response). Risk
Characterization - summarizes and combines outputs of the exposure
and toxicity assessments to provide a quantitative (e.g., one-in-a-
million excess cancer risk) assessnent of site-related risks.
The potential for noncarcinogenic effects is evaluated-by comparing
an exposure level over a specified A-ime period (e.g., life-time) with
a reference dose (RfD) derived for a similar exposure period. An RfD
represents a level that an individual may be exposed to that is not
expected to cause any deleterious effect. The ratio of exposure to
toxicity is called a hazard quotient (HQ) . An HQ less than 1
indicates that a receptor's dose of a single contaminant is less than
the RfD, and that toxic noncarcinogenic effects from that chemical
are unlikely. The hazard index (HI) is generated by adding the HQs
for all chemical (s) of concern that affect the .same target organ
 (e.g., liver) or that act through the same mechanism of action within
a medium or across all media to which a given individual may
reasonably be exposed. An HI less than 1 indicates that, based on
the sum of all HQ's from different contaminants and exposure routes,
toxic noncarcinogenic effects from all contaminants are unlikely. An
HI greater than 1 indicates that site-related exposures may present
a risk to human health.        .
The HQ is calculated as follows:
Non-cancer HQ = CDI/RfD
where:
     GDI = Chronic daily intake
     RfD = reference dose.




                                   10




                                                            500042

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

GDI and RfD are expressed in the same units and represent the same
exposure period (i.e., chronic, subchronic, or short-term). Table 4
of this ROD summarizes the carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic risks
associated with each exposure pathway. The risk assessment indicates
that there are elevated carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic risks
associated with building materials, on-site soils and sediments.
In the 1986 baseline assessment, the cumulative impact of the
hazardous substances found at the Syncon Resins Site was difficult to
assess due to the quantitative methods employed.         The exposure
pathways were modeled using "worst-case" conditions in some instances
and very conservative assumptions in all of the modeled pathways in
order to screen out those substances and exposures that were of no
concern. Multiple exposure effects for probable carcinogens were
assessed by calculating the total cancer risk for each matrix per
exposure pathway. This was accomplished by summing the cancer risks
among each chemical per matrix for each exposure pathway, and for
each chemical among all matrices and exposure pathways. Benzene,
bis (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate, benzo(a) pyrene, chlordane, aldrin, DOT,
PCBs, arsenic, cadmium and chromium exceeded the acceptable cancer
risk range of one in 10, 000 to one-in-a-million for the Site. All
of the chemicals exceeding the acceptable cancer risk level did so
principally in the direct ingestion and contact exposure pathways.
Within these pathways, the greatest cancer risk was incurred for the
unsaturated soil, building dirt/dust and lagoon sediment matrices.
These risks were as high as five-in-a-hundred for PCBs in lagoon
sediments. Lagoon sediments, likewise, exhibited the highest hazard
index of 1.9 for toluene.       However, these 1986 values are not
applicable to current Site conditions since exposure pathways have
been eliminated or controlled through implementation of the OU-1
remedy. Accordingly, there is no unacceptable carcinogenic risk or
non-carcinogenic hazard associated with taking No Further Action at
the Site, assuming the current controls are maintained.
Ecological Risk Assessment
Ecological Risk Assessment involves a qualitative and/or quantitative
appraisal of the actual or potential effects of a hazardous waste
site on plants and animals.       A four-step process is used for
assessing site-related ecological risks for a reasonable maximum
exposure scenario: Problem Formulation - a qualitative evaluation of
contaminant release, migration, and fate; identification of
contaminants of concern, receptors, exposure pathways, and known
ecological effects of the contaminants; and selection of endpoints
for further study. Exposure Assessment - a quantitative evaluation
of contaminant release, migration, and fate; characterization of



                                 11




                                                            500043

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

exposure pathways and receptors; and measurement or estimation of
exposure point concentrations.    Ecological Effects Assessment
literature reviews, field studies and/or tests linking contaminant
concentrations to effects on ecological receptors.            Risk
Characterization - measurement or estimation of both current and
future adverse effects.
Although the contaminants that contributed to the baseline potential
risks to human health and ecological receptors at the Syncon Resins
Site have not changed from those contaminants defined in the initial
remedial investigations, all of the risks at the Site have been
controlled or reduced through the implementation of the existing OU-1
remedy. The contaminants of concern identified in OU-1 are still
found in subsurface soils, free/residual product, and ground water
on-site. However, due to the implementation of the OU-1 remedial
action, concentrations have been reduced in the surface soils (0 to
2 feet).    In addition, drums and contaminated sediment from the
lagoons have been removed.     Furthermore, a permeable rock cover
system has been installed over contaminated subsurface soil areas on-
site to eliminate direct contact threats. The other provisions of
the OU-1 remedy, namely, the slurry wall installation and the ground
water collection and treatment system, CWTS, have controlled the
ecological and human health threats presented by migration of
contaminated free/residual product and ground water.
Monitoring of the OU-1 remedy over the past seven years has shown
that the components described above have been effective in reducing
and controlling those risks that remain on the Site from contaminated
subsurface soils, free product and ground water.         There is no
evidence that site-related contaminants migrate beyond the slurry
wall to impact the river. The slurry wall system installed as a
component of the existing remedy prevents tidal influences of the
river from pulling contaminated ground water off-site.            All
supplemental investigations, conducted under this OU-2, evaluated the
same areas of concern and the same media of concern addressed in OU-
1. The results of these supplemental investigations performed in
1994 and 1997 show that the same type and levels of contamination
still exist on-site in the soils and ground water that is contained
within the slurry wall because much of the contamination is not being
collected and treated on-site. The capped subsurface soils show
significant non-chlorinated organic contamination associated with
petroleum and fuel components.
The primary contaminants of concern that remain on the Site in ground
water or saturated subsurface soils include toluene, xylene,
ethylbenzene, chlorobenzene, benzene, arsenic and lead.         Minor



                                 12



                                                             500044

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

contaminants include 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane, di-n-butyl phthalate,
diethyl phthalate, bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate, trichloroethylene, 1-
2-dichlorobenzene, methylene     chloride,   N-nitrosodiphenylamine,
benzo(a)pyrene, PCBs, chlordane, aldrin, DOT, cadmium, chromium,
mercury, nickel and silver.
The exposure pathways previously identified under OU-1 investigations
include ingestion of soil, building dirt/dust and/or lagoon sediment;
ingestion of fish and shellfish; ingestion of shallow ground water;
ingestion of river water and/or surface water; inhalation of soil
and/or building dirt/dust;- direct contact with river water and/or
surface water; direct contact with on-site soil, lagoon sediment
and/or building dirt/dust; and ingestion, inhalation and/or direct
contact with materials in tanks and vessels. All of these pathways
have been mitigated by the existing OU-1 remedy. Tanks, drums and
vessels have been removed; buildings cleaned and some were
demolished; highly contaminated soils excavated and removed or
covered; contaminated lagoon liquids and .sediments removed; and
installation of a slurry wall/treatment system that separates the
river from the Site ground water, and collects and treats
contaminated ground water on-site.
Taking further action under OU-2 will only improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of the existing remedy employed on-site, and thereby
shorten the duration of the operation of the CWTS and the duration of
the maintenance of the slurry wall containment system.
The response action selected in the OU-1 ROD, and as enhanced in this
ROD, is necessary to protect the public health or welfare of the
environment from actual or threatened releases of hazardous
substances into the environment.
Discussion of Uncertainties

The procedures and inputs used to assess risks in this evaluation, as
in all such assessments, are subject to a wide variety of
uncertainties. In general, the main sources of uncertainty include:
- environmental chemistry sampling and analysis
- environmental parameter measurement
- fate and transport modeling
- exposure parameter estimation
- toxicological data.
Uncertainty in environmental sampling arises in part from the
potentially uneven distribution of chemicals in the media sampled.



                                 13



                                                            500045

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Consequently, there is significant uncertainty as to the actual
levels present. Environmental chemistry analysis error can stem from
several sources including the errors inherent in the analytical
methods and characteristics of the matrix being sampled.
Uncertainties in the exposure assessment are related to estimates of
how often an individual would actually come in contact with the
chemicals of concern, the period of time over which such exposure
would occur, and the models used to estimate the concentrations of
the chemicals of concern at the point of exposure.
Uncertainties in toxicological data occur in extrapolating both from
animals to humans and from high to low doses of exposure, as well as
from the difficulties in assessing the toxicity of a mixture of
chemicals. These uncertainties are addressed by making conservative
assumptions concerning risk and exposure parameters throughout the
assessment. As a result, the Risk Assessment provides upper bound
estimates of the risks to populations near the Site, and is highly
unlikely to underestimate actual risks related to the Site.
Remedial Action Objectives

Remedial action objectives are specific goals to protect human health
and the environment.    These objectives are developed considering
exposure routes; human, ecological, and environmental receptors;
protection of ground water resources; and potential future land use.
The remedial action objectives are based on available information,
standards such as Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements
(ARARs), and risk-based levels established in the risk assessment
that was performed in 1986.
The following remedial action objectives were established for the
Syncon Resins Site for Operable Unit 2:
     Prevent exposure to contaminants in soil at levels exceeding
     State soil cleanup criteria;
     Improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the existing OU-1
     remedy that is currently in place by excavating and draining
     contaminated soils and by removing debris that is impeding
     ground water flow. To the extent possible, the draining of the
     contaminated soils would allow the free and residual product to
     be removed from the soils, since it is acting as a source of
     ground water, contamination. It is NJDEP's and EPA's policy to
     remove or treat continuing sources of contamination (i.e., free
     or residual product) when technically feasible or practicable;



                                14



                                                            500046

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 . •   Potential restoration of the natural ground water flow at the
       Site (the slurry wall will be modified to allow ground water to
       flow from the Site into the river), when it is determined that
       levels of contaminants in the ground water are below applicable
       criteria; and
       Provide for restricted (industrial) reuse of the Site.
Description of Remedial Alternatives

CERCLA requires that the selected site remedy be protective of human
health and the environment, be cost effective, comply with other
statutory laws, and utilize permanent solutions and alternative
treatment technologies and resource recovery alternatives to the
maximum extent practicable.    In addition, the statute. includes a
preference for the use of treatment as a principal element for the
reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume of the hazardous
substances.
The cleanup criteria/standards applicable for the remediation of the
contaminated media at the Site are the New Jersey Soil Cleanup
Criteria, Surface Water Quality Standards and Ground Water Quality
Standards, and Federal Water Quality Criteria. The attached tables
identify these cleanup criteria and standards.
The Focused Feasibility Study report evaluates in detail six remedial
alternatives for enhancement of the existing remediation system, and
for addressing the contamination associated with soil and ground
water at the Site.     EPA and NJDEP developed these site-specific
alternatives, consistent with the NCP, based on the supplemental
studies conducted between 1994 and 1998. A description of the
remedial alternatives follows.
Alternative 1 - No Action
Capital Cost:        $0
Annual O&M Cost:     $275,000 (for 30 years)
Present Worth Cost: $3,650,000
Construction Time: Not Applicable
The Superfund program requires that the No Action alternative be
considered as a baseline for comparison of other alternatives. In
the No Action alternative, no additional remedial measures would be
implemented at the Site. The existing remedy/ which is a "natural
soil flushing remedy" in which contaminated ground water is collected



                                  15



                                                             500047

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

and pumped to the on-site water treatment system, CWTS, would
continue to be operated and maintained. The treated ground water
will continue to be discharged in the Passaic River and appropriate
and applicable relevant requirements (ARARs) will continue to be met.
The monitoring and reporting required for the effluent from the
treatment system would continue. The slurry wall would remain intact
to prevent contaminated ground water from leaving the Site and
discharging into the Passaic River.     The existing crushed stone
permeable cap would remain to prevent direct contact exposure to
contaminants present on-site.
Alternative 2 - Installation of Capping, Restoration of Natural
Hydraulic.Conditions at the Site, Installation of Aeration Cells in
Slurry Wall, and Discontinuation of CWTS Operation
Capital Cost:        $1,000,000
Annual O&M Cost:     $4,550 (for 30 years)
Present Worth Cost: $1,056,000
Construction Time:    6 months
Under Alternative 2, no source control or removal would be
implemented to address contaminated soil or ground water.        The
permeable cap existing .at the Site would prevent direct contact
exposure to contaminants remaining on-site. The slurry wall would be
modified to restore the natural hydraulic conditions that existed at
the Site before the wall was installed. Aeration cells would be
installed in the slurry wall openings. Ground water passing through
the cells would come in contact with air that is injected into the
bottom of each cell. Oxygen in the air will dissolve into the ground
water where it will be available for microbes that are capable of
degrading organic contaminants.      The CWTS operation would be
discontinued when it is determined that the aeration cells are
adequately controlling off-site migration of contaminants in the
ground water. This alternative relies on aeration of ground water to
remediate the Site to meet cleanup requirements for organic
contamination. Deed notices would be required to control future use
of the property.
Implementing this alternative, however, will not improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of the existing OU-1 remedy. Hence,
Alternative 2 will not be evaluated further.




                                16



                                                             500048

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 3 - Excavation and Off-Site Disposal. Restoration of
Natural Hydraulic Conditions at the Site, Installation of Aeration
Cells in Slurry Wall, and Discontinuation of CWTS Operation
Capital Cost:        $16,200,000
Annual O&M Cost:     $279,550 (for year 1 to year 3); $4,550 (for
                     year 4 to year 30)
Present Worth Cost: $17,040,000
Construction Time:    1 year
Under Alternative 3, contaminated soils would be excavated, drained
and taken off-site for disposal. When the excavated soils are placed
on a pad, any free product will drain from the soils. The free
product will be treated on-site in the CWTS. Residually contaminated
soil would then be transported off-site for or disposal at a
hazardous waste facility. Only buildings that are located within the
contaminated area would be demolished and debris would be disposed of
off-site. The excavated area would be backfilled with clean fill
material and the Site would be restored for restricted use. The
slurry wall would be modified to restore natural hydraulic conditions
at the Site, only if the ground water in the collection wells reveals
that the contaminant levels are below the applicable criteria.
Aeration cells would be installed in the slurry wall openings.
Ground water passing through the cells would come in contact with air
that is injected into the bottom of each cell. Oxygen in the air
will dissolve into the ground water where it will be available for
microbes that are capable of degrading organic contaminants. The
CWTS operation would be discontinued when it is determined that'
passive treatment of ground water by aeration cells in the slurry
wall is adequate to control off-site migration of contaminants. The
estimated annual O&M cost of this alternative assumes that the CWTS
operation will be discontinued after the third year. If the CWTS is
not discontinued, the O&M cost will remain at the higher rate.
ARARs pertaining to off-site disposal will be met. Deed notices
would be required to control future use of the property. Since this
alternative would result in contaminants remaining on the Site, the
Site will be reviewed every five years in accordance with the
requirements of CERCLA.




                                17




                                                            500049

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 3A - Excavation and Off-Site Recycling/Reuse. Restoration
of Natural Hydraulic Conditions at the Site, Installation of Aeration
Cells in Slurry Wall, and Discontinuation of CWTS Operation
Capital Cost:        $6,500,000
Annual O&M Cost:     $279,550 (for year 1 to year 3); $4,550 (for
                     year 4 to year 30)                   . .
Present Worth Cost: $7,340,000
Construction Time:    1 year
An option considered under this alternative, Option 3A, would involve
off-site recycling or reuse of the soil after excavation and
dewatering, instead of off-site disposal in a hazardous waste
facility. The dewatered soil could be recycled or reused provided
the soil passes the hazardous waste characteristics analysis.
Alternative 4 - Excavation and Drainage of Contaminated Soil, Removal
of Buried Debris, Drainage Layer Installation. Restoration of Natural
Hydraulic Conditions, and Discontinuation of CWTS Operation
Capital Cost:        $2,200,000
Annual O&M Cost:     $279,550 (for year 1 to year 3); $4,550 (for
                    year 4 to year 30)
Present Worth Cost: $3,040,000
Construction Time:    1 year
Under Alternative 4, contaminated soils would be excavated and
drained, buried debris would be removed and a drainage layer would be
placed at the bottom of the excavation. While excavated soils are
placed on a pad, any free product would drain from the soils. The
free product will be treated on-site in the CWTS. Only buildings
that are located within the contaminated area will be demolished and
debris disposed of off-site. A drainage layer to enhance ground
water flow, would be placed at the bottom of the excavation, and the
excavated soil would be placed on top of the drainage layer to
enhance ground water flow.    The existing permeable cap would be
reinstated to prevent direct contact exposure to any residual soil
contaminants remaining on-site. The permeable cap would assist in
restoring natural hydraulic conditions by allowing infiltration of
precipitation. Operation of the existing ground water collection and
treatment system will be continued until monitoring of the ground
water in the collection wells reveals that contaminant levels are
below the applicable criteria. Based on this information, the slurry
wall may be modified, by opening the wall, in order to restore
natural hydraulic conditions at the Site. The estimated annual O &
M cost of this alternative assumes that the CWTS operation will be



                                 18




                                                            500050

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

discontinued after the third year. If the CWTS is not discontinued,
the 0 & M cost will remain at the higher rate.             Discharge
requirements and Qther related ARARs are expected to be met. Deed
notices would be required to control future use of the property.
Since this alternative would result in contaminants remaining on the
Site, the Site will be reviewed every five years in accordance with
the requirements of CERCLA.
Two additional options, namely, Option 4A and Option 4B, are also
considered under this alternative.
Alternative 4A -    Excavation and Drainage of Contaminated Soil.
Removal of Buried Debris, Drainage Layer Installation, Addition of
Soil Amendments. Restoration of Natural Hydraulic Conditions, and
Discontinuation of CWTS Operation
Capital Cost:        $3,000,000
Annual O&M Cost:     $279,550 (for year 1 to year 3); $4,550 (for
                     year 4 to year 30)
Present Worth Cost: $3,840,000
Construction Time:    1 year
Option 4A involves all components of Alternative 4 with the addition
of amendments such as nitrogen, phosphorous and oxygen release
compounds (ORCs) to the residually contaminated excavated soil before
backfilling, to enhance organic degradation. Discharge requirements
and other related ARARs are expected to be met.
Alternative 4B - Excavation and Drainage of Contaminated Soil,
Removal of Buried Debris. Drainage Layer Installation, Installation
of Vertical Pipes in Backfill, Restoration of Natural Hydraulic
Conditions, and Discontinuation of CWTS Operation
Capital Cost:        $2,200,000
Annual O&M Cost:     $279,550 (for year 1 to year 3); $4,550 (for
                     year 4 to year 30)
Present Worth Cost: $3,040,000
Construction Time:    1 year
Option 4B involves all components of Alternative 4 and, in addition,
the installation of vertical vent pipes while backfilling the
excavated soil in order to help aerate the subsurface.




                                 19



                                                            500051

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 5 - Excavation and Drainage of Contaminated Soil. Free
Product Removal (dewatering), Thermal Desorption of the Excavated
Soil.   Restoration of Natural Hydraulic Conditions at the Site,
Installation of Aeration Cells in Slurry Wall, and Discontinuation of
Operation of the CWTS
Capital Cost:        $10,100,000
Annual O&M Cost:     $279,550 (for year 1 to year 3); $4,550 (for
                     year 4 to year 30)
Present Worth Cost: $10,940,000
Construction Time:   1 year
Under Alternative 5, residually contaminated soil would be excavated
and drained of water and free product.       Buried debris would be
excavated and removed. These liquids would be treated on-site in the
CWTS. The excavated soil would be treated using low temperature
thermal desorption. This process uses relatively low temperature
 (200 to 600°F) to desorb the organic contaminants . from the soil
particles. A carrier gas or vacuum system is used to transport the
gas phase contaminants to the gas trratment system. A temporary gas
treatment system will be constructed on-site. The treated soil would
be used to backfill the excavation, and the existing permeable cap
would be replaced after soil is backfilled. Only buildings that are
located within the contaminated area will be demolished and debris
disposed of off-site. The slurry wall would be modified to restore
natural hydraulic conditions, and aeration cells would be installed
in the slurry wall openings, only if the ground water in the
collection wells reveals that contaminant levels are below the
applicable criteria.    The CWTS would be discontinued when it is
determined that passive treatment of ground water by means of the
aeration cells in the slurry wall is adequate to control off-site
migration of contaminants. The estimated annual O&M cost of this
alternative assumes that the CWTS operation will be discontinued
after the third year. If the CWTS is not discontinued, the O&M
cost will remain at the higher rate. Discharge requirements and
other related ARARs are expected to be met. Deed notices would be
required to control future use of the property.           Since this
alternative would result in contaminants remaining on Site, the Site
will be reviewed every five years in accordance with the requirements
of CERCLA.




                                 20




                                                            500052

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 6 - Installation of a Vacuum-Enhanced Recovery System.
Installation of Aeration Cells in Slurry Wall, Restoration of Natural
Hydraulic Conditions at the Site, and Discontinuation of CWTS
Operation
Capital Cost:        $990,000
Annual O&M Cost:     $292,550 (for year 1 to year 3); $17,550 (for
                     year 4 to year 30)
Present Worth Cost: $1,996,000
Construction Time:    6 months
Under Alternative 6, a - vacuum-enhanced recovery system would be
installed in the highly contaminated areas of the Site. This type of
system, also referred to as dual-phase extraction, combines ground
water extraction with catalytic oxidation of extracted vapors using
the same extraction well.       By combining ground water and vapor
extraction in the same well, the effective drawdown of the aquifer
around the well is increased from what it would be with ground water
extraction alone. With this method, the amount of ground water
extracted by a single well can be increased by about 4 to 10 times.
A lower water table allows for more exposure uf contaminated soil to
air flowing through the unsaturated zone. An increased amount of
VOCs can be removed from the soil and the additional oxygen brought
into the soil by this process will enhance the natural biodegredation
of contaminants. The contaminated ground water extracted by this
process would be treated in the existing CWTS. Air extracted from
the siabsurface would be treated prior to discharge to the atmosphere.
Biodegradation of certain semi-volatile organic compounds (SVOCs)
will be enhanced due to greater exposure to oxygen in air that is
circulated through the unsaturated zone. The slurry wall' would be
modified to restore natural hydraulic conditions, and aeration cells
would be installed in the slurry wall openings. The CWTS operation
would be discontinued when it is determined that passive treatment of
ground water by means of the aeration cells in the slurry wall is
adequate to control off-site migration of contaminants.            The
estimated annual O&M cost of this alternative assumes that the CWTS
operation will be discontinued after the third year. If the CWTS is
not discontinued, the O&M cost will remain at the higher rate.
Discharge requirements and other related ARARs are expected to be
met. Deed notices would be required to control future use of the
property.    Since this alternative would result in contaminants
remaining on the Site, the Site will be reviewed every five years in
accordance with the requirements of CERCLA.




                                 21



                                                             500053

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Summary of Comparative Analysis of Alternatives

During the detailed evaluation of remedial alternatives, each
alternative is assessed against nine evaluation criteria, namely,
overall protection of human health and the environment; compliance
with applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements; long-term
effectiveness and permanence; reduction of toxicity, mobility, or
volume; short-term effectiveness; implementability; cost; and Agency
and community acceptance.
The evaluation criteria are described below:
     Overall protection of human health and the environment addresses
     whether • or not a remedy provides adequate protection and
     describes how risks posed through each exposure pathway are
     eliminated,   reduced,   or controlled      through   treatment,
     engineering controls, or institutional controls.
     Compliance with applicable or relevant and appropriate
     requirements (ARARs) addresses whether or not a remedy will meet
     all of the applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements
     of other Federal and state environmental statutes and
     requirements or provide grounds for invoking a waiver.
     Long-term effectiveness and permanence refers to the ability of
     a remedy to maintain reliable protection of human health and the
     environment over time, once cleanup goals have been met.
     Reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment is
     the anticipated performance of the treatment technologies a
     remedy may employ.
     Short-term effectiveness addresses the period of time needed to
     achieve protection and any adverse impacts on human health and
     the environment that may be posed during the construction and
     implementation period until cleanup goals are achieved.
    Implementabilitv is the technical and administrative feasibility
    of a remedy, including the availability of materials and
    services needed to implement a particular option.
    Cost includes estimated capital, and operation and maintenance
    costs, and net present worth costs.




                                 22




                                                             500054

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Agency acceptance indicates whether, based on its review of the
     FFS report and Proposed Plan, NJDEP concurs, opposes, or has no
     comment on the preferred alternative at the present time.
     Community acceptance summarizes the public's general response to
     the response measures described in the Proposed Plan and the FFS
     report.   This assessment includes determining which of the
     response measures the community supports, opposes, and/or has
     reservations about.
The following presents a comparative analysis of the alternatives for
the Syncon Resins Site based upon the evaluation criteria noted
above.
Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment
On a long-term basis, the No Action alternative (continuing the
existing remedy) is protective of human health and the environment.
The other alternatives are also considered protective of human health
and the environment on a long-term basis. Alternative 3, Off-site
Disposal, does not treat soil contamination, however, the free
product would be treated in the CWTS. This alternative would be
effective in containing contaminants in a properly designed,
constructed, operated and maintained disposal facility. Alternative
3A, Off-site Recycling/Reuse, is protective of human health and the
.environment by reducing the volume of contaminants present on the
Site, by removal. The other alternatives, namely, Alternative 4,
Excavation and Drainage of Contaminated Soil, Removal of Buried
Debris and Drainage Layer Installation, Alternative 5, Thermal
Desorption, and Alternative 6, Vacuum-enhanced Recovery, are
considered protective of .human health and the environment by reducing
the toxicity, mobility or volume of contaminants by treatment. These
alternatives, (3, 4, 4A, 4B, 5 and. 6), satisfy the preference for
treatment that reduces the toxicity, mobility or volume of
contaminants.
Compliance with ARARs

Alternative 1, No Action, complies with the existing discharge permit
limits for the CWTS discharge to the Passaic River. However, the No
Action alternative does not meet remediation goals because free and
residual product would remain on-site, against NJDEP's and EPA's
policy.
Alternative 3, Off-site Disposal, and Alternative 3A, Off-site
Recycling/Reuse, meet the Federal and State of New Jersey hazardous



                                 23




                                                             500055

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

waste regulations. Off-site disposal or recycling of soil containing
free and residual product would allow the Site to be used with
restrictions.    Replacement of the permeable cap would prevent
exposure to any low-level soil contamination still remaining on the
Site. Periodic monitoring would be required to evaluate aeration
cell treatment and compliance with discharge limits for discharge
into the Passaic River. It is anticipated that soil and ground water
criteria will be met.
Excavation and Drainage of Contaminated Soil, Removal of Buried
Debris and Drainage Layer Installation, Alternatives 4, 4A and 4B,
would require a longer time to meet restricted use soil and ground
water cleanup goals. Free product that is currently present on'the
Site would be removed by draining the excavated soil. Any residual
product would remain in the soil. The permeable cap would prevent
exposure to low-level soil contamination remaining on the Site. It
is anticipated that soil and ground water criteria will be met.
Alternative 5, Thermal Desorption, would treat the contaminated soil
to meet restricted use soil cleanup goals for on-site soil reuse.
The permeable cap would prevent exposure to any low-level soil
contamination remaining on the Site. Periodic monitoring would be
required to evaluate aeration cell treatment and compliance with
discharge limits for discharges into the Passaic River.       It is
anticipated that soil and ground water criteria will be met.
The restricted use soil and ground water cleanup goals can be met
with Alternative 6, Vacuum-enhanced Recovery, operation of the CWTS,
and catalytic oxidation of extracted vapors. The permeable cap would
prevent exposure to any low-level soil contamination remaining on the
Site. Periodic monitoring would be required to evaluate compliance
with discharge limits for discharges into the Passaic. River.
Lona-Term Effectiveness and Permanence
The long-term effectiveness of the No Action alternative is
considered poor. The No Action alternative relies on natural soil
flushing to address the principal contaminants which will require an
extended period of time to meet the remediation goals and, hence
prevent future use of the property. The long-term effectiveness of
the disposal and treatment alternatives are considered good.
However, the long-term effectiveness of Alternative 6 is questionable
due to the buried debris at the site. Each alternative addresses the
principal Site contaminants (BTEX compounds) and reduces the long-
term risks associated with soil contamination and ground water
contamination.,



                                 24




                                                            500056

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Reduction in Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume
The No Action alternative is evaluated as poor for this criteria.
While the CWTS will reduce the toxicity of contaminants reaching the
treatment plant, the heavily contaminated ground water is not
reaching the CWTS for treatment. Alternative 3, Off-site Disposal,
will reduce the volume of on-site contaminated soil and contain the
contaminants provided the disposal facility is properly designed,
constructed, operated and maintained, but will, not reduce the
toxicity. Alternative 3A, Off-site Recycling/Reuse, will reduce the
volume of contaminated soil present on the Site, by removal.
Alternatives 4, 4A and 4B, Excavation and Drainage of Contaminated
Soil, Removal of Buried Debris and Drainage Layer Installation, will
reduce the toxicity of the principal Site contaminants, provided the
right conditions are maintained for biodegradation of organic
contamination to continue. However, the inorganics may not reduce in
volume. Alternative 5, Thermal Desorption, will treat the principal
contaminants to reduce the toxicity, mobility and volume.
Alternative 6, Vacuum-enhanced Recovery, reduces the toxicity of the
principal contaminants. Alternatives 4, 4A, 4B, 5 and 6 satisfy the
preference for treatment that permanently and significantly reduce
the toxicity, mobility or volume of contamination.
Short-term Effectiveness
The .short-term effectiveness of the No Action alternative is
considered favorable because no intrusive activities into the
contaminated material will occur. The short-term effectiveness of
the disposal and treatment alternatives is considered poor because of
the volatile organic emissions that will be given off during soil
excavation and handling activities. The short-term effectiveness of
the Vacuum-enhanced Recovery alternative is more favorable than the
alternatives that include excavation because less contaminated
material is exposed to the atmosphere during construction. However,
engineering controls and personal protective equipment can be used to
reduce the short-term disadvantages of all alternatives.
Implementability
The No Action alternative' is the easiest alternative to implement.
The existing. CWTS would continue to operate and be maintained to
ensure that the discharge permit limits for the effluent from the
treatment system are met. Each of the other alternatives, except for
Alternative 6, shares a common implementation disadvantage— the
discharge of volatile organic emissions during soil excavation and
handling activities. However, this disadvantage can be addressed by



                                 25




                                                             500057

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

the use of engineering controls and personal protective equipment.
For Alternative 4A, Excavation and Drainage of Contaminated Soil,
Removal of Buried Debris and Drainage Layer Installation,
treatability studies would be necessary to. determine the appropriate
amendments to be added to the soil and the need for periodic
replenishment.    For Alternative 5, Thermal Desorption, a trial
treatment test would have to be performed to determine the optimal
operating conditions of the unit. For Alternative 6, Vacuum-.enhanced
Recovery, a pilot test would have to be conducted to determine the
area that could be treated by an individual recovery well.        The
number of recovery wells will be determined from that test.
Cost
The No Action alternative has no capital cost, moderate annual 0 & M
 (operation and maintenance) costs and the third lowest 30-year
present worth, '$3,650,000. Alternative 3, Off-site Disposal, has the
highest capital cost, $16,200,000, annual 0 & M cost comparable to
the other treatment alternatives, and the highest 30-year present
worth, $17,040,000. Alternate 3A, Off-site Soil Recycling, has a
capital cost of $6,500,000 and annual 0 & M cost the same as the Off-
site Disposal alternative. The 30-year present worth of Alternative
3A of the Off-site Disposal alternative is $7,340,000. Excavation
and Drainage of Contaminated Soil, Removal of Buried Debris and
Drainage Layer Installation, Alternative 4, has moderate capital
cost, $2,200,000, annual 0 & M cost comparable to the other treatment
alternatives, and the second lowest 30-year present worth,
$3,040,000. Alternative 4A, with soil amendments, has a capital cost
of $3,000,000, and annual O & M cost the same as for Alternative 4.
The 30-year present worth of the Alternative 4A is $3,840,000.
Alternative 4B, with no soil amendments but with vertical vent pipes
in the backfill material, has a capital cost of $2,200,000, and
annual 0 & M cost the same as for Alternative 4. The 30-year present
worth of Alternative 4B of the Free Product Removal alternative is
$3,040,000. Alternative 5, Thermal Desorption, has a capital cost of
$10,100,000, annual 0 & M costs comparable to the other treatment
alternatives,   and the second highest 30-year present worth,
$10, 940-, 000. Vacuum-enhanced Recovery, Alternative 6, has a capital
cost of $990,000, annual 0 & M cost higher than the other treatment
alternatives, and the lowest 30-year present worth, $1,996,000..
State Acceptance
The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection supports the
selected remedy presented in this ROD for the Syncon Resins Site.




                                 26




                                                             500058

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Community Acceptance
Community acceptance was evaluated after the close of the public
comment period. No written comments were received during the public
comment period. Hence, only the verbal comments made during the
public meeting were evaluated.
The majority of the questions raised during the public, meeting were
concerned with details of the existing treatment system as well as
the proposed alternative.    Questions were also asked about the
possibility of removing the excavated contaminated soil off-site so
that the Site would be free of contamination when remedial work is
completed. It was made clear at the meeting that the proposed remedy
provides for excavation of areas where free product/high
contamination exists only. Low level contamination in other areas
would continue to remain on the Site and be remediated through
natural flushing of the soils.
Principal Threat Wastes

The free product found at the Site is considered to be a principal
threat waste which is the subject of this ROD.
Selected Remedy

After reviewing the alternatives and public comments, NJDEP and EPA
have determined that the appropriate remedy for enhancement of the
existing flushing/ground water collection and treatment system to
expedite the remediation of the Syncon Resins Site is Alternative 4A,
Excavation and Drainage of Contaminated Soil, Removal of Buried
Debris, Drainage Layer Installation, Addition of Soil amendments,
Restoration of Natural Hydraulic Conditions .and Discontinuation of
CWTS Operation.    The selected alternative is a slightly modified
version (it excludes the installation of aeration cells in the slurry
wall) of Alternative 4A in the Focused Feasibility Study Report, as
described below. NJDEP and EPA believe that the selected remedy is
protective of human health and the environment and will enhance the
existing remedy implemented under OU-1 and expedite the r.emedial
action phase through the removal of free product that is still
present in subsurface soil and ground water.
The area of the Site that contains contaminated soils to be
remediated, specifically free product, is estimated at 2.5 acres.
Accordingly, approximately 30,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil
will be excavated from this area. This area will be divided into
smaller cells that will be excavated sequentially. Free product



                                27




                                                            500059

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

mixed with ground water will be removed while dewatering the open
excavations. Excavated soil will be stockpiled on a suitable pad for
collecting the free product that will drain naturally. Any free
product that drains from the stockpile of excavated soils will be
treated in the existing CWTS.       Residual contamination will be
disposed of off-site after waste characterization. Subsequently, a
subsurface gravel drainage layer will be installed in the excavation
area, before backfilling, to ;better aerate subsurface soils and
enhance ground water flow.     Non-hazardous solid waste and other
debris in the excavated soil will be removed and disposed of off-site
before backfilling the excavation with the residually contaminated
soils.. Before backfilling, amendments will be added to the soil to
enhance microbial degradation of residual organic contaminants. The
details of the remedy such as the type and amount of soil amendment,
dewatering technique, etc., will be determined by means of a pilot
test during the design phase. Residual contamination present in the
backfill material will undergo organic degradation over time. The
existing permeable cap will be reinstated to prevent direct contact
exposure to any residual contamination present in the soil. Only
buildings that are located within the contaminated excavation area
will be demolished and removed off-site for disposal.        Existing
concrete slabs/tank foundations will also be removed to provide
access to contaminated areas. Operation of the existing ground water
collection and treatment system will be continued until monitoring of
the ground water in the collection wells reveals that contaminated
levels are below the applicable criteria.
Pilot scale studies to develop site-specific design criteria will be
included in the preliminary design phase for this remedy.
A Deed Notice will be required to control future use of the property
since inorganics may remain on the Site. Since this alternative will
result in contaminants remaining on the Site above health-based
levels, the Site will be reviewed every five years in accordance with
the requirements of CERCLA.
The selected remedy is protective of human health and the environment
by reducing the volume of contaminants by treatment. The stockpiling
of excavated contaminated soils will allow free product to drain from
the excavated soils while residual product remains in the soil. The
excavation and removal of buried debris should allow the ground water
to flow more .freely to the collection and treatment system. In
addition, a permeable cap will prevent exposure to low level soil
contamination remaining on the Site. Discharges from the treatment
system will comply with the existing surface water discharge
equivalency permit requirements. Long-term effectiveness is achieved



                                 28



                                                            500060

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

through bioremediation of the residual contamination present in the
soil, and by treatment of the contaminated ground water.         The
possibility of free product removal and organic degradation would
further reduce the toxicity of the principal Site contaminants,
provided the right conditions are maintained for biological activity
to continue. Although volatile organic emissions will occur during
excavations, engineering controls and personal protective equipment
can be used to minimize this short-term disadvantage. Treatability
studies will be performed before implementation to determine the
appropriate amendments required for the soil.      The cost of the
preferred alternative has been estimated at approximately $3.8
million.
The selected remedy for the Syncon Resins Site is consistent with the
remedy that was chosen in the 1986-ROD. The overall remedy provides
the most cost-effective approach to restore the Site for restricted
use for industrial . purposes.    This remedy enhancement will also
reduce or eliminate risk to human health and the environment in an
expeditious manner. No subsequent response actions are contemplated
at the Syncon Resins Site at this time.
Statutory Determinations

The selected remedy satisfies the statutory requirements of Section
121 of CERCLA, which mandates that a remedial action be protective
of human health and the environment, cost effective, and utilize
permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies to the
maximum extent practicable. Section 121 also establishes a
preference for remedial actions which employ treatment to
permanently and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity, and
mobility of the hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants
at a site. CERCLA further specifies that a remedial action must
attain.a degree of cleanup that satisfies ARARs under federal and
state laws, unless a waiver can be justified pursuant to CERCLA
Section 121(d)(4) .
For the reasons discussed below, NJDEP and EPA have determined that
the selected remedy meets the requirements of Section 121 of
CERCLA.
Protection of Human Health and the Environment
The selected remedy for Site soils is protective of human health
and the environment by reducing the volume of contaminants by
treatment. The stockpiling of excavated contaminated soil will
allow free product to drain from the excavated soil. The free



                                29



                                                            500061

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

product will be 'treated in the existing CWTS. The permeable cap
over the contaminated areas will prevent exposure to the low-level
contamination that will remain on the Site. Enforcement of a deed
notice will also contribute to the mitigation of human risk related
to any exposure to remaining contaminants.
With the appropriate engineering controls, the excavation and
backfilling of soil from the contaminated areas will not create an
unacceptable short-term risk or cross-media impacts.
Compliance with ARARs
The selected remedy will comply with ARARS, see appendix II. Since
the remedy relies on soil flushing over time to remove
contamination present in the soil and ground water, it would take a
longer time, to meet chemical-specific Federal and State ARARs and
TBCs for these contaminated media. Free product that is currently
present in the subsurface will be removed by draining the excavated
soil. Operation of the existing ground water collection and
treatment system will be continued until monitoring of the ground
water in the collection trench indicates that contaminant levels
are below applicable criteria. Effluent from the treatment system
will satisfy the discharge criteria specified in the relevant
discharge permit. All transportation and disposal of solid and
hazardous wastes will be performed in accordance with regulations
specified by the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) 49 CFR
170-179, RCRA (40 CFR 258,   263,   264 and 265 and New Jersey (NJAC
7:26G, NJAC 16:49).
Cost-effectiveness
Of the alternatives that most effectively address the threats posed
by Site contamination, the selected remedy provides for overall
effectiveness in proportion to its cost. The net present value of
the estimated total project cost is $3,840,000.
Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment
Technologies to the Maximum Extent Practicable
Removal of free product during the excavation of the contaminated
soil will remove an existing contaminant source permanently.
Addition of suitable amendments to the excavated soil before
backfilling will facilitate biodegradation of the organic
contaminants remaining in the soil. Obstacles to ground water flow
will be removed during soil excavation and this will enhance the
natural flushing of the soil. The contaminated ground water



                                    30



                                                              500062

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

resulting from soil flushing will be treated in the CWTS thereby
removing contamination permanently.
Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element
The remedy provides for on-site treatment of any free product (the
principal threat waste) that will be collected during the
excavation of contaminated soil. The residual contamination will .
be disposed of off-site. By utilizing treatment as a significant
portion of the remedy, the statute's preference for remediation
that employs treatment as a principal element is satisfied.
Five Year Review Requirement
Since this remedy will result in hazardous substances, pollutants,
or contaminants remaining on the Site above levels that would allow
for unlimited unrestricted use, a statutory review will be
conducted within five years of the initiation of the remedial
action for this operabl^ unit and each five years thereafter.
Documentation of Significant Changes

The Proposed Plan for the Site was released to the public on
October 28, 1999. The Proposed Plan identified the preferred
alternative for the Site. NJDEP and EPA reviewed all verbal
comments received during the 30-day public comment period. Upon
review of these comments, NJDEP and EPA determined that no
significant changes to the selected remedy as originally identified
in the Proposed Plan were necessary.




                                31




                                                            500063

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

               APPENDIX I



                 Figures




Figure No.   Title

     1               Site Location Map

     2               Site Features Map

     3 .             Free I roduct Area Map
     4               Remedial Action Conceptual Map




                                                 500064

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

               FIGURE 1
SITE LOCATION WP, SYNCQN RESINS SITE,
     HUDSON COUNTY, NEW'JERSEY



                                        500065

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                      500066
                                                               AVENUE
                                                            JACOBUS
«




                                   O


                          =
                                                        V
                                     mfwmt ••» • 11 • i" • •




                                                                                5
                                                                        Ps• g
                                     •^Of, Wiws roortfo '
I




           I'
    5 «i




                                       • ——— " -.-
i




                      I
?




                (A.




                                    1. HOOC*f K«8*l • *S
                                           CO.JU.IM: no




                                                                            1|
                                                                            1
                                                                 'i'
                                                   rU
                                              in
                                   t »»
                                                            1
                                                                         It *
                                                            Ir
                                               I
                               1
                          It

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 ii




          •     i
              J8
          S

                               K
                               S
                               I



                        1
                        ,1              c


                        la                  .1
                                                    I'ii ^1            1
                                                                                       O Si
                        fl                  '•i    ^ If                                O
                                                              sfs
                                                                as
i«                  s
                    111                                                                O
                      ; 2                                                  I
                                                  Ti\
       ,                           H-   !!te^«SW^*S*^*i5wH(*M.W<.MA*S,it              . ' » 5 /* ' j^J
       5 S ™c             a        J2
 sin                                                          •~*~"    'J
                                                                               n'"*
                                   n>
                                   U)                                             AVENUE
                                                        JACOBUS
 n                    6
                    5 e 31 a
                           ^                                                                             500067
 Dl

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             Figure 4
               Remedial Action: .Conceptual Plan
                Syncon Resins Superfund Site "~




               EXCAVATED-
               SOIL




                      ,'Cx .;«&'.; CONTAMINATED::

..COLLECTION
ITRENCH




                                        500068

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

              APPENDIX II


                Tables




Table No.   Title

     1      Summary of Soil Analytical Data (1994)

     2      Summary of Ground Water Analytical Data
            (1994)

     3      Surface Water Quality Criteria
            Ground Water Quality Criteria
            Federal Water Quality Criteria

     4      ARARs and TBCs




                                             500069

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                           Syncon Resins Superfund Site
                                        Summary of Soil Analytical Data (1994)


                                             Concentration in Soil (mg/kg)
Analyte                 Mean      Max      IGW RDC Analyte                           Mean Max IGW RDC
Total Xylene            176.3    3500.0       67     410 Dibenzofuran                 0.7  10.0
Toluene                 743.0    23000       500    1000 Diethylphthalate             0.3   0.3  50 10000
Ethylbenzene            45.3      850.0      100    1000 Endosulfan sulfate           0.2   0.3
Benzene                   1.4     29.0         1      3     Endrin ketone             4.2  47.0
1 ,2-Dichlorobenzene      1.3     40.0        50    5100 Fluoranthene                 1-4. 13.0 100 2300
1 ,3-Dichlorobenzene     0.4        1.3      100    5100    Fluorene                  1.2  13.0 100 2300
1 -4-Dichlorobenzene     0.6       11.0      100     570 Tetrachloroethene            0.0   0.1   1    4
2,4,5-Trichlorophenol    0.3       0,3        50    5600 Gamma-Chlordane              0.2   0.3
2-Methylnaphthalene      1.9      24.0                      alpha-Chlordane           0.2   0.3
2-Methylphenol           0.4       5.2             2800 Toxaphene                     0.2   0.3  50  0.10
4-Methylphenol           0.3       0.8             2800 Isophorone                    0:3   0.3  50  1100
4-Nitrophenol            0.3       0.3                      Hexachlorobenzene         0.3   0.3 100  0.66
Acenaphthene             0.9      15.0       100   3400 Phenol                        0.3   0.3  50 10000
Acenaphthylene           0.3       1.9                      Trichloroethene           0.3   0.3   1   23
Acetone                  0.0       0.1       100    1000 Indeno(l ,2,3-cd)pyrene    L 0.3   1.4 500   0.9
Aldrin                   0.2       0.3       50     0.04 Bis(2-                       0.4   1.7 100   49
                                                            Ethylhexyl)phthalate
Anthracene               0.5      6.3        100   10000 Methoxychlor                 0.4   4.5  50  280
Aroclor-1242*            0.3      4.8        50     0.49 Pyrene                       1.5   7.2 100 1700
Aroclor-1248*            0.2      0.3        50     0.49   Methylene Chloride         0.5   7.8   1   49
Arsenic                 203.9   2860.0               20    Naphthalene                2.6  27.0 100  230
Benzo(a)anthracene       0.5     2.8        500      0.9   Pheneanthrene              2.0  28.0
Benzo(a)pyrene           0.4     2.5        100    0.66            TENTATIVELY IDENTIFIED COMPOUNDS
Benzo(b)fluorantbene     0.6     3.1         50      0.9   Tetrachloroethane     NT   0.3    X
                                                           8.14
Benzo(g,h,I)perlyne     0.3       1.2                      Unknown ACP NT 13.55       0.3    X
Benzo(k)fluoranthene    0.4       2.2       500     0.9    Unknown ACP NT 3.78        0.5    X
Butylbenzylphthalate    0.3       1.1       100    1100 Unknown ACP NT 4.76           0.3    X
Carbazola               0.3       1.5                      Unknown ACP NT 5.35        0.5    X
Chlorobenzene           0.1       0.5         1      37    Unknown NT 23 .26          0.3    X
Chloroform              0.0       0.1         1      19    Unknown ACP NT 6.77       22.7    X
Chrysene                0.7       3.2       500    1000    Methyl Benzene NT 4.56     0.5    X
Di-n-butylphthalate     1.1      26.0       100    5700 Unknown ACP NT 6.55           2.7    X
Di-n-octylphthalate     0.3       0.4       100    1100    Unknown NT 3 1.37          0.3    X
Dibenz(a,h)anthracene   0.3       0.3                      Unknown NT 17.90           1.3    X



Notes:
Mean = Average of the sample concentrations
Max = Maximum concentration detected
IGW = NJDEP Soil Cleanup Criteria (Impact to Ground Water)
RDC = NJDEP Soil Cleanup Criteria (Residential Direct Contact)
* Regulated as Total Aroclors




                                                                                          500070

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      Syncon Resins Superfund Site
                              Summary of Ground Water Analytical Data (1994)


                                                     Concentration (micro£rams per liter)
              Analyte                         Mean                Maximum          GW n-A Standard
 Total Xylene                                  1,287                 14,000                40      J,
 Toluene                                    14,546.41               110,000               1,000    !
 Chlorobenzene                                  10.5                   88                    4
 Benzene                                      31.73                   250                    1
 Arsenic (Total)                              78.96                   316                    8
 Arsenic (Dissolved)                          60.44                   284
 Aroclor-1248                                  8.52                    88                  0.5
 Lead (Total)                                 40.85                   374                   10
 Lead (Dissolved)                                1                      0                   10
 4,4 '-ODD                                     0.11                    1.2                 0.1
 1 ,4-Dichlorobenzene                          0.77                     4                   75
 2,4-Dimethylphenol                            1.59                     8     _            100
 2-Methylnaphthalene                          13.73                    75
 Acenaphtbene                                    1                      4                 400
 Acetone                                       4.45                    44                  700
 Beta-BHC                                      0.05                   0.55                 0.2
 Bis(2-Ethylhexyl)Phthalate                    0.42                     1                  30
 Carbazole                                     0.54                     1
 Chloroethane                                  3.73                    36
 Chromium (Dissolved)                          5.51                   14.7                 100
 Chromium (Total)                             43.42                   162                  100
Chrysene                                       6.59                    71                  20
Di-n-Butylphthalate                            9.55                   100                 900
Dibenzofuran                                  0.57                      1
Ethylbenzene                                 260.73                  2,700                700
Fluoranthene                                  0.54                      1                 300
Fluorene                                       0.8                     2                  300
Methylene Chloride                             1.86                     6                   2
Naphthalene                                  29.36                    310
Phenanthrene                                  0.63                     2
Pyrene                                        0.63                     2                  200
Unknown 12.80                                 1.36                     X
Compounds associated with                     0.81                     X
Perylene-D-12


Notes:
Mean = Average of the sample concentrations
Max = Maximum concentration detected
GW n-A Standard = New Jersey Ground Water Quality Standard for Class n-A areas




                                                                                             500071

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        SURFACE WATER QUALITY CRITERIA APPLICABLE TO NEW JERSEY
                                             unltst etherwiit notttf)

                                      Frtahwattr         Crttarla                       • ahwater    CHiaria
                                                               Human                                      Human
        Toxic Subsiane*
                                         . .... ',v...
                                         iChrpnlc              Health                                     Heihh

                                                                                                          0.66(hc)tM
Mdrtn                                                      0.0001 3{hc)t«                             . 0.00014(hc)iH
Ammonia, urHonlzed                                                                       0.1
 (24-hr. av«r»g«)
                                                                                                        1D8,000(h}« .
^m-mony (Total riceverabte)                                                                              4,300(h>«/
      (Totil retovtrablt)                                   0.0170(hc)«
tjtxnos                                                       7 million
                                                             flben/LfhW
Serium (Tolit retoveroble)
SenzMinthracane
Jenzine                                                                                                  71 (heW
Senzidlne                                                  0.0001 18(hc)«                             0.00059S(heW
   -Beraofluorinthtne
   (Benzo(b}f)ueranthene)                                   O.D026(he}«
SeraodJpyrtne (BiF)
 enzo(K)flueranthene                                        0.0026(he)w                                 0.031 (he)*
 phi-EHC (Upht-HCH)
>eti>BHC (t»1i>HCH)
 immi-BHC (gimrnn*                                                              0.16*
   HCKllndint)
 ii(2«chloroethyl) tther                                    0.031(hc)i*4
 i>(2-thloroisopropyl} ether
                 phlhilile
 romodlchloromethtnc                                                                                     22(he>-
   (Dlchlorobromomithsne)
 romoform

Cadmium (total recovt rable)
Sarton telracWoride
IMortine                       2.4m                       0.000277(hc>*.        0.0^      O.OMOv
                               co.oock, 230,000^           250.000(0!)
 hlorini PrwJuc«d Oxldanu                                                        13*,       7.6*




                                                                    April 95.1994..
                                                                                                    500072

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

»
     »
                •



            Toxic Substance
                                 i            Fnihwater
                                     ^^flualie ^'^:
                                 ^kc^te" •'Chronic'
                                                    1
                                                                   Criteria
                                                                         Human
                                                                         Health
                                                                                          :^m^»^^mf
                                                                                                            Sattweter

                                                                                          .,».^: .»-' r V-i-:
                                                                                          ^cyte> ^•Cf>ronJc>
                                                                                                                .v»i.?.'.*..'i: .?^A3
                                                                                                                                        Criteria
                                                                                                                                                Human
                                                                                                                                                Heahh
    Jhlerobenzeni                                                       2S.O(h>y                                                              2l,DOO(hK,
    ShlorofcTm                                                         e.e?(hcK                                                                470(hc)v
    g.Chlorophenol                                                      122(hK             • •"                                                 402(r»K '
    Shlorpyrtfos                     o.oex         0.04 IM
                                                                         .. . ... - .          0.01U                O.OOWH,                        •
    Chromium (Total recoverable)                                        teo(hK                                                           •     8^30(h^
    Chromium*5 C^otal            1,700(a)i^ 2lO(l}t«                             *   V.

                                                                                                                                                 - ,*
      recoverable)
    Chromium*6 (Total             16(d)m    ii(d)i«i                                      i,ioo(d)iH                50(d)m
      recoverable)
    Shrysene        .                         •                       0.0028(hcK                                                        - 0.031 (hc)v
    Copper (Total recoverable)       ie(a)i»*      12{a)<*.                                2.6(d).«                 2.6(d)m
    Cyanide                           22«           5^                  700(h)m                 1.0s,                 1.0w                  220,000(h)w
    M'»DDD (p,p'*TDE)                                                O.OD063(hc)iu         •                                               0,000837(hcX>
    M'-DDE                                                           O.OOOS6B(hc}^                                                         0.000$9(hc)i*«
    M'-DDT                            1.1w        0.0010^'          •O.OOOS88(hc)w             0.1i-                0.0010*              • O.OOOf 9{hc>M
    Jemeton                                         0.1^              ' .'                                             0.1w
    Nb*nz(e,h)anthrac*ne •                                            0.0028(hc)«                                                             0.031 (hc)«
    Dlbromoehloromethana                                                72.6(riK                                •
      (Chlorodibromomi thane)                                          •4.1(hc)w.                                                              940(he)m
    DJ-n-butyl phlhelate                                               2,700(h}m                                                              12,000(h)iM
    l,2.Dlchforebtnz«nt                                             ~ 2,l20(h)w                                                               16,500(h)H;
    1,3-Dlehlorobenzene                                               ' 400(h)iH                                                              2,600(h)m
    M-Dlchlorobenzene            •                   '   I
                                                                        943(h)«                                                               2,600(h)i^
    J,3-DichlorobenzWine                                             0.03&6(hc)«                                                              0.0767(hc)w
    1,2-Dlchloroethani ,                                              0.201(hc)«                                                                »9(heK              .
 l,1*p!ch(oroethyiene                     '                            4,81 (h>*
                                                                    - 0.87<hc)fM
                                                                                                                . .•     • ...•'               «(hC)m

    nnH ^-Dlchloroethylene                                              e»(hK                                                                      ':". • • .• •-

 !,4-Dlchlorophenol                                                    82.7(hK                                            •    ••              790(h)i>.
 1>Dlchloropnopene (da and            •                               0.193(he>u                                                               1,700(hV
    trans)                                                              10(h)iM
 Jieidrin                            2.5*         0,0015*           0.0001 3S(hcK .         0.71*                0.001 ft*                   0.00014(he)iM
 3iethyl phthalati                                       •            2UOO(h)«                                                                111,000(hK
 )lmethyiphihilite                                                  'Sl3,000(h>u .                                                           2,ftOO,000(h)^ .
  .ft-DinHro-o-creioI                                    '• - '.    • 13.4(h>« . • •               ••                                          765(h)«

XJDEPEOffict ofUnd &.                                                         April 25,1994



                                                                                                                                         500073

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                      urttai othtrvrfaa ndtd)

                              *
                                              Free hwater             Cr+t.rii                                          f»tNmtir                   Crtttri*                •
                                                                            Human '                                                                       Human
                                                                                              ". «*«,»•! x^^-^j. •'•;»/)*

        Tcxfc Substance       ^Stf-S 'Chronlo
                                                 iv;^ ••;•;:>' ;*Xi         Hearth            iSSS3f^! SSwS^                                               Heahh
 2,4-Dlnltrophenol                                                         ee.7(h)w                                                                      14,000(1)}*
 ?,4-Dirrttfoto!uent                                                      0,11 (hcX» '                                                                   . «.1(hC>c

 1,2-Dlphenylhydraalne                                                                                                           •                       0,$4(hc>M
                                                                         0.040(hC)e*
 indoaulfani (alpha and b«la)  O^v     0.0«^                            . C.«2(h>c                o.ow*                      0.0087*                      1.W(h>^
 ifpha-Endeautfan                                                          O.»(h>«        •
                                                                                                                        •
 wta-Endosulfan                                                            0.»3(h}eM .
 Endoeuffan aulfate                                                        O.fi3(h>c                              •                                       2.0(h)«
 Endrin                               0.18^       0.0023*                  0.6}5(h)w              0.037*                     0.0021*                     O.e7<(h)w
 •ndrin aldehyde                                                           0,7e(hK                - ••                             •                      O.t1(h>y
                                                                                                             *
 •thylbewene                                                              S,030(h)«                                                                      27,900(h>u
 *luora nthene                                                             900(h)iM                                                                       S70(h)M
 :
 Juorene                                 :                                1,»00(h}i»*                                                                    14,000(h)M
 Suthion                          -                   0.01W                  •                  ...          .-             . 0.01* •
 Septa chlor                          0.52w       0.0038^               O.D0020S(hC>-             O.OS3*                     0.0036*                 0.00021 (hc)i*.
 •lepiachlor epoxlde                  0.52w       0.003B«               0.000 10(hc)p»-           0.05X                      0.003&*                 0.0001 04(ht>u
 ^xachlorobenzene                                                       0.00074t(hc>w                                                                0.00077(hc}t^
 ^xachlorobutadiene                                                        e.M(hK                                                     .                  *DO(hc)m
                                                                          4.4(hC)m
 ^xichlorocyclopentadiene                                                  240(h)t*t                     •                                               17,000(h)*
 Kexachloroethant                                                          2,71(h>u                                                                       12.4(hK
                                                  k
                                                                           1fi(hC)n*                                                                    89(he)m
 ndeno(1 ,2,3-od)pyrene                                                  0.002»(hcK                      .                  ..                       • 0.031 (he)*
 tophorone '                      •                    •                   €52(hK                                                                        e.oootheW
                                                                           »4(hc)»«                                                          ,.f
 .aid (Total recoverable)         82(a)m          3.2(a)m                  C.OfhX'             220(tf}»»                     0.*(e>«                       •. . • •
4alathlon                                           0.1»                                                                             0.1.1
^angineie (Total                                                                                                                                     .     100(h>-
   recoverable) .
Mercury (Total raeoverabla)       2.4(d)w 0.012(C)m                       0.14(h)m              2.1(d)t^                    0.025(c)p«                   P.146(h)*
•talhoxychlor                                         0,03s*               40(h>«                                                0.03^
Methyl bromide                          • •       •        .               4B(h}«M                                                                       4,000(h>y
    (bremomethane)
/ethytini chloride                                                        2.46(hc)w                                                       .... ... 1,600(hck
MM        •                                       O.OD1W                                                                     o.oou                        ..
^Icfcel (Total recoverable)       ,400 (a)r* 160(a)f.                      51C(hK                75(<J)t^                    6.3(tf)iM                    3,WO(h)«          (

NJpE?EOff.c« of Und &                                                            April 2$, 1994
                                                                                                                                                                            •-« v
                                                                                                                                                                      • • A™
                                                                                                                                                                          •* .*•V
                                                                                                                                                   500074

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

*
                                    I             Fnahwaler Crtltrit                                                           tattwtitf            Crfttria
                                                                                    Human                                                                Human
 ————————————                  •" l;r.';.' ..>.'^x-                                 HeiHh
                                                      ••^Chronic''-                                       :?2SS(i^ -^Sc^                                 Health
 Wrata (at N)                       I                                           10,000(h)-;
                                                                                                                      *
 Wrobaraane                                                                        16.0(h)^                                                             1,*00(h>*
 ^Nhroaodl-rvbulylamlne                                                       O.OOW1 (hcV                 • •
 ^.Nhroaodlathylamlne                                                         0.0002J3(hc)w                               .•           •
 ^Nhroaodimathylamlne                                              •          o.oooe»e(hc>w                                                              •.1(he)w
 ^Nftroaodlphenylamlne         .                                                 4.85(hcX-                                                               16(hc)*»
 ^Nttrowpyrrolidlne                                                            0.0l6?(hc)«i
 'anthlon                               0.06&M         0.01i*/
                                                                         '*                                                                     •                    .
                                                               •
»enlacMorobenzena                       '.    '.                                  3.e7(h>«                                                               4U1(h)itf
»antachlorophanol                       20(b)*          13(b)ttt                0.26(hC)rw                  13^                      7.P*/            • .Bwc(hC)m
                                                                                                                  *
^fienol                                                                         20,9DO(h)»                                                            4,600,000(h)w
?                                                                             * * " * " *
    fto$phorou* {yallow}                                                                                                             0.1*
9
 o!yehiorin«)ed biphanyis                              0.014«             0.000244 (he)m                                            0.030*.           0.000247(hc)w
   <PCB»)
PCB-1242                                                                 0.000044^)^                                                                 0.00004 $(hc}»«
PCB-12S4                                                                 O.C00044(he)M                                                               0.00004 S(he)»*
  '•B-1221                                                               O.C00044(hc)i*«                                                    •        0.00004 5(hc)iK
"CB-1232                                      .                          0.000044 (he)t*.                                                            0.00004 5(hc)i^
'CB-1248                                                                 0.000044(he)m                                                               0.00004S(he)».
"CB-tteO                                                                 0.000044 (he)^                                                              0.00004S(hc)^
9
 CB-1016                                                           ."    0.000044 (hc}»*                                                             0.00004 5(he)«*
*yrene                                                                            7»7(h)^                                                               §,(70(h)w
Selenium (Total racoverabla)            20«N            f.OiM                      I0(h>w                 300(d)f*                 7l(d)i*
Silver (Total reoovarabft) *         4,1(1)^                                       164(h)«                2.3(d}»*
Sulflde-hydrogan auKlde                                  ^UU                     '._••*     • ' " . - '     • -• .•'
                                                                                                                                    .*•.'•
£ ,4 ,$-Tatra chlorcben: ane                                             . 2.H(h>«                                                                       9^$(f>)w
        v
!,3l?,e retrachlorodibanzo-p»                                           O.DOOOD001J(hc>*                                                            O.OOOOOOOMCheV
     dloxln(TCDD)
 ,1,2^-Talrachloroathane                                                         1J(he)««                                                               110(hc)p»
'etraehloroathylana         |                                                  0.38B(hc)itf                 .'.                                         4JM(he)iu
'halllum (Total racovanble)                                    *
                                                                                 U0(h)w                                                                 Q^2(h)«
'oluene                       •                                            C,800(h)tH                                                          500,000(h>«
'oxaphana                       0.73*                 O.OD02M            0.000730(he)w                     0.21*                   0.0002»i . 0.000747(he)«

JDEPEOfflecefLtodAWaierPUnnini                                                              April 25, 1W4                      .                          4




                                                                                                                                                       500075

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            (ug/l unleti otherwise noted)

                   •                                        Freshwater                Criteria                                Saltwater              Criteria
                                                                                               Human                                                           Human
                                           v< V* :.•>>.• '. '.:<.•

            Toxic Subslance
                                                              1
                                           KSfcaile * •.-throSc *                 1            Hearth.                                                         Health
     1,2,4-TrichIorobenzene                                                                 30.6(h)«                 .                                         113(h)^
     J,1,1-Trichloroetharte                                                   •             127(h>-                 -••                       •- .        •
     1,1£.TricW6rbethane                                                                    13.5(h)*                                                          420(hc)n.
                                                                                         • 6.0(hc)cM
     rrichloroelhylene                                                                     1.0B(hc>»                                                           «1(hc>v
     2,4,5-TrtcNorophenol                                                                  2,5SO(h>-                                                 ,        »,790(h)H,
     Z,4,6-TricWorophenol                                                                  •2.1(hc)iw                                                         6.5(hc)tu
     vinyl chloride         .   -                                                         0.0830(hc)«                              . .•                       E26(he)^
     Zinc (Tots! recoverable)              120(i)tn                  110(a)t*                                      6S(d)iM             §e<d)iM
            Criteria for these metals are expressed by equations which follow. Criteria In the table ere at total
            hardness of 100 mg/l with an assumed water effect ratio (WER) of 1.0.
                     Acute criterion • WEft e(mA(If>(hlrtnlM))*bA)      • : •
                     Chronic criterion • WER «(m6{ln(hardnett))+bc)
            Factors for use In the formulae are:
                                                                     • mA                 &A            • mc                 *C
            Cadmium                                                   1.128            -3.828            0.7152           •3.460
            Copper                                                   0.6422            -1.464            0.8545           -1.465
                          43
            Chromium                                                 0.8160            3.688            0.8160             •1.861
            Lead                                                     1.273            •1.460            1.273             •4.705
            Nickel                                                   0.6460            9.3612           0.8460            1.1645
           Silver                                                    1.72             -e.52               -                  •
           2inc                                                      0.8473            0.8604           0.8473            0.7614

           Criteria are expressed by the equations which follow. Criteria In the teble ere et pH of 7.8.
                       Acuie criterion
                       Chronic criterion
e          If the chronic criterion for total mercury exceeds 0.012 ug/L, the edible portion of aquatic species of
           concern muti t* analyzed to determine whether JddWonel ecllons ere required.
d          Crfierie for these metals are expreued as a function of the WER
ft . • Noneardnogenie effecf-based human heetth criteria                                                                                              i
he     Human cardnogen              '                    • :.'.                                                ;                   .
                                                                                      * " 1.                                  "         " *
ol         Organolepllc effed-bssed criteria expressed as maximum concentrations
*          Criterie for FW2-TP A FW2-TM waters                                                       . . . . . .
•«         Criterie for FW2-NT waters                   .                                        .                 ...
KJDEPE^fflce of Und& Water Planning                                                              April 25, 1994                                           . S

                                                                                                                                                     500076

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Ground Water Quality Standards

                                            SPECIFIC GROUND WATER QUALITY CRITERIA - CLASS II-A   AMD PRACTICAL GUAMTITATION LEVELS
                                                                         Ground Water                         Practical                  Higher of PQLs and
                                                                         Quality                              Quant i tat ion            Ground Water Quality
Constituent                                        CASRN                 Criteria*                            Levels (POLs)*             Criteria*
        I                                                                                                                                                           1

alpha-BHC (alpha-HCH) .............. 319-84-6 ............ 0.006 ............ 0.02 .............. 0.02
beta-BHC (beta-HCH) ............... 319-85-7 ............ 0.2 ............. 0.04 .............. 0.2
gamma-BBC
 (gamna-HCH/Lindane) .............. 58-89-9 ............. 0.2 ............. 0.2 ............... 0.2
Bis(2-chloroethyl) ether ............ 111-44-4 ............ 0.03 ............ 10 ............... 10
Bis(2-chloroisopropyl) ether .......... 39638-32-9 .......... 300 .............. 10 ............... 300
Bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate ........... 117-81-7 ............ 3 .............. 30 ............... 30
• Bromodichloromethane
(Diehlorobromomethane) ............. 75-27-4 ............. 0.3 ............. 1 ................ 1
Bromoform .................... 75-25-2 ............. 4 .............. 0.8 ............... 4
Butylbenzyl phthalate .............. 85-68-7 ............ 100 .............. 20 ............... 100
Cadmium .................... 7440-43-9 ............ 4 .............. 2 ................ 4
Carbofuran ................... 1563-66-2 ............ 40 .............. 7 ............... 40
 Carbon tetrachloride                                  56-23-5 ............. 0.4 ............. 2 ................ 2
 Chlorobenzene .................. 108-90-7 ............ 4.............. 2 ........... ..... 4
 Chlordane • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •   57-74-9 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   0.01 . . . . . . . . . . . .     0.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0.5
 Chloride   .................... 16887-00-6 ........                                250,000 ............. 2000 ............. 250,000
 Chloroform ................... 67-66-3 ............. 6 .............. 1 ................ 6
 4-Chloro-3-methyl
 (o-chloro-m-cresol) . .............. 59-50-7 . ............ NA .............. 20 ............... NA
 2-Chlorophenol ................. 95-57-8 ............. 40 .............. 20 ............... 40
 Chlorpyrifos .................. 2921-88-2 ............ 20 ....,......;.. 0.2 .............. 20
 Chromium (Total) ................ 7440-47-3 ........... 100 .............. 10 ............... 100
 Chrysene .................... 218-01-9 ............ MA .............. 20 ............... NA
 Color .....................................                                            10 CU ............ 20 CU .............. 20 CU
 Copper ..................... 7440-50-8 .......... 1,000 ............ 1,000 .............. 1,000
 Cyanide ..................... 57-12-5 ............ 200 .............. 40 ............... 200
 2,4-0   ..................... 94-75-7 ............. 70 .............. 5 ............... 70
 Dalapon ..................... 75-99-0 ............ 200 .............. 10 ............... 200
 4.4--DDD (p.p'-TDE) ............... 72-54-8 ............. 0.1 ............. 0.04 .............. 0.1
 4,4'-DDE .................... 72-55-9 ............. 0.1 ............. 0.04 .............. 0.1
 4,4'-DDT .................... 50-29-3 ............. 0.1 .;........... 0.06 .............. 0.1
 Demeton ..................... 8065-48-3 ............ 0.3 ............. NA ................ 0.3


                                                                                                                                                     500077

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Ground Water Quality Standards

                                          SPECIFIC GROUND WATER QUALITY CRITERIA - CLASS II-A AND PRACTICAL QUANTITATION LEVELS
                                                                         Ground Water                           Practical                             Higher of PQLs and
                                                                         Quality                                Quant i tat ion                       Ground Water Quality
Constituent                                     CASRN                    Criteria*                              Levels (PQLs)'                        Criteria*
       I                                                                                                                                                                      1

                        ......... 83-32-9 ....... ..... 400 ........ ...... 10 ....... ........ 400
Acenapthylene ......... ......... 208-96-8 ......        HA          ...... 10 ....... ........ NA
                        ......... 67-64-1 ....... ..... 700 ........        NA         ........ 700
Acrolein ........... ......... 107-02-8 ......           UA          ...... 50 ....... ........ NA
Acrylamide .......... ......... 79-06-1 ....... ...... 0.008 ...... ...... NA ....... ......... 0.008
Acrylonitrile .................. 107-13'1 ............ 0.06 ............ 50 ............... 50
Adipates
(Di(ethylhexyl)adipate) ............. 103-23-1 ............ NA .............. 6 ............... NA
Alachlor .................... 15972-60-8 ........... 0.43 ............ 2 ................. 2
Aldicarb sulfone ........          . . 1646-88-4 ............ 2 ........ ...... 3 ........ ........ 3
Aldrin ............. ........ 309-00-2 ...... ...... 0.002 ...... ...... 0.04 ...... ... . . . . . 0.04
                       ........ 7429-90-5 ...... ..... 200 ........ ..... 200 ........ ....... 200
Ammonia .............                            ..... 500 ........ ..... 200 ........ ....... 500
Anthracene ........... ........ 120-12-7 ...... ..... 2000 ........ ...... 10 ........ ...... 2000
                       ........ 7440-36-0 ...... ...... 2 ........ ...... 20 ........ ....... 20
Arsfenic (Total) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7440-38-2 . . . . . . . . . . . .     0.02 . . . . . . . . . . . .         8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Asbestos   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1332-21-4 . . . . . .     7X106f/L>10um1 . . . . . . . . .     105f/L>10um1 . . . . . . . . .      7Xl06f/L>10uma
Atrazine   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1912-24-9 . . . . . . . . . . . .     3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Barium ..................... 7440-39-3 .......... 2,000 ............. 200 .............. 2000
Benz(a)anthracene         .............. 56-55-3 ............. NA .............. 10 ............... NA
Benzene . . . . . t .............. 71-43-2 ............. 0.2 ............. 1 ................ 1
Benzidine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92-87-5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0.0002 . . . . . . . . . . . 50 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
Benzyl Alcohol   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100-51-6      . . . . . . . . . . . 2000 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . N A . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           2000
Benzo(a)pyrene (BaP)      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50-32-8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . N A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           NA
3,4-Benzofluoranthene
 (Benzo(b)fluoranthene)     . . . . . . . . . . . . . 205-99-2   . . . . . . . . . . . . NA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 NA
Benzo(ghi)perylene    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 191-24-2     . . . . . . . . . . . . NA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .               NA
BenzodOfluoranthene       . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 207-08-9   . . . . . . . . . . . . NA . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      NA
Beryllium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7440-41-7 . . . . . . . . . . . .       0.008 . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            20




                                                                                                                                                             500078

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Ground Water Quality Standards

                                               SPECIFIC GROUND WATER QUALITY CRITERIA - CLASS 11-A AND PRACTICAL QUANTITATION LEVELS
                                                                                    Ground Water                        Practical                           Higher of PQLs and
                                                                                    Quality                             Quant i tat ion                     Ground Water Quality
Constituent                                            CASRN                        Criteria*                           Levels (PQLs)*                      Criteria*
       i                                                                                                                                                                        1

Dibenz(a,h)anthracene .............. 53-70-3 ............. NA .............. 20 ................ NA
0 i bromoch I oromethane
(Chlorodibromomethane) ............. 124-48-1 ............ 10 .............. 1 ............... 10
1,2-Dibromo-3-chloropropane
(DBCP) ..................... 96-12-8 ............. NA .............. 2 ............... NA
Di-n-butyl phthalate     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84-74-2 . . . . . . . . . . . .               900 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 900
1.2-Dichlorobenzene      - • • • • • • • • • • • • 95-50-1 . . . . . . . . . . . .                 600 .............. 5 ............... 600
1.3-Dichlorobenzene    • • • • • • • • • • • • • • . • • • • • • 541-73-1   ...........            6 0 0. . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 600
1.4-Dichlorobenzene    • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 106-46-7   . . . . . . . . . . . . 75 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    5 ...............                 75
3,3'-Dichlorobenzidine     . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91-94-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . .               0.08 . . . . . . . . . . . . 60 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      60
1.1-Dichloroethane • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 75-34-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . N A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      70
1.2-Dichloroethane • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 107-06-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 . 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1,1-DichloroethyLene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75-35-4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
cis-1,2-Dichloroethylene       • • • • • • • • • •             156-59-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 0
trans-1,2-Dichloroethylene      . . . . . . . . . . . 156-60-5              ...........            100 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
2,4-Oichlorophenol     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120-83-2               . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     20
1.2-Oichloropropane   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78-87-5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 . 5 . . . . . . . . . . . 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
cis-1,3-0ichloropropene . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10061-01-5 . . . . . . . . . . . NA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . NA
trans-1,30ichlorpropene . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10061-02-6                  . . . . . . . . . . . NA . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    7 ...............                 NA
1.3-Dichloropropene
(cis and trans) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 542-75-6                    ............             0.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . NA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      .02
Oieldrin .................... 60-57-1 ............. 0.002 ............ 0.03 .............. 0.03
Diethyl phthalate ................ 84-66-2 ........... 5,000 .............. 10 .............. 5,000
2,4-Dimethylphenol ............... 105-67-9 ........... 100 .............. 20 ............... 100
Dimethyl phthatate ............... 131-11-3 . . . ; . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • • • • • 10 ... •• ............
4,6-Dinitro-o-cresol .............. 534-52-1 ............ NA .............. 60 ............... NA
2,4-Dinitrophenot ............... 51-28-5 ............. 10 .............. 40 ............... 40
 2,4-Dinitrotoluene
  /2,6-Dinitrotoluene mixture .......... 121-14-2 ............ 0.05 ............ 10 ............... 10




                                                                                                                                                               500079

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Ground Water Quality Standards

                                 SPECIFIC GROUND WATER QUALITY CRITERIA - CLASS II-A AND PRACTICAL QUANTITATION LEVELS
                                                             Ground Water                        Practical               Higher of PQLs and
                                                             Quality                             Quant i tat ion         Ground Water Quality
Constituent                            CASRN                 Criteria*                           Levels (PQLs)'          Criteria*
       1                                                                                                                                        1

2,6-Dinitrotoluene ........ ....... 606-20-2 ....
                                               ....... NA ...... ........ 10            ........... NA
                        ....... 117-84-0 .... ...... 100 ...... ........ NA . . . . ........... 100
                        ....... 88-85-7 .....  ....... 7 ...... ........ 2 . . . . ............ 7
                        ....... 122-66-7 .... ........ 0.04 . . . . ........ NA . . . . ............ 0.04
Diquat .............. ....... 85-00-7 ..... ........ 20 ...... ........ NA . . . . ........... 20
Endosulfan ............ ....... 115-29-7 .... ........ 0.4 . . . . ......... NA . . . . ............ 0.4
alpha-Endosulfan
 (Endosulfan I) .......... ....... 959-98-8 .... ........ 0.4 . . . . ......... 0.02 . . ............ 0.4
beta-Endosulfan
 (Endosulfanll) .......... ....... 33213-65-9 . . . ........ 0.4 ....                       ........ 0.04 . . ............ 0.4
Endosulfan sulfate ........ ....... 1031-07-8 .... ........ 0.4 ....                        ........ 0.08 . . ............ 0.4
Endothall ............ ....... 145-73-3 .... ....... 100 .....                              ........ NA . . . . ........... 100
Endrin .............. ....... 72-20-8 ..... ........ 2 .....                                ........ 0.04 . . ............ 2
Epichlorohydrin ......... ....... 106-89-8 .... ........ 4 .....                            ........ NA . . . . ............ 4
Ethylbenzene ........... ....... 100-41-4 .... ....... 700 ..... ........ 5 . . . . ........... 700
Ethylene dibromide ........ ....... 106-93-4 .... ........ 0.0004 . . ........ 0.05 . . ............ 0.05
Fluoranthene ........... ....... 206-44-0 .... ....... 300 , .... ........ 10 . . . ............ 300
Fluorene ............. ....... 86-73-7 ... . ........   .        300 ..... ........ 10 . . . ............ 300
                               ....... 16984-48-8 . . . ....... 2000 .....  ....... 500 . . . ........... 2000
Foaming agents (ABS/LAS) .....                          ......   500 ..... ......... 0.5 ... ...........; 500
Glyphosatc ............ ....... 1071-83-6 .... ....... 700 ..... ......... NA . . . . ........... 700
                                                             . . . . . 250rag/L   ..... ,...;. 10 mg/L . . . ......... 250 mg/L
Heptachlor ............ ....... 76-44-8 ..... ........ 0.008 . . . ......... 0.4 ... ............ 0.4
                              ....... 1024-57-3 .... ........ 0.004 . . .........
                                                                        .         0.2 ... ............ 0.2
                              ....... 118-74-1 .... ........ 0.02 . . . ......... 10 ... ........... 10
Hexachlorobutadiene ........ ....... 87-68-3 ..... ........ 1 ..... ......... 1 ... ............ 1
                              ....... 77-47-4 ..... ........ 50 ..... ......... 10 ... ........... 50
Hexachtoroe thane ......... ....... 67-72-1 ..... ........ 0.7 .... ......... 10 ... ........... 10
Hydrogen sulfide ......... ....... 7783-06-4 .... ........ 20 ..... ......... NA ... ............ 20
Indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene ...... ....... 193-39-5 .... ........ NA ..... ......... 20 ... ............ NA
Iron ............... ....... 7439-89-6 .... ....... 300 ..... ........ 100 ... ............ 300
Isophorone ............ ....... 78-59-1 ..... ....... 100 . . . ..........
                                                                 .         10 ... ........... 100
Lead (Total) ........... ....... 7439-92-1 .... ........ 5 ..... ......... 10 ... ........... 10


                                                                                                                                    500080

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Ground Water Quality Standards

                                       SPECIFIC GROUND WATER QUALITY CRITERIA - CLASS II-A AND PRACTICAL QUANTITATION LEVELS
                                                                    Ground Water                        Practical                          Higher of PQLs and
                                                                    Quality                             Quantitation                       Ground Water Quality
Constituent                                  CASRN                  Criteria*                           Levels (PQLs)*                     Criteria*
       I

Malathion .................... 121-75-5 ........... 200 .............. 5 ............... 200
Manganese .................... 7439-96-5 ............ 50 .............. 6 ............... 50
Mercury (Total) ................. 7439-97-6 ............ 2 .............. 0.5 ............... 2
Methoxychlor .................. 72-43-5 ............. 40 .............. 10 ............... 40
Methyl bromide
 (browvethane) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74-83-9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   10
Methyl chloride
 (ehloroMethane) ................ 74-87-3 ............. 30 .............. 2 ............... 30
Wethyl ethyl ketone ............... 78-93-3 ............ 300 .............. NA ............... 300
3-»ethyl-*-eMortj(*enol ............. 59-50-7 ............. NA .............. 20 ............... NA
"ethylef* chloride ............... 75-09-2 ............. 2 .............. 2 ................ 2
*-*ethyl-2-p»»tanone .............. 108-10-1 ........... 400 .............. NA ............... 400
Mirex ...................... 2385-85-5 ............ 0.01 ............ NA ................ 0.01
Nickel (Soluble salts) ............. 7440-02-0 ........... 100 .............. 10 ............... 100
Nitrate (as N) ................. 14797-55-8 ...'...... 10,000 ............. 400 ............. 10,000
Nitrate and Nitrite (as N) .......................... 10,000 .............. NA ............. 10,000
Nitrite (as.N) ................. 14797-65-0 ......... 1,000 ............. 400 .............. 1,000
Nitrobenzene .................. 98-95-3 ............. 3 .............. 10 ............... 10
N-Nitrosodimethylamine ............. 62-75-9 ............. 0.0007 ........... 20 ............... 20
N-Nitrosodiphenylamine ............. 86-30-6 ............. 7 ............. 20 ............... 20
N-Nitrosodi-n-propylamine ............ 621-64-7 ............ 0.005 ............ 20 ............... 20
Odor   .....................................                                       3b   .............. NA ............... 3h
Oil & Grease and
Petroleum Hydrocarbons (PHC) ..... ^ ............. None Noticeable .............. NA ......... None Noticeable
Oxamyl ..................... 23135-22-0 .......... 200 .............. 20 ............... 200
PCBs
(Polychlorinated biphenyls) ........... 1336-36-3 ............ 0.02 ............ 0.5 ............... 0.5
Pentachlorophenol ................ 87-86-5 ............. 0.3 .-. ........... .1 ................ 1




                                                                                                                                              500081

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Ground Water Quality Standards

                                                    SPECIFIC GROUND WATER QUALITY CRITERIA - CLASS II-A AND PRACTICAL QUANTITATION LEVELS
                                                                                     Ground Water                         Practical                  Higher of PQLs and
                                                                                     Quality                              Quantitation               Ground Water Quality
Constituent                                                 CASRN                    Criteria*                            Levels (PQLs)'             Criteria*


                                                                                                       6.5-8.5 ........... NA ................ 6.5-8.5

Phenanthrene .................. 85-01-8 ............. NA .............. 10 ............... NA
Phenol ..................... 108-95-2 ........... 4000 .............. 10 .............. 4000
Picloram .................... 1918-02-1 ........... 500 .............. 1 ............... 500
Pyrene ..................... 129-00-0 ........... 200 .............. 20 ............... 200
Selenium (Total) ................ 7782-49-2 ............ 50 .............. 10 ............... 50
Silver ..................... 7440-22-4 ............ NA .............. 2 ............... NA
Simazine .................... 122-34-9 ............ 1 .............. 0.8 ............... 1
Sodium ..................... 7440-23-5 .......... 50,000 ............. 400 ............. 50,000
Styrene ..................... 100-42-5 ........... 100 .............. 5 ............... 100
Sulfate .................... 14808-79-8 ........ 250,000 ............. 5000 ............. 250,000
Taste ............................... None Objectionable .............. NA ....... None Objectionable
TCDD
(2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo
 -p-dioxin)     ...        . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1746-01-6 . . . . . . . . . . . .             0.0000002 . . . . . . . . . .   0.01 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0.01
1,1,1,2-Tetrachloroethane . . . . . . . . . . . . 630-20-6                   . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . NA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     10
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane . . . . . . . . . . . . 79-34-5 . . . . . . . . . . . . .                    2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Tetrachloroethylene • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 127-18-4 . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 . 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
2,3,4.6-Tetrachlorophenol . . . . . . . . . . . . 58-90-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . NA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . NA
Thallium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7440-28-0 . . . . . . . . . . . . 0.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Toluene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108-88-3 . . . . . . . . . . 1,000 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1000
Total dissolved solids (TDS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 500,000 . . . . . . . . . . . . 10,000 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 500,000
Toxaphene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8001-35-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . 0.03 . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2,4,5-TP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93-72-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 0
1.2,4-Trichlorobenzene                                              120-82-1 . . . . . . . . . . . .   9 ..............                1 . . . . . . . . . . . • • • • • °
1.1.1-Trichloroethane • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 71-55-6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30
1.1.2-Trichloroethane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79-00-5 . . . . . . . . . . . . .                    3 .............. 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Trichloroethylene • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 79-01-6 . . . . . . . . . . . . .      1 .............. 1 . . . . . . . . . . - • • • • • . . 1
2.4.5-Trichlorophenol .............. 95-95-4 ............ 700 .............. 10 ............... 700
2.4.6-Trichlorophenol .............. 88-06-2 ............. 3 .............. 20 ............... 20
Vinylchlorfde •    •   •    •   •   •   •   •   •               75-01-4 . . . . . . . . . . . . .      0.08 . . . . . . . . . . . .    5 ................ 5
Xylenes (Total)        •        •                       •           1330-20-7 ............ 40 .............. 2 ................ *0



                                                                                                                                                                 500082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Ground Water Quality Standards

                                        SPECIFIC GROUND WATER QUALITY CRITERIA - CLASS II-A AMD PRACTICAL QUANTITATION LEVELS
                                                                     Ground Water                         Practical                           Higher of PQLs and
                                                                     Quality                              Quant i tat ion                     Ground Water Quality
Constituent                 .                 GASRN                  Criteria*                            Levels (PQLs)*                      Criteria*
       I                                                                                                                                                         I

m&p-Xylenes ................... NA ............... .NA .............. 2 ............... NA
o-Xylene .................... NA ............... NA ............ ^ . 1 ............... NA
Zinc ...................... 7440-66-6 .......... 5,000 .............. 30 .............. 5000
Microbiological criteria",                      prevailing Safe Drinking
Radionuclides &                                 Water Act Regulations
Turbidity                                                                        (N.J.A.C. 7:10-1 et seq.)



Explanation of Terms;
* = Ground Water Quality Criteria and PQLs are expressed as ug/L unless otherwise noted. Table 1 criteria are all maximum values unless clearly indicated as a range
for which the minimum value is to the left and the maximum value is to the right.
PQL -- Practical Quantitation Level as defined in N.J.A.C. 7:9-6.4
CASRN - Chemical Abstracts System Registration Number
NA = not available for this constituent.
a « Asbestos criterion is measured in terms of fibers/L longer than 10 micrometers (f/L > 10 urn)
ug = micrograms, L = liter, f = fibers, CU= standard Cobalt Units
b = Odor Threshold Number, mg = milligrams, H = Hardness
(Total) means the concentration of metal in an unfiltered sample following treatment with hot dilute mineral acid (as defined in "Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water
& Wastes", EPA-600/4-79-020, March 1979) or other digestion defined by the analytical method. However samples that contain less than 1 nephlometric turbidity unit (NTU)
and are properly preserved, may be directly analyzed without digestion.
m= Pursuant to prevailing Safe Drinking Water Act Regulations any positive result for fecal coliform is in violation of the MCL and is therefore an exceedance of the ground
water quality standards.




                                                                                                                                                  500083

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              NATIONAL RECOMMENDED WATER QUALITY CRITERIA FOR PRIORITY TOXIC POLLUTANTS

                                                                    Freshwater                          Saltwater                        Human Health
                                                                                                                                      For Consumption of:
                                                                                                                                      Water +   Organism
                                        CAS          CMC                          CCC          CMC                   CCC              Organism      Only            FRCite/
               .Priority Pollutant      Number       G^g/L)                       G^g/L)   G^g/L)                   G^g/L)            fcg/L)       G/g/L)            Source
  1           Antimony                   7440360                                           |                         • .                14B.Z       4300 B          57FR60848
  2           Arsenic                    7440382      340 AAK                150AAK             69 A.D.bb           36 A,D.bb                                       62FR42160
                                                                                                                                      0.01 8 CMS   0.14 cxs         57FR60848
  3           Beryllium                  7440417                                                                                          >Z          i             62FR42160
  4           Cadmium                    7440439      4.3 DJ*                2.2 D.E.K           42D.bb             9.3 D.bb              JZ           i            62FR42160
  5a          Chromium HI               16065831      5700,*                 74D.EJC
                                                                                                                                        J,ZToul        j
                                                                                                                                                                  EPA820/B-96-00!
                                                                                                                                                                    62FR42160
•••••••*•*•

  5b          Chromium VI               18540299        16D*                     llDJC         1,1 00 D.bb           50 D.bb           J.Z Total      j             62FR42160
  6           Copper                     7440508      13 D.E.K^ee           9.0 D,E,K.ee        4.8 D.cc.ff         3.1 D.cc.ff        1,300 U                      62FR42160

  7           Lead                       7439921 j    65D.E,bb.gg           2.5 D.E.bbj|        210 D.bb             8.1 D.bb              J           J            62FR42160
  8           Mercury                    7439976       1.4DJC.hh            0.77DJCJA           l.SD.ee^ih      0.94 D.ee.hh           0.050 B      0.051 B j       62FR42160

  9           Nickel                     7440020      470 D.E.K              52DJEJC             74D.bb              8.2 D.bb     |     610 B       4,600 B   1     62FR42160

   10         Selenium                   7782492            L.R.T                5.0 T         290 D.bb.dd          71 D.bb,dd    1                           1 62FR42160
                                                                                                                                  1      170 z      11,000    j IRIS 09/01/91
                                                                                                                           *

   11         Silver                     7440224       3.4 O.E.O                                 1.9D.O                                                             62FR42160

   12         Thallium                   7440280        •                                                                                1.7 B       6.3 B           57FR60848

   13         Zinc                       7440666 |     120D.E.K              120 D.E.K           90 D.bb             81 D.bb                                        62FR42160
                                                                                                                                       9,100 u     69,000 u       IRIS 10/01/92




                                                                                                                                                                   500084

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           Freshwater                          Saltwater                     Human Health
                                                                                                                          For Consumption of:
                                                                                                                          Water*    Organism
                                 CAS           CMC                     . CCC           CMC                 CCC            Organism     Only                        FRCite/
        Priority Pollutant       Number       fcg/L)                     fog/L)       (Mg/L)               fcg/L)         G/g/L)      G/g/L)                         Source
14    Cyanide                       57125         22 K.Q                5.2 K.Q                                                                                 EPA820/B-96-OOI
                                                                                          1 Q.M.            1 Q,bb           700 B.Z        220,000 B.H             57FR60848
IS    Asbestos                    1332214
                                                                   .                                                       7 million
                                                                                                                           fibers/L i
                                                                                                                                                                    57FR60848

16    2,3,7,8-TCDD Dioxin         1746016                                         1                                         1.3E-8C           1.4E-8C               62FR42160
17    Acrolein                     107028                                                                                      320               780                57FR60848
18    Acrylonitrile                107131                                                                                  0.059 B.C          0.66 B.C              57FR60848
19    Benzene                       71432                                                                                    1.2B.C             71 B.C              62FR42160
20    Bromoform                     75252 '                                                                                  4.3 B.C           360 B.C              62FR42160
21    Carbon Tetrachloride          56235     .                                                                             0.25 B,C           4.4 B.C      1       57FR60848
22    Chlorobenzene                108907                                                                            1       680B.Z          21.000B.H |            57FR60848
23 . Chlorodibromomethane          124481                                                                            j      0.41 B.C            34B.C       I       62FR42160
24    Chloroethane                  75003                                     .
                                                                                  •

25    2-Chloroethylvinyl Ether     110758                                                                                „ _ . . . _ ...................... „..„„..„.......„.........
                                                   •   .
26    Chloroform .                  67663                                                          '                        5.7 B.C       470 B.C j 62FR42160

27    Dichlorobrolhomethane         75274                                                                                   0.56 B.C            46 B.C              62FR42I60
                                                                                                                                                             ...... .. ..................
28    1,1-Dichloroethane            75343                               -

29    1,2-Dichloroethane           107062                                         i                                         0.38 B.C            99B.C       j       57FR60848

30    1 , 1 -Dichloroethylene       75354                                         |                                      | 0.057 B.C           3.2 B.C              57FR60848




                                                                                                                                                        500085

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                                         j
                                                                                   Freshwater                         Saltwater                   Human Health
                                                                                                                                               For Consumption of:
                                                                                                                                               Water*      Organism
                                               CAS                        CMC                   CCC          CMC                  CCC          Organism      Only            FR Cite/
              Priority Pollutant               Number                    !fcg/L)                G/g/L)       O^g/L)               0*g/L)       G/g/L)       G/g/L)            Source
  31        1 ,2-Dichloropropane                      78875                                                                                     0.52 B.C      39 B.C         62FR42I60
  32        1 ,3-Dichloropropene                    542756                                                                                       108          1,700 B        57FR60848
  33        Ethylbenzene                             100414                                                                                    3,100 B^      29,000 B        62FR42160
  34        Methyl Bromide                            74839                                                                                      48 B         4000 B         62FR42160
  35        Methyl Chloride                           74873                                                                                        j            j            62FR42160
  36        Methylene Chloride                        75092.                                                                                    4.7 B.C      1600 B.C        62FR42160
  37        1 , 1 ,2,2-Tetrachloroethane              79345                                                                                     O.I7B.C       1 1 B.C        57FR60848
  38        Tetrachloroethylene                      127184                                              •                                       0.8 c        8.85 c         57FR60848
  39        Toluene                                  108883                                                                                    6,800 B^     200,000 B        62FR42160
  40        1 ,2-Trans-Dichloroethylene              156605                                                                                1    700B.Z       140,000 B       62FR42160
                                                                                                                                                                1
            1,1,1 -Trichloroethane
  41                                                  71556
                                                                                                                                           1 "                               62FR42160
  42        1,1 ^-Trichloroethane                     79005 1                                                                                   0.60 B.C      42B.C          57FR60848
                                                                                           ••
  43 - Trichloroethylene                              79016                                                                                      2.7 c         81 c          57FR60848

  44        Vinyl Chloride                            75014                                                                                      2.0 c        525 c          57FR60848
                                                                                                                                           i
  45        2-Chlorophcnol                            95578                                                                                     120B.U       400 B.U         62FR42160

  46        2,4-Dichlorophenol                       120832                                                                                      93B.U        790 B.U        57FR60848

  47        2,4-Dimethylphenol                       105679                                                                                     540 B.U      2,300 B.U       62FR42I60

  48        2-Methyl-4,6-Dinitrophenol              534521                                                                                        13.4         765           57FR60848
•****••••                                                              ......————— ..........—— ._— .. ............. — ....—— ..——— .„.:....
  49        2,4-Dinitrophenol                          51285                                                                                      70 B       14,000 B        57FR60848

  50        2-Nitrophenol                              88755
  51        4-Nitrophenol                            100027
  52        3-Methyl-4-Chlorophenol                    59507                                                                                       u            u
                                           •••••••*»••••*••••••»*« i

                                                                                                                                                                        500086

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              .                                                       :•                  .                      "   •                                                  ;
                                                                Freshwater                                            Saltwater                                  Human Health
                                                                                                                                                              For Consumption of:
                                                                                                                                                             Water +    Organism                        I
                                 CAS               CMC                               CCC                    CMC                             CCC              Organism      Only                         i         FR Cite/
       Priority Pollutant        Number           fcg/L)                             G/g/L)                fog/L)                           0/g/L)           G/g/L)       (A/g/L)                       i          Source
53   Pentachtorophenol              87865              I9FJC                        15 F*                         13 bb                     7.9 bb            0.28 B.C               8.2 B.CJI                     62FR42I60
54   Phenol                        108952                                                                                                                    21,OOOB.u                                             62FR42160
                                                                                                                                                                                    4,600,000 B.H.U                57FR60848
                                                                                                      ........... ——— .............. —— ... — .....
55   2,4,6-Trichlorophenol          88062                                                                                                                     2.1 B.C.U                6.5 B.C                     62FR42160-
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ..............................
56   Acenaphthene                   83329                                                                                                                     1,200B,u               2,700 B.U                     62FR42160
57   Acenaphthylene                208968                                                                                                                                                               1
58   Anthracene                    120127                                                                                                                     9,600 B               11 0,000 B                     62FR42160
59   Benzidine '                    92875                                                                                                              0.00012 B.C 0.00054 B.C I                                   57FR60848
                                              ......................... —— ........................... ........               .   .......            ....
60   BenzoaAnthracene               56553                                                                                                               0.0044 B.C   0.049 B.C j                                   62FR42160
61   BenzoaPyrene                   50328                                                                                                                    0.0044 B.C              0.049 B.C                    62FR42160
62   BenzobFluoranthene            205992                                                                                                                    0.0044 B.C              0.049 B.C                     62FR42160

63   BenzoghiPerylene              191242              •                                                                                                                      ..........................
64   BenzokFluoranthene            207089 j                                                                                                                  0.0044 B.C              0.049 B.C                     62FR42160
65   Bis2-ChloroethoxyMethane      111911 1                                                                                                              .. _ „ '. ......... ... ... ... . ..... ........ ..............................
66   Bis2-ChloroethylEther         111444                                                                                                                     0.031 B.C                 1.4B.C                     57FR60848

67   Bis2-ChloroisopropylEther    39638329                                                                                                                     1,400B                                              62FR42I60
                                                                                                                                                                                    1 70,000 B                     57FR60848

68   Bis2-EthylhexylPhthalatex     117817                                                                                                                      1.8 B.C                 5.9 B.C                     57FR60848
                                                                                                                                                                '
69   4-Bromophenyl Phenyl          101553                                                                                         '
     Ether
70   Butylbenzyl Phthalate*         85687                                                                                                                     3,000 B                 5,2008                       62FR42160

     2-Chloronaphthalene            91587                                                                                                                |     1.700B                 4,300 B                      62FR42I60
71



                                                                                                                                                                                                       500087

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                                                  i
                                                           Freshwater                                          Saltwater                                   Human Health
                                                                                                                                                         For Consumption of:
                                                                                                                                                        Water +. Organism
                                 CAS           CMC                             CCC               CMC                              CCC                   Organism      Only                  FRCite/
       Priority Pollutant        Number       (Hg/L)                           G/g/L)           G*g/L)                            fcg/L)                G/g/L)       0/g/L)                  Source
72   4-Chlorophenyl Phenyl        7005723
     Ether
                                            ...... — ...... — . ————— . — ..„„........——— ...„,...;— ............ ————,...                                                            ...
73   Chrysene                      218019                                                                                                               0.0044 B.C    0.049 B.C             62FR42160
74   Dibenzoa.hAnthracene           53703                                                                             -     .
                                                                                                                                                        0.0044 B.C    0.049 B.C ... 62FR42160
75   1 ,2-Dichlorobenzcne           95501                                                                                                                2,700 B^     1 7,000 B     62FR42I60
76   1 ,3-Dichlorobenzene          541731                                                                                                           I      400         2,600                62FR42160
77   1 ,4-Dichlorobenzene          106467                                                                                                                 400 z        2600                 62FR42160
                                                                                                                                                                                      ...
78   3,3'-Dichlorobenzidinc         91941                                                                                                                0.04 B.C    0.077 B.C              57FR60848
79   Diethyl Phthalate*             84662                                                                                                          | 23,0008         1 20,000 B ... 57FR60848
80   Dimethyl Phthalatew           131113        ......................... ........ . ... .                                                         | 313,000        2,900,000              57FR60848
81   Di-n-Butyl Phthalate"          84742                                                                                                           |     2,700 B     12,000 B              57FR60848

82   2,4-Dinitrotolucne            121142                                                                                                                               9.1 C               57FR60848

                                                                                              ;• . . . . . _j_ ...
                                                                                                                                                    1     O.llC
83   2,6-Dinitrotoluene            606202
84   Di-n-Octyl Phthalate          117840
                                                                                              1 »•»•*••••*••**•*•»»»••• M ••«   H »••*•••••*••**••»••




85   1 ,2-Dipheny Ihydrazine       122667                                                                                                                0.040 B.C    0.54 B.C              57FR60848
                                                                                                                                                                                  i
86   Fluoranthene                  206440                                                                                                                  300 B       370 B                62FR42I60
                                                                                              ............ ————— ....... —————————————— ..-..,
                                                                                                                                                                                  f
87   Fluorcne                       86737                                                                                                                 1,3008      14,0008               62FR42160
                                            .. — .......;— ....... — .. — ...............                                                                                         .j.«


88   Hexachlorobenzene             118741                                                                                                               0.00075 B,C 0.00077 B.C             62FR42160

89   Hexachlorobutadiene            87683                                                                                                                 0.44 B.C     50 B.C               57FR60848

90   Hexachlorocyclopentadiene      77474                                                                                                                240B.U.Z    1 7,000 B.H.O 1        57FR60848
                                                                                                                                                                                      :
91   Hexachloroethane               67721                                                                                                                 1.9B.C       8.9 B,C        :     57FR60848



                                                                                                                                                                                  500088

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                   . .
                                                            Freshwater                         Saltwater                    Human Health
                                                                                                                         For Consumption of:
                                                                                                                        Water +    Organism
                                   CAS          CMC                      CCC           CMC                  CCC         Organism      Only                                    FR Cite/
        Priority Pollutant         Number       G*g/L)                   fog/L)       fog/L)                fcg/L)      G/g/L)       G/g/L)                                    Source
92    Ideno 1 ,2,3-cdPyrene          193395                      '•
                                                                                                                         0.0044 B.C               0.049 D.c                    62FR42160
93    Isophorone                      78591                                                                                  36 B.C               2,600 B.C                            IRIS
                                                                                                   '
                                                                                                                       ............................                                11/01/97
94    Naphthalene                     91203 . — . —— . — ...................... ———
                                                                                                                                              ........................
95    Nitrobenzene                    98953                                                                                   17 B               I.900B.H.U                    57FR60848
96    N-Nitrosodimethylamine          62759                                                                             0.00069 B.C                   8.1 B.C                  57FR60848
97    N-Nitrosodi-n-Propylam ine     621647                                                                               0.005 B.C                   1.4B.C                   62FR42160
98    N-Nitrosodiphenylamine          86306

                                                                                  ___~~_i~:
                                                                                                                            5.0 B.C                    I6B.C                   57FR60848
99    Phenanthrene                    85018
                                                                                                                                                                         ...........................
100   Pyrene                         129000                                                                                  960 B                    11,000 B                 62FR42I60
                                                                          -
101   1 ,2,4-Trichlorobenzene        120821                                                                                  260z                      940                 IRIS 1 1/01/96
102   Aldrin                         309002         3.0o                                  1.3 G                         0.00013 B.C 0.00014 B.C                               62FR42160

103
104
      alpha-BHC
      beta-BHC
                                     319846
                                     319857
                                                      •
                                                                                  ,_                       _ J           0.0039 B.C
                                                                                                                          0.014 B.C
                                                                                                                                                  0.013 B.C
                                                                                                                                                  0.046 B.C
                                                                                                                                                                              62FR42I60
                                                                                                                                                                              62FR42160

105   gamma-BHC (Lindane)             58899         0.95 K                               0.16G                             0.019 c                    0.063 c                  62FR42160
                                                                                                                                                                             ................... ....
106   delta-BHC                      319868
107   Chlordane                       57749         2.4 o             0.0043o.»          0.09 G            0-004 G.U                                                          62FR42160
                                                                                                                         0.0021 B.C              0.0022 B.C                 IRIS02/07/98

108 • 4,4'-DDT                        50293          l.lc             0.001 G,«          0.13o             0.00 lo.«    0.00059 B.C 0.00059 B.C                                62FR42160

109   4,4'-DDE                        72559                                                                             0.00059 B.C 0.00059 B.C                                62FR42I60
                                                                                                       .                                                                       62FR42160
110   4,4'-DDD                        72548                                                                    .        0.00083 B.C 0.00084 B.C




                                                                                                                                                                   500089

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                  Freshwater                                     Saltwater                       Human Health
                                                                                                                                              For Consumption of:
                                                                                                                                             Water +    Organism
                                          CAS             CMC                       CCC                  CMC                 CCC             Organism      Only                 FRCite/
               Priority Pollutant         Number         fcg/L)                     Ozg/L)              fcg/L)               (,/g/L)         fcg/L)       0/g/L)                 Source
   Ill       Dieldrin                         . 60571        0:24 K            0.056 K.O                   0.71 G        0.0019 G,,.         0.00014 B.C 0.000 14 B.C - 62FR42160
   112       alpha-Endosulfan                 959988        0.22 G.Y           0.056 O.Y                  0.034 G.Y      0.0087 G.Y             HOB             240 B           62FR42160
   113       beta-EndosuIfan               33213659         0.22 O.Y           0.056 G.Y            j     0.034 G.Y      0.0087 G,Y             HOB             240 B           62FR42160
   114       Endosulfan Sulfate               1031078                                                                                           HOB            240 B            62FR42160
  115        Endrin                             72208       0.086 K            0.036 K.O                  0.0370         0.0023 G.ia           0.76 B         0.81 B.H          62FR42160
   116       Endrin Aldehyde                  7421934                                                                                    }     0.76 B         0.81 B.H          62FR42160
••••••*•«•                                                              .............................
  117        Heptachlor                         76448       0.520             0.003 8 G,U                 0.053 G        0.0036 G.U          0.00021 B.C 0.00021 B.C            62FR42I60
  118        Heptachlor Epoxide               1024573       0.52 G.v        0.0038 G.V.II                 0.053 G.v     0.0036 G.V.M         0.00010 B.C 0.00011 B.C            62FR42160
  119        Polychlorinated Biphenyls                                        0.014 N.U                                      0.03 N.II                                          62FR42I60
             PCBs:                        -                                                                                                  0.00017 B.C.?   0.00017 B.C.P      63FR16182
 120 Toxaphene                                8001352 |        0.73             0.0002 u j•         0.21            0.0002 u   0.00073 B.C 0.00075 B.C I 62FR42160
Footnotes:
A This recommended water quality criterion was derived from data for arsenic (III), but is applied here to total arsenic, which might imply that arsenic (III) and
   arsenic (V) are equally toxic to aquatic life and that their toxicities are additive. In the arsenic criteria document (EPA 440/5-84-033, January 1985), Species
   Mean Acute Values are given for both arsenic (HI) and arsenic (V) for five species and the ratios of the SMAVs for each species range from 0.6 to 1.7. Chronic
   values are available for both arsenic (III) and arsenic (V) for one species; for the fathead minnow, the chronic value for arsenic (V) is 0.29 times the chronic value
   for arsenic (III). No data are known to be available concerning whether the toxicities of the forms of arsenic to aquatic organisms are additive.
B This criterion has been revised to reflect The Environmental Protection Agency's ql * or RfD, as contained in the Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS) as of
  April 8,1998. The fish tissue bioconcentration factor (BCF) from the 1980 Ambient Water Quality Criteria document was retained in each case.
C This criterion is based on carcinogenicity of 10"* risk. Alternate risk levels may be obtained by moving the decimal point (e.g., for a risk level of 10s, move
   the decimal point in the recommended criterion one place to the right).
D Freshwater and saltwater criteria for metals are expressed in terms of the dissolved metal in the water column. The recommended water quality criteria
   value was calculated by using the previous 304(a) aquatic life criteria expressed in terms of total recoverable metal, and multiplying it by a conversion factor
   (CF). The term "Conversion Factor" (CF) represents the recommended conversion factor for converting a metal criterion expressed as the total recoverable
   fraction in the water column to a criterion expressed as the dissolved fraction in the water column. (Conversion Factors for saltwater CCCs are not currently
   available. Conversion factors derived for saltwater CMCs have been used for both saltwater CMCs and CCCs). See "Office of Water Policy and Technical


                                                                                                                                                                             500090

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                NATIONAL RECOMMENDED WATER QUALITY CRITERIA FOR NON PRIORITY POLLUTANTS

                                                  i
                                                                                                                                           •'   . •
                                                           Freshwater                     Saltwater                          Human Health
                                                                                                                          For Consumption of:
                                        CAS            CMC               CCC          CMC              CCC             Water +       Organism           FR
          Non Priority Pollutant       Number         fog/L)            fcg/L)       fog/L)           fcg/L)        Organism (/ug/L) OnlyO/g/L)     Cite/Source
  1       Alkalinity                     -                          20000F                                                                                                        Gold Book
  2       Aluminum pH 6.5-9.0          7429905          750 G,I         87GJ.L                                                                                                   53FR33178
•••••••

  3       Ammonia                      7664417             FRESHWATER CRITERIA ARE pH DEPENDENT - SEE DOCUMENT   D                                                              EPA*22-R-9WH»
                                                             SALTWATER CRITERIA ARE pH AND TEMPERATURE DEPENDENT                                                                EPAWO/S-M-WM
  4       Aesthetic Qualities                                              NARRATIVE ^tATEMENT- SEE DOCUMENT                                                                      Gold Book
  5       Bacteria                                         FOR PRIMARY RECREATION AND SHELLFISH USES -SEE DOCUMENT                                                         j      Gold Book
  6       Barium                       7440393                                   j                             |        1,000 A                                            j     Gold Book
  7       Boron                                                           NARRATIVE STATEMENT- SEE DOCUMENT                                                                j      Gold Book
  8       Chloride                     16887006        860000 o     230000 G j                                                                                             j 53FR 19028
                                                                                                                           c
  9       Chlorine                     7782505 I          19              11     1       i3            7.5                                                                 ! Gold Book
                                                                                                                   ..      — ........................... ...... ............j... .......................
   10     Chlorophenoxy Herbicide        93721                                                                            10 A                                             j Gold Book
          2^5,-T?                                                                                                                                                          j
                                                                                                                                                                           !


   11     Chlorophenoxy Herbicide        94757                                                                          .100A.C                                            1      Gold Book
          2,4-D
   12     Chloropyrifos                2921882          0.083o          0.0410   | 0.01 lo        0.0056 o                                                                j Gold Book

   13     Color                           —                              NARRATIVE STATEMENT- SEE EJOCUMENT F                                                              {      Gold Book
•••**••

   14     Demeton                      8065483                           0.1 F   1                    0.1 F                                                                I      Gold Book

   15     Ether, Bis Chloromethyl       542881                                                                          0.00013 E                  0.00078 E               JIRIS 01/01/9!
•*••*••

   16     Gases, Total Dissolved          ..                             NARRATIVE STATEMENT - SEE DOCUMENT F                                                              j      Gold Book

   17     Guthion                        86500                          0.01 F   I                    0.01 F                                                               j      Gold Book

   18     Hardness                        ~                                NARRATIVE STATEMENT- SEE DOCUMENT                                                               I*     Gold Book
                                                                                                                                                                                         .* •»




                                                                                                                                                                                      500091

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              ' •   Fr eshwater            j        Saltwater                               Human Health
                                                                                                                         For Consumption of:
                                CAS       j CMC                    CCC          CMC               CCC                 Water +      Organism            FR
     Non Priority Pollutant    Number j 0/g/L)                    G*g/L)       fcg/L)            fcg/L)          Organism (^g/L) Onlyfcg/L)        Cite/Source
19   Hexachlorocyclo-hexane-     319868 j                                                                              0.0123            0.0414      Gold Book
     Technical
20   Iron .                     7439896 !                         1000F    j                                            300 A                        Gold Book
21   Matathion                   121755                           0.1 F    1                     0.1 F                                               Gold Book
22   Manganese                                                             5
                                7439965 1                                  1                                            50 A              100 A      Gold Book
23   Methoxychlor                 72435 1                         0.03 F   j                    0.03 F                 100A.C                        Gold Book
24   Mirex                     2385855 j                      0.001 F |                         0.001 F                                              Gold Book
25   Nitrates                  14797558 I                                  j                              ' j         10.000A                        Gold Book
26   Nitrosamines                         j                                ;                                           0.0008             1.24
27   Dinitrophenols            25550587 |                                  |                                              70             14,000      Gold Book
     Nitrosodibutylamine.N                                                 j
28                              924163 |                                                                  , I$        0.0064
                                                                                                                      ...... . . A       0.587 A     Gold Book
29   Nitrosodiethy lam ine.N      55185 j                                  |                                          0.0008 A           1.24 A      Gold Book
                                                                                                          ....
30   Nitrosopyrrolidine.N        930552 |                                  |                                            0.016             91.9       Gold Book
31   Oil and Grease               - !                             NARRATIVE STATEMENT -SEE DOCUMENT                                  F               Gold Book

32   Oxygen, Dissolved          7782447               WARMWATER AND COLDWATER MATRIX - SEE DOCUMENT                                         o        Gold Book

33   Parathion                    56382         0.065 j       0.0131       i                                                                         Gold Bodk

34   Pentachlorobenzene         608935                                     i                                            3.5 E             4.1 E    IRIS 03/01/88
                                                                                                                  .
35   pH                           —                           6.5 -9F      j               6.5-8.5F.K                   5-9                          Gold Book

36   Phosphorus Elemental      7723140                                     I                    0.1 F.K                                              Gold Book

37   Phosphate Phosphorus                 j                         NARRATIVE STATEMENT- SEE DOCUMENT                                                Gold Book



                                                                                                                                                      500092

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                               .
                                                        Freshwater               |            Saltwater                     Human Health
                                                                                                                          For Consumption of:
                                       CAS         CMC                CCC        | CMC                        CCC Water +           Organism                  FR
      Non Priority Pollutant          Number      G/g/L)             G/g/L)      I G^g/L)                    G*g/L) Organism G^g/L) OnlyG*g/L)           Cite/Source
38    Solids Dissolved and              . — .                                    j                                        j 250,000 A                      Gold Book
      Salinity
                                                                                 1                                         I
39    Solids Suspended and                —                          NARRATIVE STATEMENT - SEE DOCUMENT F                                                  Gold Book
      Turbidity
                                                                                                                                                                 .........
40    Sulfide-Hydrogen Sulfide         7783064                       2.0 F        j                          2.0F |                                 .
                                                                                                                                                           Gold Book
41    Tainting Substances                                              NARRATIVE STATEMENT- SEE DOCUMENT                                                   Gold Book
42    Temperature                                               SPECIES DEPENDENT CRITERIA - SEE DOCUMENT                               M                  Gold Book
43    Tetrachlorobenzene, 1 ,2,4,        95943                                                                            j   2.3 E         2.9 E        FRIS03/OI/91
      5-                                                                                                                                                    "
                                                                              .....I..................................    j
44    Tributyltin TBT                     -          0.46 N        0.063 N         1 0.37 N                     0.010 N                                 j 62FR42554
                                                                                   {
45 Trichlorophenol.2,4,5-                95954 1                                                                   2,600 B,E   9800 B.E        j IRIS 03/0 1/88
Footnotes:                                                                            •
A This human health criterion is the same as originally published in the Red Book which predates the 1980 methodology and did not utilize the fish ingestion BCF
  approach. This same criterion value is now published in the Gold Book.
B The organoleptic effect criterion is more stringent than the value presented in the non priority pollutants table.
C A more stringent Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) has been issued by EPA under the Safe Drinking Water Act. Refer to drinking water regulations
  40CFR141 or Safe Drinking Water Hotline (1-800-426-4791) for values.
D According to the procedures described in the Guidelines for Deriving Numerical National Water Quality Criteria for the Protection of Aquatic Organisms and
  Their Uses, except possibly where a very sensitive species is important at a site, freshwater aquatic life should be protected if both conditions specified in
  Appendix C to the Preamble- Calculation of Freshwater Ammonia Criterion are satisfied.
E This criterion has been revised to reflect The Environmental Protection Agency's ql * or RfD, as contained in the Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS) as of
  April 8,1998. The fish tissue bioconcentration factor (BCF) used to derive the original criterion was etained in each case.
F The derivation of this value is presented in the Red Book (EPA 440/9-76-023, july, 1976).
G This value is based on a 304(a) aquatic life criterion that was derived using the 1985 Guideline" (Guidelhesfir Deriving Numerical National Water Quality
  Criteria for the Protection of Aquatic Organisms and Their Uses, PB85-227049, January 19fc J) and was issued in one of the following criteria documents:
  Aluminum (EPA 440/5-86-008); Chloride (EPA 440/5-88-00l);Chloropyrifos (EPA 440/5-86-005).
I This value is expressed in terms of total recoverable metal in the water column.
J This value is based on a 304(a) aquatic life criterion that was issued in the 1995 Updates: Water Quality Criteria Documentsfor the Protection of Aquatic Life in
  Ambient Water (EPA-820-B-96-001). This value was derived using the GLI Guidelines (60FR15393-15399, March 23,1995; 40CFR132 Appendix A); the
  differences between the 1985 Guidelines and the GLI Guidelines are explained on page iv of the 1995 Updates. No decision concerning this criterion was affected
  by any considerations that are specific to the Great Lakes.


                                                                                                                                                            500093

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           _   _ _ __   »_-__-———« ^••*>WJ> k*UWMJI«UO

                                                 Syncon Resins Site^ Kearny, Hudson County, New Jersey

Standard, Requirement, Criteria, or Limitations        Citation     Potential Applicable or Relevant                             Esplanation
                                                                     and Appropriate Requirements/
                                                                       To Be Considered Materials
Hazardous Waste - Federal

Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (Solid       42 USC 6901-     Applicable or relevant and               Remediation may require disposal of material
Waste Disposal Act "SWDA"                           6987             B|>|nu|Hmiic.                            considered hazardous.

Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste       40CFRPart        Applicable or relevant and                Remediation may require disposal of material
                                                    261              appropriate.                              considered hazardous.
Releases from Solid Waste Management Units          40CFRPart        Not applicable or relevant and            There are no solid waste management units on
                                                    264              appropriate.                              site.
Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA)                 13 USC Sec.      Potentially applicable or relevant        May be applicable if PCBs are present in soil or
                                                    2601-2629        and appropriate.                          groundwater above regulatory limits.
Hazardous Waste - New Jersey

NJ Hazardous and Solid Waste Regulations            N.JAC7:26        To be considered.                         Remediation may require disposal of material
                                                                                                               considered hazardous.
NJ Solid Waste Management Act                       NJ.S.A. 13:1     Applicable or relevant and                Disposal requirements for non-hazardous waste
                                                    E-lctscq.        appropriate.                              generated at the site during the fieldwork.
NJ Cleanup Criteria for Contaminated Sites          N.J.A.C.         To be considered.                         Cleanup standards will be used to determine
                                                    7:26D                                                      necessary remediation.
NJ Technical Requirements for Site Remediation      N.J.A.C7:26E     To be considered.                         Remedial activities must consider N.J.A.C.
                                                                                                               7:26E, Technical Requirements for Site             1
                                                                                                               Remediation.                                       |
Wetlands -Federal

 Protection of Wetlands                              Exec. Order      Not applicable or relevant and            Wetlands are not present on the property.
                                                     No. 11,990       appropriate. , •
                                                     40CFR
                                                     6.302(a) and                                                                              . &
                                                                                                                                                  * *
                                                     Appendix A
 Dredge and Fill Requirements (Section 404)          40 CFR Parts     Not applicable or relevant and            Wetlands are not present on the property.
                                                     230-231          appropriate.




                                                                                                                                                 500094

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              Potential Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements (ARARs) and To Be Considered (TBCs) Materials
                                                               Syncon Resins Site; Kearny, Hudson County, New Jersey
  StaAdar*
        •d, •Requirement,
              ——*——— * Criteria,
                          «_»...—•- or Limitations
                                       -----                        — -
                                                                   atation       Potential Applicable or Relevant                     Explanation
                                                                                 and Appropriate Requirements/
                  ds • New Jersey

                  ands Protection Act                           N.J.S.A.         Not applicable or relevant and     Wetlands are not present on the property.
                                                                19:9A-1 and      appropriate.
                                                                7:7A
  NJFret hwater Wetlands Protection Program                     N.J.S.A.      Not applicable or relevant and        Wetlands are not present on the property.
                                                                !3:9A-I(o9B- appropriate.
                                                                30
  NJFiw (water Wetland Rules                                    NJ Freshwater Not applicable or relevant and        Wetlands are not present on the properly.
                                                    Wetland Rules appropriate.
  Occupi tional Safety and Health Administration- Federal

  Occupa tional Safety and Health Act                           29 USC 651-      To be considered.                  Fieldwork and remediation must follow OSHA
                         **      j
                                     *     '      • •
                                                                678
                                                                29CFRPart
                                                                1910
  Occupa ional Safety and Health Regulations                    29CFRPart        To be considered.                  Fieldwork and remediation must follow OSHA
                                                                 1910.1000                                          regulations.
                                                                SubpartZ
  Air-F< deral                                                                            • -

  dean/llirAct                                                  42USCA           Applicable or relevant and         Remediation is likely to includo air emissions.
                                                                7401
  Nationa Ambient Air Quality Standards                         40CFRP*rt        Applicable or relevant and         Remediation is likely to include air emissions.
                                                                50
  Nations Emission Standards for Hazardous Air                  40CFRPart        Applicable or relevant and         Remediation is likely to include air emissions.
  Pollutaiits                                                   61

  Alr-Ni iw Jersey

  NJAirlF Dilution Regulations                                   N.J.A.C 7:27    Applicable or relevant and         Remediation is likely to include air emissions.
         ......
<abl*i&jj!K«eS*                                                                                                                                   500095

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  . .„_ — . _rr.. —— „. .w^,a,,i ouu n|>|/iu|Miaic acquirements (.AKAKs) and To Be Considered (TBCs) Materials
                                                 Synoon Resins Site, Kearny, Hudson County, New Jersey

Standard, Requirement, Criteria, or Limitations       Citation        Potential Applicable or Relevant                       Eiplanation
                                                                      and Appropriate Requirements/
                                                                        To Be Considered Materials
Drinking Water - Federal                                          •
Safe Drinking Water Act                            42USCA             Potentially applicable or relevant   Drinking water regulations may be applicable if
                                                   300(f)             and appropriate.                     shallow aquifer is considered to be a Class II-A
                                                                                                           aquifer.
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations        40CFR              Potentially applicable or relevant   Drinking water regulations may be applicable if
                                                                      and appropriate.                     shallow aquifer is considered to be a Class II-A
                                                                                                           aquifer.
National Secondary Drinking Water Standards        40CFRPart          Potentially applicable or relevant   Drinking water regulations may be applicable if
                                                   141                and appropriate.                     shallow aquifer is considered to be a Class II-A
                                                                                                           aquifer.
EPA Office of Drinking Water, Health Advisories    N/A                To be considered.                    Drinking water regulations may be applicable if
                                                                                                           shallow aquifer is considered to be a Class II-A
                                                                                                           aquifer.
Drinking Water - New Jersey

NJ Safe Drinking Water Act                         N.J.S.A.           Potentially applicable or relevant   Drinking water regulations may be applicable if
                                                   58:12-12           and appropriate.                     shallow aquifer is considered to be a Class II-A
                                                                                                           aquifer.
NJ Drinking Water Regulations                      N.J.A.C. 7:10 Potentially applicable or relevant        Drinking water regulations may be applicable if
                                                                 and appropriate.                          shallow aquifer is considered to be a Class II-A
                                                                                                           aquifer.
Water Discharge - Federal

Clean Water Act                                    33 USC, 1251- Applicable or relevant and                Remediation is likely to result in discharge of site
                                                   1376          appropriate.' "                           groundwater to the Passaic River.
Rivers and Harbors Act of 1889                     33 USC 403    Applicable or relevant and                Remediation is likely to result in discharge of site
                                                                      appropriate.                         groundwater to the Passaic River.

National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System     40CFRPart         Applicable or relevant and           Treated groundwater is expected to be discharged
                                                    125               appropriate.                         to the Passaic River.




                                                                                                                                          500096

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 Potential Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements (ARARs) and To Be Considered (TBCs) Materials
                                                  Syncon Resins Site, Keamy, Hudson Connry, New Jersey

Standard, Requirement, Criteria, or Limitation*       Citation          Potential Applicable or Relevant                      Explanation
                                                                        and Appropriate Requirements/
                                                                 * *.


Water Discharge -New Jersey

NJ Clean Water Act                                 N.J.A.C.             ^Applicable or relevant and        Remediation is likely to result in discharge of site
                                                   7:14A                 appropriate.                      groundwater to the Passaic River.
NJ Waste Water Discharge Requirements              N.J.A.G 7:9-          Applicable or relevant and        Treated groundwater is expected to be discharged
                                                   S.letseq.             appropriate.                      to the Passaic River.
NJ Pollutant Discharge Elimination System          NJ.A.C7:14A Applicable or relevant and                  Treated groundwater is expected to be discharged
Regulations                                                      appropriate.                              to the Passaic River.
NJ Soil and Sediment Control Act                   N.J.S.A4:24- Potentially applicable or relevant         Remediation may require soil excavation and
                                                   39 through 55 and appropriate.                          control of soil erosion.
NJ Rules on Discharge of Petroleum and Other       N.JAC7:7A Applicable or relevant and                    This requirement may be applicable if petroleum
Hazardous Substances .                                           appropriate.                              or other hazardous substances are found to be
                                                                                                           discharging to surface or groundwater.


Wilderness Act                                     16 USC 1131          Not applicable or relevant and     The site is not part of a Federal preserve area.
                                                   50CFR35.1            appropriate.
Wild And Scenic Riven Act                          16 USC Sec.          Not applicable or relevant and     The site is not part of a Federal preserve area.
                                                   1271-1287            appropriate.
                                                   40CFRSec.
                                                   6.302(e)
National Wildlife Refuge System                    16 USC 668            Not applicable or relevant and    The site is not part of a Federal preserve area.
                                                                         appropriate.                                                       *>•




Preserve Areas -New Jersey

NJ Wild and Scenic River System                    N.J.S.A 13:8-         Not applicable or relevant and    The site is not part of a New Jersey preserve area.
                                                   45
NJ Natural Areas Systems                           N.J.A.C. 7:2-         Not applicable or relevant and    The site is not part of a New Jersey preserve area.
                                                   11                    appropriate.
Hackensack Meadowlands District                    N.J.A.C. 19:4-        Not applicable or relevant and    The she is not part of a New Jersey preserve area.
                                                   6                     appropriate.


                                                                                                                                          500097

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                Syncon Resins Site, Keamy, Hudson County, New Jersey             .                                             1

Standard, Requirement, Criteria, or Limitations     ' Citation     Potential Applicable or Relevant                        Explanation                         I
                                                                    and Appropriate Requirements/
                                                                      To Be Considered Materials
Coastal Zones - New Jersey

NJ Water Front and Harbor Statutes             N.J.S.A. 12:5-      Potentially applicable or relevant    Site is located along the Passaic River and is
                                               1                   and appropriate.                      influenced by tidal waters.
NJ Coastal Area Facility Review Act            N.J.A.S.            Potentially applicable or relevant    Site is located along the Passaic River and is
                                               13:19-1             and appropriate.                      influenced by tidal waters.
NJ Coastal Zone Rules                          N.J.A.C7:7E-        Potentially applicable or relevant    Site is located along the Passaic River and is
                                               7.12                and appropriate.                      influenced by tidal waters.
Underground Storage Tank Regulations - New Jersey

NJ Underground Storage Tank Regulations            N.J.A.C.         Potentially applicable or relevant   Previous information reports that underground
                                                   7:14B            and appropriate.                     storage tanks may have existed onsite for fuel
                                                                                                         storage.
Cultural Resources - Federal

Historic Sites, Buildings and Antiquities Act      16 USC 461-      Potentially applicable or relevant   This regulation may be applicable if on-site
                                                   467              and appropriate.                     buildings are found to be historically significant
                                                   40CFR                                                 and artifacts are found during fieldwork.
                                                   6.301(a)
                                                   36CFR
                                                   62.6(d)

Archeological and Historic Preservation Act        16 USC 469       Potentially applicable or relevant   This regulation may be applicable if artifacts are
                                                   40CFR            and appropriate.                     found during field work.
                                                   6.301(a)

National Historic Preservation Act                  49 USC 470      Potentially applicable or relevant   This regulation may be applicable if on-site
                                                    40CFR          .and appropriate.                     buildings are found to be historically significant.
                                                    6.301(b)                                                     .
                                                    36CFRPart
                                                    800




                                                                                                                                              500098

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 Potential Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements (ARARs) and To Be Considered (TBCs) Materials
                                                  Sjneon Resins Site, Keanty, Hudson County, New Jersey

Standard, Requirement, Criteria, or LtaHatimi          Citation     Potential Applicable or Relevant                         Eiplanation
                                                                    and Appropriate Requirements/
                 «.
Cultural Resources - New Jersey                                         ',



NJ Natural Heritage Protection Program              N/A             To be considered.                     This requirement may be applicable if buildings
                                                                                                          are found to be historically significant and

Wildlife/Endangered Species - Federal

Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act                  16 USC 661-     Not applicable or relevant and        Remedial activities at the site will not affect the
                                                    666             appropriate.                          Passaic River.
                                                    40CFR302(g)
Endangered Species Act                              16 USC 1531     Potentially applicable or relevant    Requirements of Endangered Species Act may be
                                                    40CFRPart       and appropriate.                      applicable if endangered species are identified at
                                                    302(h) 50 CFR                                         the site during fieldwork.
                                                    Part 402
Contaminant Specific - Federal

Toxic Pollutant Effluent Standards                  40 CFR Part     Potentially applicable or relevant    Treated groundwater is expected to be discharged
                                                    129             and appropriate.                      to the Passaic River.
Water Quality Criteria                              40 CFR Part     Potentially applicable .or relevant   Surface water quality criteria will be used to
                                                    131 Quality     and appropriate.^                     compare surface water analytical results for
                                                    Criteria for                                          remediation purposes.
                                                    Water, 1986
EPA Future Interim Sediment Criteria Values for     SCO No. 17      Not applicable or relevant and        There are no sediments found on site.
Nonpolar Hydrophobic Organic Contaminants, May                      appropriate.
1988

Overview of Sediment Quality in the United States   N/A             Not applicable or relevant and        There are no sediments found on site.
(1987)                                                              appropriate.
EPA Office of Water Guidance, Water-Related Fate N/A                To be considered.                     This guidance may be applicable for
of 129 Priority Pollutants                                                                                contamination found in groundwater.

                                                                                                                                               500099

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  syncon Kesins Site, Kearny, Hudson County, New Jersey

Standard, Requirement, Criteria, or Limitations         Citation     Potential Applicable or Relevant                       Explanation                       1
                                                                     and Appropriate Requirements/
                                                                        To Be Considered Materials
Contaminant Specific - New Jersey
                                                     .
NJ Groundwater Quality Standards                     N.J.A.C. 7:9-6 Applicable or relevant and            Groundwater quality criteria will be used to
                                                                      appropriate.                        compare groundwater analytical results for
                                                                                                          remediation purposes.
NJ Surface Water Quality Criteria                    N.J.A.C. 7:9-4 Applicable or relevant and            Surface water quality criteria will be used to
                                                                    appropriate.                          evaluate discharge of contaminants in
                                                                                                          groundwater to the Passaic River
Floodplain - Federal

Floodplain Management                                Exec. Order      Not applicable or relevant and      The site is not located in a floodplain.
                                                     No. 11,988       appropriate.
                                                     40CFR
                                                     6.302(b)and
                                                     Appendix A
Floodplain - New Jersey

NJ Flood Hazards Area Regulations                    N.J.A.C7:13-     Not applicable or relevant and      The site is not located in a floodplain.
                                                     3                appropriate.
 Health Based Standards - Federal

 EPA Carcinogen Assessment Group Potency              N/A             To be considered.                   These factors have been considered in a human
 Factors                                                                                                  health risk assessment prepared for the site.
 Acceptable Intake - Chronic (AIQ and Snbchnmic       N/A             To be considered.                   These factors have been considered in a human
 (MS): EPA Health Assessment Documents                                                                    health risk assessment prepared for the site.
 American Conference of Governmental Industrial       N/A              To be considered/                   These limits will be used to prepare health and
 Hygienists (ACGIH), Threshold Limit Values                                                                safety plan and comparison with field instrument
 (TLV), Time-Weighted Averages (TWAs), and                                                                 readings to determine appropriate level of
                                                                                                           protection.




                                                                                                                                                500100

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      APPENDIX III


Total Risk Summary Tables




                            500101

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                1
           -I » * • « « • • • » • • ?                                               t*?T               '7?
     J
     T*


          j|!U I I I H S . . . HHH = = £ E E = '"111 • " « * " •
          Ill -"- --- -«•-•                      *--• *"
          1 1I I tit .11 U- 7 II I III saa „ 1T4 Val .11.
          15 J-J J5; zt* iiS £s* i-.H i5S   *ji    ««£ Si* '.'•
                                             .:.:- . »~^ *--
          lP:«£5                                                                                       til
          ii: sss 555  III . . . : . . . , . , , . #j
                  ssi .-;-•
                                                                          In in ... ut ...
          Ulsss sss. Ill lit I I I I III.aii
                                          sssitssss ll.91sss
           ;'l 2:: as iff jj« ca/ £•*.* *.*.*.
           J   I                    « * * M w M 9 > » * » M K M « « H «
                                                                                           -.-I-*
                                                                                             •! tJ»l
                                    £££                                   ss
      j                                               SSS SSS SSS
               « 1 1 III
                   t I III III                    1
                                                  'sss sss sss                                         III
                                    111 life 1111 UT
                                    set.      z:n s
 f
ll                 sssssH.  lit
                   is: .933 sfz                                                      r*s-J\ ..'. In
                                                                                                 Sj*
                                                                          ill in , ,., in
                    22* *** '"                    "'    '"    '"      "' *•**• *•*.*•                                 I? I
SE
is                                                                                                                          . i
                                                                                                                            s
fi                 SSS SSS II 11. 111
                   lit us wx tsi sss s^t
                                         ... SSS SSS' UVSSS IVa
                                              its at sss Tit *st
                                                                                                                      p !j
if
i 1                                     sts sis t s f . 252 iij
                                                                                                                      P. 1 ii
      I
                                                                                                                      I! i &
                                                                                                                      I! I 111
                    IS..3I III  III
                           -5- tft ••• s!
                                                                                                                       fi
                    I I                 III III I I I I lit
                              = . «S 352 Ss* 223 3S1
h              H,
                    I   7
                         fi
                                        BJ • • • • • • • • • •••!!.•'• 1 Ifl ijll!                                    {-I
                                                                                                                         •I     « <J!?.
          Ni t*w .. .
                    *.,* t*.
                    -•'»      ---
                                         " • • • • • ' • " ' «'• tie
                                              •
                                                                              t&isi       HI• • •
                                                                                ttt • • • SiS
                                                                              .4JJ     --J                «^J
                                                                                                                      th *• r T •*•*
                    II! II! Wi Ws Li U • • • II! Ill ffi 11B
                                        «*«    •>••!   M«^   «MM>         *                      -i-i_t         J J
                                    »                                     j
                                                                              m              .   rf<8 j

                                                                                                                      •'
                                                                                                                       iHIi!!!!l
                   . 333
                       s
                         sss
                          5 S
                             ssj sag BsagSssag
                                            s
                                               sag saa saa saa saa :saa
                                 .                s.s 2 2 a
                     ! I vP                                   |i I1 1 s                                                     ss as;
                                                                                                                            500102

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         i^.'i t                                         i As
         IS'                                                                         1
        -Wt                                        t . .           \3I\
         ft--!--
                                                                   t
                                                                                    I
                                                   I     vil -1» 1
        . ii.. . ••••                 .
                                                                                    I
               . I                   •e
                                                                                    IKS
                    • U • : 1 ill                                      II5
        hi:
        s      .11 ...                                          •- .- 31)
               V- a H
                                                                                     a
                                                    *      *           *. 'll        ii
                             r
                             ;s, , I
                                   i . 1.1 i
                                       s : x *, :i
          11" '                           s.        a.
               H- * H                                                               s EH «
          s;
         Nl •
                I    I   I    t   i        l
                                                                         s
                                                                         ^ I t
                                                                              V
                                                                             I «'


                                                                                    lli
                                                                                    e If
                                                                                    i is
                                                                                           t
          i                                                                         « Ii
                                                                                    s !*
                                                                   13 3
                •iS <
                                                                                    Ml I
                         *    322
                              » «          J
                a .• <        s .•             •
                                                                                    Iiifi
•   i
                                                                                    500103

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    APPENDIX IV


Responsiveness Summary




                         500104

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       Responsiveness Summary
                    Syncon Resins Superfund Site
                         Kearny, New Jersey

As part of their public participation responsibilities, the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) held a public comment period
from October 28 through December 9, 1999, for interested parties to
comment on the Proposed Plan for Operable Unit 2 (OU-2) of the
Syncon Resins Superfund Site, located in Kearny, New Jersey. The
Proposed Plan identified the preferred remedy that EPA and NJDEP
considered for the enhancement of an existing soil and ground water
remediation system at the Site, as required in the 1986 Record of
Decision.
NJDEP held a public meeting at the Kearny Town Hall on November 4,
1999 to discuss results of the Focused Feasibility Study and to
elaborate further on the rationale for selecting the preferred
remedial alternative. During :he public meeting, representatives
from NJDEP discussed the preferred remedy, answered questions, and
received oral comments on the alternatives under consideration.
NJDEP's responses to significant comments received during the
public meeting and public cctiment period are summarized in this
Responsiveness Summary. NJDEP did not receive any written comments
throughout the public comment period. All comments summarized in
this document were taken into consideration in EPA's and NJDEP's
final determination of a remedy for the enhancement of the existing
remedy that was selected in OU-1.   The selected remedy for OU-2 is
described in the Decision Summary of the ROD for the Site.
This Responsiveness Summary is divided into the following sections:

I.      Overview: This section discusses EPA's and NJDEP's
preferred alternative for remedial action.
II.     Background of Community Involvement:     This section briefly
describes community relations activities for the Site.
III.   Meeting Comments and NJDEP's Responses:     This section
provides a summary of major issues and concerns, and expressly
acknowledges and responds to all significant comments raised at the
November 4, 1999 public meeting.




                                                              500105

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

I.    OVERVIEW

This, is a summary of the comments and questions from the public
regarding the Proposed Plan dated, October 1999, for remediation of
the Syncon Resins Superfund Site, and NJDEP's responses to those
comments and questions.
At the initiation of the public comment period on October 28., 1999,
NJDEP and EPA presented their preferred remedial alternative for
the enhancement of an existing soil and ground water remediation
system. The preferred remedy includes excavation and drainage of
contaminated soil, removal of buried debris, drainage layer
installation, addition of soil amendments, possible restoration of
natural hydraulic conditions, and discontinuation of the
contaminated water treatment system (CWTS) operation. This is the
preferred alternative for enhancement of the existing
flushing/ground water collection and treatment system to expedite
the remediation of the Syncon Resins Si_e.
The preferred alternative is a slightly -nodified version (excludes
the installation of aeration cells in tu^ slurry wall) of
Alternative 4A in the Focused Feasibility Study Report. NJDEP and
EPA believe that the preferred alternative is protective of human
health and the environment and will enhance the existing remedy
implemented under OU-1 and expedite the remedial action phase
through the removal of free product that is still present in
subsurface soil and ground water. This preferred remedy for the
Syncon Resins Site is considered .consistent with the remedy that
was chosen in the 1986 Record of Decision (ROD).
II.    BACKGROUND OF COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT

The supplemental investigation results, Focused Feasibility Study,
Proposed Plan, and supporting documentation were made available to
the public at the information repositories for the Site located at:
Kearny Town Hall, 402 Kearny Avenue, Kearny, New Jersey. 07032;
Kearny Main Public Library, 318 Kearny Avenue, Kearny, NJ, 07032;
NJDEP, Central File, 401 East State Street, 1st Floor, Trenton, NJ;
and EPA, Superfund Records Center, 290 Broadway, 18th Floor, New '
York, NY. The notice of the availability of these documents was
published in the Jersey Journal on October 28,1999. The public was
given the opportunity to comment on the preferred alternative
during the public comment period that began on October 28, 1999 and
concluded on December 9, 1999.




                                                           500106

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

In addition, a public meeting was held on November 4, 1999 at the
Kearny Town Hall to answer questions concerning the -Site, to
present the conclusions of the Focused Feasibility Study and to
discuss the rationale for selecting the preferred remedial
alternative. Prior to the public meeting held at Kearny Town Hall,
the Syncon Resins Superfund Site had received little attention from
area residents, although local officials have remained informed on
the status of the Site. NJDEP did not receive any written comments
during the public comment period.

III.       PUBLIC MEETING COMMENTS AND NJDEP'S RESPONSES
Questions or comments are summarized in bold, followed by NJDEP's
responses.
Treatment Issues

1. Are soil amendments included in Alternative 4B as they are in
4A?

Soil amendments are not included in Alternative 4B. However,
vertical vent pipes would be installed under Alternative 4B to help
aerate the subsurface.1
2. Concern was expressed that Oxygen Release Compounds (ORCs) may
not be appropriate for this Site.

During the design phase, pilot studies.will be performed using ORCs
to determine the efficiency of the treatment.
3. Has electric coagulation been considered as a low-cost
replacement for the existing wastewater treatment plant?

Electric coagulation was not considered. The agencies' efforts
under OU-2 were not directed at the existing treatment plant.
4. Do you have a cost per thousand gallons on the operation of the
treatment plant?

The cost to operate the treatment plant is approximately $31 per
thousand gallons.



       1
       During the public meeting, NJDEP stated that soil
amendments would be included in Alternative 4B.




                                                            500107

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

5. Was the use of catalyzed hydrogen peroxide considered for
injection into the subsurface targeting the ground water rather
than excavation of the soil?

A variety of technologies were considered in addition to
excavation. However, the area of concern is not a homogenous
filled area, but there are areas of soil that may be very permeable
and other areas that are not permeable at all, due to the presence
of structures such as concrete foundations, buried timbers and
wharf walls. The use of subsurface injections was considered
insufficient to result in a short-term, definitive cleanup compared
to an excavation project and hence, was eliminated during the
screening of alternatives in the focused feasibility study.
6. Is the soil amendment process going to occur during excavation
or will the soil be stockpiled and then processed by some
mechanical means?

The conceptual plan is to build a concrete prd large enough to hold
a certain amount of soil so that it can be effectively drained.
Once the excavated soil has been drained of any free product, the
soil amendments will be added. The soil would then be put back in
the ground with the amendments along with a drainage layer at the
bottom of the excavation. However, the details related to soils
handling shall be refined during the remedial design phase.
Future Use Issues

1. Would off-site disposal expand the possible uses that could be
made of the property after the cleanup, and if so, wouldn't the
extra money spent in off-site disposal be commensurate with future
use of the Site?

Off-site disposal of the soil that will be excavated will not
significantly enhance the future use of the Site. Removal of the
highly contaminated soil off-site for recycling, as called for in
Alternative 3, still leaves other contaminated soil on-site. The
entire Site would have to be excavated at a much higher cost in
order to remove all contamination. Alternative 4A still allows for
reuse of the Site with deed restrictions and the Site is expected
to be fully functional as an industrial property.




                                                           500108

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

2. What sort of deed restrictions would be imposed on the property
and would any sort of industrial use be allowed?

The deed notice to be placed on the Syncon Resins property will
indicate the types and extent of residual contamination left on
site in soils and ground water at the completion of the remedial
action, and will limit the property to commercial or industrial
use. It will require that future property users refrain from
activities that would disturb residual contamination, or take
measures to address the residual contamination if it must be
disturbed. Such measures will require approval from NJDEP and EPA.
Industrial use would be allowed provided it complies with the deed
notice.
3. Once the site has been completed, what sort of specific
restrictions would be posed regarding future construction, e.g.,
foundations, pilings, etc?

The deed notice will specify that residual contamination not be
disturbed or that further remedial measures be taken to address the
contamination. Any future construction plans that might disturb
the residual contamination or interfere with existing components of
the remedy will require review and approval by NJDEP and EPA.
Other Issues

1. Are you going to demolish the buildings on the south end of the
lot in order to get to the free product?
There is one building in this area that would have to be
demolished. There are several concrete foundations that would also
have to be removed as part of the excavation.
2. What is the procedure for submitting a bid on the soil
recycling job?

The preferred alternative 4A does not provide for removal of the
soil for recycling. However, it is anticipated that the contract
for the remedial action will be awarded through a competitive
bidding process. The procedures for submitting a bid is as
follows: the bid is advertised, a public notification is published,
related documents are sent to interested contractors, the bid is
submitted by the contractor, NJDEP evaluates the bids, and the
contract is awarded to the selected contractor.




                                                            500109

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

3. Is there any discussion on the preferred alternative or is it
locked in at this point?

All the alternatives in the Proposed Plan are open for public
comment until December 9, 1999. After all of the comments have
been received, a Responsiveness Summary will be prepared responding
to the comments. The EPA and the State will then decide whether to
change the remedy or continue with the preferred remedy based on
the comments received. The official remedy is selected when the
Record of Decision is issued.
4.   Is the 1986 Record of Decision going to be modified?

The initial remedial investigations and the existing remedy
selected under the 1986 ROD are designated as OU-1. EPA and NJDEP
established OU-2 to fund and conduct these supplemental studies
required as part of the remedy. Accordingly, this Proposed Plan
summarizes the efforts under OU-2 and describes a preferred remedy
that both agencies believe will satisfy the final provision of the
1986 ROD for the Syncon Resins Site.

 5. Is off-site disposal of contaminated soil from the entire Site
one of the alternatives?

Yes, Alternative 3 included off-site disposal of contaminated soil.
6. Does this remediation affect the ability of the proposed storm
drainage pipeline that would run through the property?

No, the storm drain proposal is on the northern boundary of the
property, which is well away from the new work that is being
proposed.
7. Has the last proposal for plans on the storm drainage line been
accepted?

A final proposal regarding the storm drainage line has not been
received.          ;
8.   How deep is the clay layer?

On average, it is about eight feet from the surface.




                                                            500110

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

9. How many acres does the 30,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil
affect?

It is about two and a half acres.
10.   Is the cap currently a gravel cap?

It is a permeable gravel cap that allows for natural flushing to
continue.
11. Would a permeable cap be used in the 30,000 cubic yard
excavation area?

The permeable cap would be maintained for.as long as the treatment
plant is in operation. If at some point in the future the ground
water were found to be no longer contaminated above standards that
would threaten the river, the permeable cap would no longer be
relevant. A cover for direct contact exposure, however,, would be
needed, but the permeability of the cap would not be important at
that point.
12.   Will a pilot study be conducted before fieldwork is commenced?

A pilot study will be performed during the design phase. It will
help to determine the parameters required for the design of the
selected remedy. Once the Record of Decision is signed by both
agencies, the remediation process enters the design phase. A
remedial design contractor would be hired to conduct pilot scale
testing of the conceptual plan. The pilot scale treatability study
would look at the conceptual plan of excavating a cell, placing it
on a pad, observing how much of it drains, noting what types of
debris comes out of it, how much free product is in the open
excavation, the thickness of the drainage layer needed on the
bottom of the excavation, and what type of amendments' might enhance
the residual contamination that is left in the soil when it is put
back into the ground.
13. If the pilot scale study fails, what happens in the regulatory
process?
The purpose of the pilot study will be to establish remedial
parameters, e.g., to determine how long it will take and to what
extent the free product will drain from the soil. The preferred
alternative cannot fail in removing debris and other artificial
obstructions that are blocking natural flow. In the summer of
1997, a smaller trench was excavated. The physical barriers were




                                                             500111

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

removed and the free product was visible in the open excavation.
Therefore, the primary objective of the remedy is expected to be
met.  The soil amendment process is an added benefit that would
help remove residual organic compounds that are present in the
soil. The main objective is to remove barriers to natural flow and
to remove any free product that is in the subsurface soil.

14. Does this process Involve the installation of linear trenches
or the removal of 30,000 cubic yards that will all be put back?

It involves the removal of 30,000 cubic yards that will be put back
after some treatment and enhancement. The 30,000 cubic yards will
be excavated one cell at a time. The size of each cell will be
determined during the design process.




                                                          500112

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        APPENDIX V




Administrative Record Index




                              500113

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                    SYNCON RESINS SUPERFUND SITE
         ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD ADDENDUM FOR OPERABLE UNIT 2

The following addendum to the existing Administrative Record for
the Syncon Resins Site corresponds to Operable Unit 2 - Enhancement
of the existing soil and groundwater remediation system:
1.    Record of Decision, Syncon Resins Site - September 29, 1986
2.    Final Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study, Task 2, Site
      Investigation Report, Syncon Resins Site - Ebasco, August 1986
3.    Final Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study, Task 3, Risk
      Assessment Report, Syncon Resins Site - Ebasco, August 1986
4.    Final Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study, Task 3,
      Identification and Screening of Remedial Alternatives, Syncon
      Resins Site - Ebasco, August 1986
5.    Final Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study Task 5,
      Evaluation of Remedial Alternatives, Syncon Resins Site -
      Ebasco, August 1986
6.    Results and Analysis of 1994 Sampling Episode, NJDEP
      Memorandum dated March 15, 1996
7.    Analytical Results of MW-11 and MW-19 Handex, January 11, 1997
8.    Cone Penetrometer Data - Handex, March 26, 1997
9.    Revised Final Report on Remedial Alternatives - Handex, July
      29, 1997
10.   Focused Feasibility Study Report for Syncon Resins Site -
      L.R.Kimball& Associates, July 1998
11.   Superfund Proposed Plan, Syncon Resins Site - October 1999
12.   Community Relations Plan, Syncon Resins Superfund Site, own of
      Kearny, Hudson County, May 1983 and Addendum dated August 1988
13.   Notice of public meeting and public availability of the
      Proposed Plan dated October 1999




                                                              500114

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        APPENDIX VI


NJDEP's Letter of Concurrence




                                500115

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                      0f
Christine Todd Whitman               Department of Environmental Protection                                Robert C. Shijxix, Jr.
Governor



           ' Ms.
             x/ TJeanne x*
                        M. rFox                                                              SEP
                                                                                             WUI 21 2000

             Regional Administrator
             U.S. EPA- Region 11
             290 Broadway
             New York, NY 10007-1866
             Subject:        Syncon Resins Superfund Site
                             Record of Decision (ROD) - Operable Unit 2

             Dear Ms. Fox:

             The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) has evaluated and
             concurs with the components of the selected remedy as described below for the Syncon
             Resins Superfund Site. The selected remedy corresponds to the second operable unit for
             the site, which is located in Kearny Township, Passaic County, New Jersey.

             The major components of the selected remedy include:
             1.     Excavation and drainage of approximately 30,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil
                    from an area of about 2.5 acres,
             2.     Removal and disposal of buried debris and other obstructions from the excavated
                    areas,
             3.     Installation of drainage layer at the bottom of the excavations,
             4.     Treatment/disposal of drained free product from the excavated material,
             5.     Addition of soil amendments to the excavated soil before backfilling,
             6.     Possible restoration of natural hydraulic conditions, and discontinuation of the
                    contaminated water treatment system (CWTS) operation, and
             7.     Establishment of institutional controls to ensure continued commercial/industrial
                    use of the property.

             NJDEP concurs that the selected remedy is protective of human health and the
             environment, complies with requirements that are legally applicable or relevant and
             appropriate for the remedial action, and is cost effective.




                                          N*w Jersey if art iiqual Opportunity Ku,filay>:r
                                                          Kccytlod Paper


                                                                                                           500116

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The State of New Jersey appreciates the opportunity afforded to participate in the
Superfund process.

                                         Sincerely,




                                         Robert CySJrfnn, Jr.
                                         Commissioner




                                                                          500117
