LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES FOR OU1 FOR THE FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY SITE
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/616484
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: a2aab621308298d7dee01695685453c1f55b86444e5baa33ae74a89ae0d83945
Source PDF pages: 7
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES

                         Former Kil-Tone Company Superfund Site
                                     Operable Unit 1


Site Name and Location
Former Kil-Tone Company Superfund Site
Vineland, Cumberland County, New Jersey

Introduction
The purpose of this Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) is to explain the United States
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) changes to the remedy selected in the September
2016 Record of Decision (ROD) for the Former Kil-Tone Company Superfund Site (Site),
Operable Unit (OU) 1. The OU1 ROD was prepared by EPA as lead agency for the Site, in
consultation with the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP). The
selected remedy described in the OU1 ROD represents the first of four planned remedial phases,
or operable units, for the Site.

Under Section 117(c) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act of 1980, as amended (CERCLA or Superfund), 42 U.S.C. § 9617(c), EPA is
required to publish an ESD when, after issuance of a ROD, subsequent enforcement or remedial
actions lead to significant, but not fundamental, changes in the selected site remedy. Sections
300.435(c)(2)(i) and 300.825(a)(2) of the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution
Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 C.F.R. §§ 300.435(c)(2)(i) and 300.825(a)(2), set forth the criteria
for issuing an ESD and require that an ESD be published if the remedy is modified in a way that
differs significantly in scope, performance, or cost from the remedy selected in the ROD for the
Site.

This ESD presents the significant differences to the remedy selected in the OU1 ROD. This ESD
also provides a brief history of the Site, describes the original remedy, and explains how,
subsequent to the finalization of the decision document, issues concerning the scope and
performance of the selected remedy were identified.

This ESD and the documents that provide the basis for the ESD decision will be incorporated
into the administrative record maintained for the Site in accordance with Section 300.825(a)(2)
of the NCP, 40 C.F.R. § 300.825(a)(2). The administrative record file is available for review
during business hours at the EPA Region 2 Superfund Records Center, 290 Broadway, New
York, NY 10007 (Monday through Friday, 9:00 AM–5:00 PM); at the information repository at
the Vineland City Library, 1058 East Landis Avenue, Vineland, New Jersey 08360 (for library
hours: http://www.vinelandlibrary.org); and online at: www.epa.gov/superfund/former-kil-tone.
However, given the disruptions caused by COVID-19, access to the EPA Region 2 Superfund
Records Center and the Vineland City Library may be limited. EPA recommends contacting the
EPA Region 2 Superfund Records Center at (212) 637-4308 or the Vineland City Library at
(856) 794-4244 to discuss options before visiting.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Site Location, History, Contamination Problems, and Selected Remedy

EPA issued the OU1 ROD in September 2016. The OU1 ROD identified remedial action
objectives (RAOs), which are specific goals to protect human health and the environment. The
following RAOs were established for OU1 of the Site:

           x   Prevent potential current and future unacceptable risks to human receptors
               resulting from direct contact with contaminated soil.

           x   Prevent migration of site contaminants from the OU1 properties to other areas via
               overland flow and air dispersion.

The major components of the remedy selected in the OU1 ROD include the following:

           x   Excavation of an estimated 21,000 cubic yards of soil contaminated primarily
               with arsenic and lead from approximately 57 residential properties in the vicinity
               of the Site;

           x   Off-site disposal of excavated contaminated soil, and backfilling of excavated
               areas with clean fill; and

           x   Restoration of the affected properties.

The remediation goals selected in the ROD were based on New Jersey residential soil standards
and are 19 parts per million (ppm) for arsenic and 400 ppm for lead. During Phase 1 of the OU1
remedial action, six residential properties were remediated and restored to conditions allowing
unrestricted future use, including continued residential use. Phase 1 was initiated in 2017 and
completed 2018. During Phase 2 of the OU1 remedial action, an additional 26 residential
properties were remediated and restored to conditions allowing unrestricted future use, including
residential use. Phase 2 was initiated in 2018 and completed in 2020. At least 48 additional
residential properties have been identified for Phase 3 of the OU1 remedial action, which EPA
currently expects to be the last phase of remedial action for OU1. The design for Phase 3 of the
remedial action is expected to be complete in 2021.


EPA issued the ROD for OU2, which addresses the former Kil-tone facility and non-residential
properties in the vicinity of the former Kil-Tone facility, on September 30, 2019. The OU2
remedy includes excavation of an estimated 57,800 cubic yards of soil contaminated with arsenic
and lead from approximately 40 properties, including the former facility itself, to a depth not to
exceed the groundwater table; off-site disposal of excavated soil; backfilling of excavated areas
with clean fill; and restoration of the affected properties. Design of the OU2 remedial action is
ongoing.

Investigation activities for OU3 of the Site, which addresses groundwater, were initiated in
spring 2019, and the investigation of OU4, which addresses surface water, sediment and
floodplain soil, was initiated in spring 2020.
                                                 2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  I.          Background

       A. Site Location and Description

The Site includes the former Kil-Tone Company facility (Property) located at 527 East Chestnut
Avenue, City of Vineland, Cumberland County, New Jersey, and the areal extent of
contamination which includes residential, commercial and industrial properties in the vicinity of
the Property. OU1, the subject of this ESD, addresses residential properties in the vicinity of the
Property.

The Property is approximately 4.076 acres and is located in a mixed-use (residential, commercial
and industrial) community that has been identified as a community with environmental justice
concerns. According to the 2010 Census, the approximate racial breakdown of the City of
Vineland included White (67%), Black or African American (14.2%), Asian (1.7%), and Others
(12.9%). The 2010 Census also reported a Hispanic/Latino population of 38%. The total median
household income was reported in 2010 at $54,024 and $50,690 in 2014. The Property is
bordered to the north by East Chestnut Avenue; to the east by South Sixth Street; to the south by
Paul Street; and to the west by South East Boulevard, which is next to railroad tracks used for
freight transport. Residential, commercial and industrial properties are located throughout the
area.

A storm sewer catch basin located in the northwestern corner of the Property discharges into the
head of the Tarkiln Branch, a tributary of the Parvin Branch that flows into the Maurice River
that flows into Union Lake.

       B. Site History

The Property was the site of pesticide manufacturing operations from about 1916 to about 1933.
Starting in or about 1916, the former Kil-Tone Company manufactured, among other things, the
pesticide lead arsenate at the Property. In 1926, the Property was purchased by John Lucas &
Company, which created a new subsidiary named the Lucas Kil-Tone Company that continued to
manufacture arsenic-based pesticides on the Property until on or about 1933, at which point
pesticide manufacturing ceased.

Lead arsenate is a pentavalent form of inorganic arsenic and contains about 22 percent arsenic.
Inorganic arsenics are known to be acutely toxic. Among the products manufactured at the
Property were Green Cross Dry Powdered Arsenate of Lead, Green Cross Standard Arsenate of
Lead, Green Cross Sulpho-arsenate Powder, Green Cross Sulphur and Arsenate Lead Mixture,
Modified Kil-Tone, Improved Kil-Tone, Fruit Kil-Tone, Bordeaux Mixture, Dry Powdered
Arsenate of Zinc, and Beetle Mort.

After pesticide manufacturing operations ceased in 1933, the Property was not used until it was
sold in 1943 to three individuals that used the Property to produce tomato-based products. The
Property has changed ownership several times since 1943, but no owner after the Lucas Kil-Tone
Company manufactured pesticides. The Property was purchased in 2008 by the current owner,


                                                 3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Urban Manufacturing, LLC. The Property is leased to Urban Sign & Crane, Inc., which
fabricates and installs commercial signs.

An August 2014 investigation of the Property by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection (NJDEP) found arsenic at concentrations as high as 740 ppm in the top six inches of
soil, and at concentrations as high as 5,800 ppm between 3.5 to 4 feet below ground.
Groundwater beneath the Property had concentrations of arsenic of 8.1 micrograms per liter
(μg/L) to 14,000 μg/L. As a result of its investigation, on November 14, 2014, the NJDEP
referred the Site to EPA.

From January 2015 through February 2016, EPA conducted several sampling events at the Site
to determine the nature and extent of contamination. Sampling results identified arsenic and lead
in soils at the Property, as well as in soils in the vicinity of the Property including at residential,
commercial and industrial properties. Arsenic and lead were also found in groundwater, surface
water and sediment samples collected by EPA. On April 5, 2016, EPA placed the Site on the
National Priorities List.

In April 2016, EPA initiated a removal action to address potential exposure to surface soil
contaminated with arsenic and lead at residential properties in the vicinity of the Property. Clean
topsoil was placed over portions of 26 residential properties as an interim measure until a
permanent remedy was selected and implemented to prevent exposure to arsenic and lead
contaminated soil. Additional removal work was done farther from the Property in the flood
plain of the Tarkiln Branch. Clean soil was placed on six residential properties in the flood plain
and fencing was installed at portions of two public housing developments along the Tarkiln.
These additional removal activities are also interim measures designed to prevent exposure to
and migration of arsenic and lead contaminated soil until a final remedy is selected and
implemented.

 II.           Description of Significant Differences

The remedy selected in the OU1 ROD includes excavation of contaminated soil, off-site disposal
of the excavated soil, back filling with clean fill, and restoration of the affected residential
properties.

The ROD specifies that excavation activities may require the demolition and replacement of
structures such as sheds, garages and the removal of asphalt and driveways, and that excavation
of the contaminated materials may also require the temporary relocation of residents. The OU1
ROD did not, however, include a provision for permanent relocation.

Sampling conducted by EPA in 2016 through 2017, as part of the design of Phase 2 of the OU1
remedial action, found arsenic concentrations as high as 13,000 ppm in soil around a house
targeted for remedial action. In 2019, additional sampling found elevated concentrations of
arsenic and lead beneath the basement of the house. Arsenic and lead concentrations exceeding
the remediation goals for OU1 were identified from 6 inches below ground to 15 feet below
ground, the depth of the investigation, which is beneath the water table. The highest

                                                   4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

concentration found in a sub-basement boring was 9,500 ppm of arsenic found at 84 inches
below ground, and concentrations as high as 13,000 ppm of arsenic were found behind the house.

After review of all documentation regarding the house, including engineering studies, EPA has
made the determination that structurally supporting the house to remove soil beneath it is
impractical due to the structural integrity of the house, the potential risks associated with
continued occupation of the house, and the cost, making the house an impediment to a protective
cleanup. Per EPA’s National Superfund Permanent Relocation Interim Policy, and EPA’s
OSWER Directive: 9355.0-71P, Interim Policy on the Use of Permanent Relocations as Part of
Superfund Remedial Actions, permanent relocation/property acquisition should be considered as
part of a remedial action only if there is a risk to human health that cannot be effectively
addressed by cleanup, or where the structure is an impediment to a protective cleanup. These
conditions are met in this instance. Therefore, EPA is changing the OU1 remedy to include the
permanent relocation of the residents, acquisition of the property, and demolition of the house.

As required, Superfund-related permanent relocations and property acquisitions areconducted
under the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as
amended.

A Pre-Decisional Real Estate Planning Report (REPR) was submitted by the Baltimore District
of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers ( February 2021) with respect to this acquisition and
relocation project. The total cost for EPA to acquire the property, and relocate the
owners/residents, is estimated to be $573,500.

Further, EPA has determined that because the extent of site-related contamination at this
property, and the nature of work that will be required to address it, more closely resembles that
of properties being addressed in OU2 (where contamination is found below the water table) than
it does the houses being addressed in OU1, the remediation of the soil associated with this house
will be addressed as part of the OU2 remedial action.

The significant difference from the OU1 ROD documented in this ESD is that EPA will acquire
the property, permanently relocate the residents at this property and demolish the structure, as
opposed to temporarily relocating them, due to structural integrity of the house and the risk to the
residents, and the cost of remediating contaminated soil below the structure. In addition, this
ESD documents EPA’s determination that where the extent of site-related contamination more
closely resembles that of properties being addressed in OU2 (i.e., contamination is found below
the water table) than OU1, remediation of these properties may be addressed as part of the OU2
remedial action rather than as part of OU1.

During Phase 3 of the remedial design investigation of OU1, EPA may identify additional
residential properties where EPA determines that it is appropriate to permanently relocate
residents because there is a risk to human health that cannot effectively be addressed by cleanup
or where the structure is an impediment to a protective cleanup, consistent with EPA’s National
Superfund Permanent Relocation Interim Policy, and EPA’s OSWER Directive: 9355.0-71P,
Interim Policy on the Use of Permanent Relocations as Part of Superfund Remedial Actions. The
modification described in this ESD will apply to any such additional properties that may be

                                                 5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

identified during implementation of the OU1 remedial action, where permanent relocation,
property acquisition and demolition are required to safely address the soil contamination beneath
those structures.

Support Agency Comments

The State of New Jersey concurs with this ESD. The State’s letter providing its concurrence is
located in the administrative record maintained for the Site.

Affirmation of Statutory Determinations

EPA, after consultation with NJDEP, is issuing this ESD to modify the OU1 selected remedy to
provide for permanent relocation of affected resident(s), acquisition of properties, and demolition
of residences if site-related soil contamination exceeding the clean up levels for arsenic and/or
lead is detected under a residence, and structurally supporting the house is impractical due to the
structural integrity of the house, the potential risks associated with continued occupation of the
house, and the cost, making the house an impediment to a protective cleanup. The OU1 remedy,
as modified by this ESD, still satisfies the requirements of Section 121 of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C.
§ 9621.

The remedy, as modified by this ESD, will be protective of human health and the environment
and will comply with federal and state requirements that are legally applicable or relevant and
appropriate to the remedial action.

The modified remedy is technically feasible, cost-effective, and represents the maximum extent
to which permanent solutions and treatment technologies can be used in a practicable manner at
the Site.

This ESD does not alter the five-year review requirements outlined in the OU1 ROD.

Public Participation Compliance

In accordance with the NCP, a formal public comment period is not required when issuing an
ESD. A notice briefly summarizing this ESD will be published in a major local newspaper of
general publication in accordance with Section 300.435(c)(2)(i) of the NCP, 40 C.F.R.
§ 300.435(c)(2)(i).

This ESD and the documents that provide the basis for the decision to modify the OU1 remedy
to provide for permanent relocation, property acquisition, and demolition will be incorporated
into the administrative record for the Site in accordance with Section 300.825(a)(2) of the NCP,
40 C.F.R. § 300.825(a)(2). The administrative record file is available for review during business
hours at the EPA Region 2 Superfund Records Center, 290 Broadway, New York, NY 10007
(Monday through Friday, 9:00 AM–5:00 PM); at the information repository at the Vineland City
Library, 1058 East Landis Avenue, Vineland, New Jersey 08360 (for library hours:
http://www.vinelandlibrary.org); and online at: www.epa.gov/superfund/former-kil-tone.
However, given the disruptions caused by COVID-19, access to the EPA Region 2 Superfund
                                                6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Records Center and the Vineland City Library may be limited. EPA recommends contacting the
EPA Region 2 Superfund Records Center at (212) 637-4308 or the Vineland City Library at
(856) 794-4244 to discuss options before visiting.


                      Digitally signed by
 Evangelista,         Evangelista, Pat

 Pat                  Date: 2021.07.14 14:34:03                July 14, 2021
                      -04'00'

Pat Evangelista, Director                                      Date
Superfund & Emergency Management Division
U.S. EPA, Region 2




                                                  7
