LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT FOR OU1 FOR THE COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/638482
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: f6c6761c4b02951eb073d16ed0e657f42fbbda4f46774c99787d7f1361a51dac
Source PDF pages: 167
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT

Cosden Chemical Coatings Corp. Superfund Site

City of Beverly, Burlington County, New Jersey




United States Environmental Protection Agency
                   Region 2
             New York, New York
               September 2022




                                                 *638482*
                                                   638482

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            DECLARATION STATEMENT
                         RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT

SITE NAME AND LOCATION

Cosden Chemical Coatings Corp. Superfund Site
City of Beverly, Burlington County, New Jersey
EPA ID# NJD000565531
Operable Unit 1, Groundwater

STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) issued a Record of Decision (ROD)
for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corp. Superfund Site (Site) on September 30, 1992, as
modified by the 1998 Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD), which addressed
contaminated soil and groundwater at the Site, located in the City of Beverly, Burlington County,
New Jersey. This decision document presents the remedy amendment for the contaminated
groundwater.

EPA selected the remedy amendment in accordance with the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA) as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§9601-
9675, and to the extent practicable, the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution
Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 CFR Part 300. The decision is based on the administrative record
for the Site, an index for which can be found in Appendix IV.

The State of New Jersey concurs with this ROD Amendment. A copy of the State’s concurrence
letter can be found in Appendix V.

ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE

The response action selected in this ROD Amendment is necessary to protect the public health,
welfare, or the environment from actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from the
Site into the environment.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY AMENDMENT

The Site cleanup is being addressed in one phase or Operable Unit. The response action
described in this document amends the groundwater remedy selected in the 1992 ROD, as
modified by the 1998 ESD. The major components of the remedy amendment include the
following:

   In-situ groundwater treatment targeting remaining groundwater source area contamination,
    and

   Long‐term groundwater monitoring to assess the progress of lowering the concentration of
    contaminants in groundwater over time.

                                               1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The remaining groundwater source area contamination will be addressed through in-situ treatment.
The in-situ treatment consists of In-Situ Chemical Oxidation (ISCO) which utilizes oxidants
injected into the contaminant source areas in the groundwater aquifer to transform harmful
contaminants into less toxic byproducts. At the Site, a pilot study was performed between 2017
and 2021 to determine the effectiveness of ISCO in reducing levels of remaining source area
contamination. Based on the findings of the ISCO pilot study, the amended remedy consists of an
estimated five rounds of in-situ chemical injections targeting the remaining groundwater source
area contamination with sampling to be completed before, between, and after each round of
injections. After all injection rounds are completed, a period of monitoring will follow to allow for
re-equilibration of metal concentrations and evaluate whether additional injections are not needed.
The remedy also calls for institutional controls (ICs), such as a Classification Exception Area/Well
Restriction Area (CEA/WRA), which would restrict groundwater uses or activities that could result
in direct contact with contaminated groundwater. The estimated total present worth cost for the
selected remedy is $1,409,900.

DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

Part 1: Statutory Requirements

The remedy amendment is protective of human health and the environment, complies with
federal and state requirements that are applicable or relevant and appropriate to the remedial
action, and is cost-effective. EPA has determined that the amended remedy represents the
maximum extent to which permanent solutions and treatment technologies can be utilized in a
practicable manner at the Site.

Part 2: Statutory Preference for Treatment

The remedy amendment satisfies the statutory preference for treatment as a principal element of
the remedy (i.e., reduces the toxicity, mobility, or volume of hazardous substances, pollutants, or
contaminants as a principal element through treatment).

Part 3: Five-Year Review Requirements

A policy five-year review for the Site was completed on May 31, 2022. The selected remedy,
including actions taken pursuant to the 1992 ROD, as modified by the 1998 ESD and this ROD
Amendment, will not result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants remaining on-
site above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, but is anticipated to take
more than five years to attain remedial action objectives and cleanup levels, and therefore a
policy review will continue to be required.

ROD DATA CERTIFICATION CHECKLIST

The following information is included in the Decision Summary section of this ROD
Amendment. Additional information can be found in the administrative record for this Site.




                                                 2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

x   Chemicals of concern and their respective concentrations can be found in the “Site
    Characteristics” section.

x   Baseline risk represented by the chemicals of concern can be found in the “Summary of
    Risks” section.

x   The source reduction goal for the chemical of concern, xylene, and the basis for this goal can
    be found in the “Remedial Action Objectives” section.

x   Current and reasonably anticipated future land use assumptions and current and potential
    future uses of groundwater used in the baseline risk assessment and ROD can be found in the
    “Current and Potential Future Site and Resource Uses” section.

x   Estimated capital, operation, and maintenance (O&M), and total present worth costs,
    discount rate, and the number of years over which the remedy amendment cost estimates are
    projected can be found in the “Description of Alternatives” section.

x   Key factors that led to selecting the remedy amendment can be found in the
    "Comparative Analysis of Alternatives" and "Statutory Determinations" sections.

Pat                 Digitally signed by Pat
                    Evangelista

Evangelista         Date: 2022.09.28 14:01:44
                    -04'00'
_______________________________________             
                                                                    09/28/2022
                                                                    ___________
Pat Evangelista, Director                                           Date
Superfund and Emergency Management Division
EPA Region 2




                                                3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT

          DECISION SUMMARY

Cosden Chemical Coatings Corp. Superfund Site

City of Beverly, Burlington County, New Jersey




United States Environmental Protection Agency
                   Region 2
             New York, New York
               September 2022

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                             TABLE OF CONTENTS


SITE NAME, LOCATION AND BRIEF DESCRIPTION ............................................................ 1

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES .............................................................. 1

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION ................................................................. 4

SCOPE AND ROLE OF THE RESPONSE ACTION ................................................................... 4

SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS ............................................................................... 5

CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES ................................. 9

BASIS FOR REMEDY MODIFICATION .................................................................................. 10

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS ...................................................................................................... 10

REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES ......................................................................................... 15

DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES .................................................................. 16

COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES ................................................................ 18

PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTES ................................................................................................ 22

SELECTED REMEDY AMENDMENT...................................................................................... 22

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS .......................................................................................... 23

DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES ............................................................... 25

APPENDICES

APPENDIX I                   Figures
APPENDIX II                  Tables
APPENDIX III                 Responsiveness Summary
APPENDIX IV                  Administrative Record Index
APPENDIX V                   State Letter of Concurrence

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE NAME, LOCATION AND BRIEF DESCRIPTION

The Cosden Chemical Coatings Corp. Superfund Site (Site), United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) ID# NJD000565531, is located within a residential area in the City of
Beverly, Burlington County, New Jersey at the intersection of Manor Road and Cherry Street
(Figure 1). It is bounded on the north and east by residential streets, on the south by Conrail
tracks and farmland, and on the west by undeveloped land. The nearest residence is
approximately 300 feet to the north of the Site. The Beverly Elementary School is located 0.2
miles to the northeast. The neighboring area is suburban with some light industry. The Delaware
River is approximately 4,000 feet to the north, and Rancocas Creek is approximately 1.5 miles to
the southwest of the Site. The population within a one-mile radius of the Site is approximately
800 people. The local water utility provides drinking water, and the Delaware River is the source
of the potable water supply.

The Site encompasses approximately 6.7 acres of a former paint formulation and manufacturing
facility that operated from 1945 until 1989. The facility produced coatings for industrial
applications. In the manufacturing process, pigments were combined with resins and solvents
and then placed into a mixing tank where other ingredients were added to produce the final
coating products. The mixing tanks were then washed out with solvents, and the used solvents
were transferred to drums. Organic solvents used in the manufacturing process were recycled
until 1974. After 1974, drums containing spent solvents were stored on-site; some of these drums
leaked their contents onto the ground and caused soil and groundwater contamination. Solvents
were also stored in underground storage tanks, which also leaked their contents.

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES

A grass fire that occurred at the Site on April 22, 1980, prompted the Burlington County
Department of Public Safety to report the Site conditions to the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP). Subsequent visits by the NJDEP revealed the presence of
surface spills and several hundred unsecured drums. Various court actions and negotiations
undertaken by NJDEP against Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation resulted in a judicial
consent order on February 5, 1985, that ordered Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation to clean
up the facility. Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation initiated the cleanup in February 1985,
but abandoned cleanup efforts after 88 of 695 drums were removed. In January 1986, NJDEP
then undertook an emergency removal of the drummed material and cleanup of surface spills
around the drum storage areas.

EPA placed the Site on the National Priorities List (NPL) in July 1987 and began a remedial
investigation and feasibility study (RI/FS) in April 1988. In June 1989, EPA initiated emergency
cleanup activities at the Site by constructing a fence around areas of soil contamination and
began removing the remaining drums, paint cans, pigment bags, mixing tanks, and underground
storage tank contents. On May 28, 1990, as the removal action was nearly completed, a fire
occurred inside the process building which consumed a majority of the building. On May 31,
1990, the building was condemned by the Beverly City building inspector.



                                                1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Based on the RI/FS that was conducted by EPA from April 1988 until September 1992, a Record
of Decision (ROD) selecting a remedy for the Site was issued by EPA on September 30, 1992.
Subsequently, the contaminated soil component of the remedy was reviewed during the remedial
design stage, including a pre-design investigation, which uncovered conditions that led EPA to
issue an Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) in September 1998 for the soils at the Site.

Building Demolition

EPA decontaminated and demolished the remnants of the former Cosden Chemical process
building. All demolition debris, including asbestos, was disposed of off-site. This work was
conducted between July 1995 and January 1996.

Soils

The contaminated soils remediation was conducted by the EPA Region 2 Removal Action
Branch with technical support provided by EPA’s Environmental Response Team (ERT). ERT
performed an extensive screening effort at the Site employing x-ray fluorescence (XRF)
technology to identify the concentrations and depths of inorganic contamination (principally lead
and chromium). The data were used to define the area and depth of the excavation. The soil
remediation was accomplished in phases between June 1999 and March 2002.

The soil cleanup was conducted to meet a remediation goal based on the NJDEP Residential
Direct Contact Soil Cleanup Criterion (RDCSCC) for lead in effect at that time, 400 milligrams
per kilogram (mg/kg). For PCBs, the soil remediation goal was based on the EPA PCB cleanup
policy, which recommended a residential cleanup goal of 1 mg/kg for unrestricted residential
use. However, post-excavation sampling indicated that the soil remediation ultimately met
NJDEP's more stringent RDCSCC in effect at that time of 0.49 mg/kg for PCBs.

All contaminated soils, underground storage tanks, and residual liquids were sent off-site for
disposal and/or treatment, as necessary. EPA’s remedial action report, dated September 2003,
documents the soil portion of the cleanup, which included the excavation and disposal of 13,000
tons of contaminated soil, solid waste, and debris, four underground storage tanks, and 2,600
gallons of liquid waste (Figure 2).

A soil vapor extraction (SVE) system was installed, including three banks of SVE wells and
collection lines that allowed contaminated vapors to be extracted from the vadose zone, the
subsurface area that extends from the ground surface to the groundwater table. A fence was
installed around the treatment facilities to provide security and prevent trespassing. The SVE
system started operation in 2007, and was shut down in June 2010, after groundwater levels
increased when the nearby public supply wells were closed, thus submerging the SVE wells
underwater.

Groundwater

EPA entered into an Interagency Agreement with the United States Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE) Baltimore District to prepare the remedial design for the groundwater remediation and

                                                2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

oversee remedial construction. The largest element of the remedial design/remedial construction
was the groundwater extraction and treatment system (GETS). Construction of the GETS began
in July 2006 and was completed in July 2007. Award of the long-term remedial action (LTRA)
contract was made in June 2009, at which time the LTRA began.

Data indicated that the GETS efficiently removed contaminants from the groundwater prior to
on-site reinjection. The primary contaminants of concern in groundwater, as identified in the
1992 ROD, are ethylbenzene, toluene, xylene, trichloroethene (TCE), lead, and chromium. The
GETS reduced levels of all contaminants present in extracted groundwater to meet the New
Jersey Class II-A Groundwater Quality Standards (GWQS) before the groundwater was
reinjected back into the aquifer.

EPA began a pilot study in August 2017 to test the effectiveness of In-Situ Chemical Oxidation
(ISCO) in reducing volatile organic compound (VOC) concentrations in groundwater. The pilot
study was conducted to address remaining contamination that EPA had identified using a
Membrane Interface Probe/Hydraulic Profiling Tool (MIPHPT). The revised conceptual Site
model for soil and groundwater includes a fairly uniform layer of soil impacted largely by
xylenes. This layer ranges from 20-24 feet deep and two to four feet thick; however, most of the
contamination is located in the interval of 20-22 feet below the ground surface (bgs). Some
evidence suggests that a shallow lower permeability unit could be present resulting in a shallow
perched water-bearing unit in some portions of the Site. It appears that in limited areas, high
concentrations of VOCs or limited immobile solvent material could be sorbed to soil particles
beneath the water table particularly in the area where the Cosden Chemical production plant
underground storage tanks were once located. EPA and USACE determined that ISCO could
more quickly address this remaining contamination than the GETS. The GETS was shut down in
May 2018, due in part to the potential for ISCO treatment materials to enter the treatment plant
during the pilot study.

During the pilot study, EPA installed 16 monitoring wells to focus monitoring activities where
VOC concentrations are highest, including monitoring wells MW-103, MW-105, MW-109 and
MW-110. Four rounds of injections of persulfate with a sodium hydroxide activator were
performed between 2017 and 2021. Groundwater monitoring was conducted before and after
each injection event to establish baseline concentrations that could be used to evaluate treatment
effectiveness.

Vapor Intrusion

Vapor intrusion can occur when volatile contaminants in groundwater volatilize and enter
commercial and residential buildings as contaminated vapors. Since the primary contaminants of
concern at the Site are VOCs, vapor intrusion was evaluated in March 2004 via groundwater
sampling to determine if vapor intrusion would be a concern. EPA determined that the vapor
intrusion pathway was not complete because no VOCs were detected above EPA's screening
criteria. The results of this evaluation remain valid since the concentrations of VOCs in
groundwater have continued to decline since 2004 and no VOCs are detected above screening
levels in off-site wells. The only buildings on the Site are related to the extraction/treatment/
reinjection system.

                                                3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

The Focused Feasibility Study (FFS) report and the Proposed Plan for the remedy amendment
were released to the public for comment on July 29, 2022. These documents were made available
to the public in the administrative record file on the EPA Region 2 website at
https://www.epa.gov/superfund/cosden-chemical. The notice of availability for these documents
was published in the Burlington County Times on July 29, 2022. A public comment period was
held from July 29, 2022 through August 29, 2022. EPA also maintains a local repository at the
Beverly Municipal Building, which is located at 446 Broad Street, Beverly, NJ 08010, and
phone number (609) 387-1881. In addition, on August 16, 2022, EPA conducted a virtual public
meeting to discuss the findings of the FFS and to present EPA’s Proposed Plan for the ROD
Amendment to local officials and the community. There were several questions or comments
from the audience and EPA received additional comments in writing during the public comment
period.

Responses to the questions and comments received at the public meeting and in writing during
the public comment period are included in the Responsiveness Summary section of this ROD
Amendment (see Appendix III).

SCOPE AND ROLE OF THE RESPONSE ACTION

The Site cleanup is being addressed in one phase or Operable Unit (OU), which addresses three
distinct components, namely the building, soils and groundwater. Based on the RI/FS that was
conducted by EPA at the Site from April 1988 until September 1992, a ROD was issued by EPA
on September 30, 1992. The 1992 ROD identified the following Remedial Action Objectives
(RAOs) for the remedy:

      Prevent exposure to contaminant sources that present a significant human health risk;
       and,
      Restore contaminated groundwater to drinking water standards.

The major components of the selected remedy in the 1992 ROD included:

      Decontamination and demolition of the building on the Site with disposal of the building
       debris at an appropriate off-site facility;
      In-situ stabilization of soil contaminated with inorganic compounds and PCBs; and,
      Extraction of contaminated groundwater with on-site treatment and recharge to the
       underlying aquifer.

The 1992 ROD was modified by an ESD that EPA issued in 1998. As a result of the 1992 ROD
and 1998 ESD, the remedy included the following components to meet the Site RAOs:

      Decontamination and demolition of the building on the Site with disposal of the building
       debris at an appropriate off-site facility;
      Excavation of soils with off-site treatment (if necessary) and disposal;
      Construction of a soil vapor extraction system to address the remaining contaminants

                                               4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       present in soil above the water table (the vadose zone); and,
      Extraction of contaminated groundwater with on-site treatment and recharge to the
       underlying aquifer.

This ROD Amendment adds an additional RAO to the existing remedy, which is to address the
remaining groundwater source area contamination where concentrations are the highest,
including in the vicinity of monitoring wells MW-03, MW-103, MW-105, MW-109 and MW-
110 at the Site. This RAO supplements the existing Site RAOs and remediation goals.

The Site’s building demolition and soil remedy, which were conducted in accordance with the
1992 ROD and 1998 ESD, are complete and are not being modified by this ROD Amendment.
The remedy amendment to the 1992 ROD selected herein is expected to be the final action for
the Site.

SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS

The Site is located within a residential area at the intersection of Manor Road and Cherry Street
in the southeastern corner of the City of Beverly in Burlington County, New Jersey. The property
is bounded on the north and east by residential streets, on the south by Conrail tracks and
farmland, and on the west by undeveloped land. The nearest residence is approximately 300 feet
to the north of the Site. The Beverly Elementary School is located 0.2 miles to the northeast. The
neighboring area is suburban with some light industry.

According to EPA’s EJSCREEN, there are no demographic indicators for the City of Beverly
that identify it as a community with environmental justice concerns. South of the Site, there are
some demographic indicators that this area is above the 80th percentile when compared to
national percentiles for communities over age 64, low income, and linguistically isolated.

The Delaware River is approximately 4,000 feet to the north of the Site, and Rancocas Creek is
approximately 1.5 miles to the southwest of the Site. The population within a one-mile radius of
the Site is approximately 800 people.

Two former public supply wells owned and operated by New Jersey American Water Company
are located approximately 3,200 feet north of the Site but are no longer in use. New Jersey
American Water Company closed the two supply wells more than twenty years ago and replaced
them with a larger surface water treatment plant along the Delaware River.

The hazardous substances still present at the Site are VOCs and metals in groundwater.
Specifically, the VOCs consist of total xylenes, ethylbenzene, toluene, and trichloroethene and
the metals are lead and chromium. The Conceptual Site Model for the Site indicates that these
contaminants are currently located only in a groundwater plume on the Site estimated to be
approximately 9,000 square feet (0.21 acres) in size and located 20 to 25 feet bgs.

Site Geology and Hydrology

The Site is located in the Atlantic Coastal Plain physiographic province of southern New Jersey.
Unconsolidated sediments in the shallow subsurface soil at the Site are alluvial deposits
                                                5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

consisting mainly of sand and gravel with minor amounts of silt and clay. The Potomac-Raritan-
Magothy (PRM) aquifer is the primary aquifer in the area of the Site and a significant source of
municipal water for the region. This regional aquifer system is composed of three sandy aquifers
(designated Lower, Middle, and Upper) that are separated by intervening confining units
composed of silt and clay. The Upper PRM aquifer is not present at the Site. The contaminated
aquifer at the Site is the Middle PRM aquifer.

North of the Site property, regional groundwater flows northward towards the Delaware River.
The Delaware River is the major surface water feature located approximately 4,000 feet north of
the property. The projected 100-year flood of the Delaware River is expected to extend no closer
than 3,000 feet north of the property. The closest distance that the 500-year flood is expected to
occur is approximately 1,900 feet to the north.

Current water-level data collected during non-pumping conditions indicate a groundwater divide
at the northern limit of the Site. Groundwater at the Cosden property has a west/northwest flow
direction (Figure 3), possibly influenced by the nearby Bog’s Ditch and its unnamed tributary,
while groundwater off-property flows north/northwest towards the Delaware River. The low
hydraulic gradient measured at the Site, permeabilities measured during MIPHPT probes, dye
injections, and movement of oxidant as part of the ISCO pilot study all indicate that groundwater
moves slowly through the Site.

Static groundwater levels collected during the past five years as part of the ISCO pilot study
indicates that the water table is located approximately 17 feet bgs on the Site property. An EPA
well survey conducted in May 1991 found no private wells used for drinking water in the vicinity
of the Site, and since that time, EPA has not identified any private wells used for drinking water
near the Site. Two public supply wells owned by New Jersey American Water Company (Wells
No. 15 and 16) are located approximately 3,200 feet north of the Site but are no longer in use.
New Jersey American Water closed the two supply wells more than twenty years ago and
replaced them with a larger surface water treatment plant along the Delaware River.

Current Nature and Extent of Contamination

In 2015 and 2016, EPA performed MIPHPT investigations at the Site to identify where
contamination was still present in groundwater and found that contamination was generally
present at depths between 20 and 25 feet bgs. Sixteen new monitoring wells were installed on the
Site to target this depth. As described above, EPA initiated an ISCO pilot study to determine if
ISCO could address the remaining contamination. Field work took place between August 2017
and May 2021. Thousands of individual groundwater contaminant analyses obtained during the
ISCO pilot study can be found in Appendix D-2 of the Summary Report for In-Situ Chemical
Oxidation Pilot Study, which is in the administrative record. Groundwater analytical results for
ethylbenzene, toluene and total xylene are shown for the duration of the pilot study from 2017 to
2021 (Figure 4).




                                                6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Recent concentrations of contaminants in the new monitoring wells after four rounds of ISCO
pilot study injections are summarized below:

Ethylbenzene – After injections, some of the new monitoring wells did not report any detectable
concentrations of ethylbenzene (non-detect). The highest detected concentration was 13,800
micrograms per liter (µg/L) in 2021. This is a reduction from the previous maximum
concentration of 25,200 µg/L in 2018.

Toluene – Concentrations in 2021 ranged from non-detect to 957 µg/L. This is a reduction from
the maximum concentration of 3,220 µg/L in 2018.

Total Xylenes – Concentrations in 2021 ranged from 1.1 µg/L to 59,100 µg/L. This is a reduction
from the previous maximum concentration of 114,000 µg/L in 2018. The highest concentrations
include monitoring wells MW-03, MW-103, MW-105, MW-109 and MW-110.

Trichloroethene – Concentrations in 2021 ranged from non-detect to 53.3 µg/L.

Total Lead – Concentrations in 2021 ranged from non-detect to 15 µg/L.

Total Chromium – Concentrations in 2021 ranged from non-detect to 1,500 µg/L.

With the exception of total chromium in a single monitoring well, total lead and total chromium
concentrations were below NJDEP GWQS in groundwater before the ISCO pilot study. Total
lead and total chromium concentrations are now above NJDEP GWQS primarily in portions of
the Site where ISCO injections were concentrated. This is due to the oxidizing conditions created
by the persulfate that was injected for the ISCO treatment. These increases in metal
concentrations due to ISCO are typically transitory and are expected to re-equilibrate after
injections cease, so that the metal concentrations return to the pre-injection levels over time.

The area of residual higher levels of toluene, ethylbenzene, and total xylenes (TEX)
contamination generally coincides with groundwater total xylene concentrations greater than
1,000 μg/L and was reduced from 0.77 acres prior to the ISCO pilot study to 0.21 acres post-pilot
study. This is the remaining source area at the Site (Figure 5).

In addition, four monitoring wells, MW-10I, PZ-10S, MW-108, and MW-114, are located on the
Cosden property near the property boundary, in the downgradient direction of groundwater flow.
EPA uses these wells to monitor whether groundwater contamination is leaving the property.
These monitoring wells were installed in response to changes in the direction of groundwater
flow when groundwater pumping ceased at the two downgradient public supply wells. The
monitoring wells have reported single detections of VOCs above the remediation goals
established in the ROD and NJDEP GWQS standards in the past five years, specifically single
detections of ethylbenzene, total xylenes, and trichloroethene. Recent sampling in April 2021
indicates that concentrations of ethylbenzene and trichloroethene may no longer be above the
standards, though EPA will continue to sample these monitoring wells to confirm this.




                                               7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Major Conclusions of the Pilot Study

   The 16 new monitoring wells installed during the pilot study helped to delineate the extent of
    TEX and the magnitude of the remaining TEX groundwater contamination at the Site. In
    addition, water-level elevations measured using new and existing monitoring wells
    confirmed the direction of shallow groundwater flow was westerly across the Site.

   Overall, the ISCO injections were successful in eliminating or reducing TEX concentrations
    at monitoring wells within targeted treatment zones. Fourteen monitoring wells showed
    significant declines (greater than 50%) in TEX compound concentrations between initial
    sampling in 2017 and the May 2021 sampling.

   Total xylene concentrations in groundwater remained high in some monitoring wells. For
    example, the total xylene concentration at MW-103 was 37,400 μg/L in May 2021 and the
    total xylene result for MW-110 was 28,600 μg/L in October 2020 indicating additional
    injections will be necessary to achieve the remediation goals.

   Ethylbenzene levels during the same period decreased by nearly 50%. At well MW-105, total
    xylene concentrations decreased from 59,000 μg/L (November 2017) to 5,160J (estimated)
    μg/L (May 2021), and ethylbenzene concentrations showed a similar approximate 10-fold
    decrease.

   Based upon pilot study calculations, the volume of contaminated groundwater was reduced
    by the four rounds of ISCO injections by approximately 73%. This calculation used the
    saturated aquifer thickness of 25 feet and the square footage of the total xylene plume greater
    than 1,000 μg/L before and after injections. More specifically, the plume was estimated as
    roughly 33,500 ft2 (0.77 acres) prior to ISCO injections and about 9,000 ft2 (0.21 acres) after
    ISCO injections. The average concentration of individual contaminants has also been reduced
    by more than 70% (Table 1).

Off-Property Monitoring Wells

Eight off-property monitoring wells were installed in 2001 as part of an off-property
groundwater investigation. They are located outside of the Cosden property boundaries (Figure
6). Though these monitoring wells were historically located downgradient from the Site, these
monitoring wells are now located hydraulically downgradient and side-gradient from the source
area due to the elimination of the effects from the aquifer pumping at the former public supply
wells. The off-property monitoring wells were sampled in September 2017, March 2018, and
April 2021. The off-property monitoring wells have not reported any exceedances of NJDEP
GWQS or ROD levels for VOCs or metals in the past five years.

Emerging Contaminants

Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) – Six monitoring wells were sampled for PFAS in
April 2021. NJDEP has developed GWQS for three specific PFAS chemicals: Perfluorononanoic
Acid (PFNA, 13 nanograms per liter (ng/L)), Perfluorooctane Sulfonate (PFOS, 13 ng/L), and

                                                8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA, 14 ng/L). PFNA concentrations ranged from non-detect at MW-
10I to 19 ng/L at MW-8S. MW-8S is the most hydraulically upgradient monitoring well on the
Site. PFOS concentrations ranged from non-detect at MW-9S to 66.8 ng/L at MW-3. PFOA
concentrations ranged from 41.8 ng/L at MW-10I to 253 ng/L at MW-8S. MW-10I and PZ-10S,
the most downgradient Site wells, reported detections of PFAS above NJDEP GWQS. The
highest reported concentrations of PFAS at PZ-10S was PFOA at 81 ng/L.

1,4-Dioxane - Four on-site monitoring wells were sampled for 1,4-dioxane in November 2019.
All of the monitoring wells sampled reported non-detect values. Downgradient monitoring well
MW-10I did not report detections of 1,4-dioxane, but downgradient monitoring well MW-108
reported 1.3J µg/L in November 2019. In 2021, eight on-site monitoring wells, including
downgradient monitoring well MW-108, were sampled for 1,4-dioxane, with a detection limit
below NJDEP GWQS (0.4 µg/L). MW-108 reported 0.406 µg/L in April 2021. All other
monitoring wells reported non-detect values in 2021.

1,2,3-Trichloropropane - Four on-site monitoring wells (MW-103, MW-104, MW-105, and
MW-110) were sampled for 1,2,3-tricholoropropane in March 2021. All monitoring wells were
non-detect for 1,2,3-trichloropropane with a detection limit below the 0.03 µg/L NJDEP GWQS.

Additional investigation of PFAS contamination is required in order to determine the nature and
extent of that contamination and whether the PFAS contaminants are Site-related. This ROD
Amendment does not address PFAS contamination.

CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE SITE AND RESOURCE USES

Land Use

The Site is located in the southeastern corner of the City of Beverly, Burlington County, New
Jersey, approximately one‐half mile southeast of the Delaware River. The Site address is 1023
Cherry Street, and the property encompasses approximately 6.7 acres. Two buildings, a soil
vapor extraction system building and the groundwater extraction and treatment system building,
are currently located on the property. The Site is bounded on the north by Cherry Street, on the
east by Manor Road, on the south by railroad tracks, and on the west by undeveloped land. The
neighboring area is suburban residential with some light industry.

Groundwater Use

The PRM aquifer is the primary aquifer in the area of the Site and a significant source of
municipal water for the region. This regional aquifer system is composed of three sandy aquifers
(designated Lower, Middle, and Upper) which are separated by intervening confining units
composed of silt and clay. The Upper PRM aquifer is not present at the Site. The contaminated
aquifer at the Site is the Middle PRM aquifer.

North of the Cosden property, regional groundwater flows northward towards the Delaware
River. The Delaware River is the major surface water feature located approximately 4,000 feet
north of the property.


                                                9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Two former public supply wells owned and operated by New Jersey American Water Company
are located approximately 3,200 feet north of the Site but are no longer in use. New Jersey
American Water closed the two supply wells more than twenty years ago and replaced them with
a larger surface water treatment plant along the Delaware River. Residents in the Site vicinity are
currently connected to a municipal drinking water supply. Groundwater is used for irrigation and
potable water supply in the adjacent Edgewater Park Township.

BASIS FOR REMEDY MODIFICATION

This is an amendment to the 1992 ROD as modified by the 1998 ESD. The 1992 ROD addressed
groundwater contamination by selecting extraction and treatment, which EPA implemented until
2018, shortly after EPA began performing the ISCO pilot study. Through this
ROD Amendment, the remaining groundwater source area contamination will be addressed
through in-situ treatment. The in-situ treatment consists of ISCO, which utilizes oxidants injected
into the groundwater aquifer in the source areas to transform harmful contaminants into less
toxic byproducts. The pilot study was performed between 2017 and 2021 to determine ISCO’s
effectiveness in reducing levels of remaining source area contamination. Based on the findings of
the ISCO pilot study, the source area of TEX contamination was reduced from 0.77 acres prior to
the ISCO pilot study to 0.21 acres post-pilot study. This area is the remaining source area at the
Site subject to this ROD Amendment.

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS

As part of the 1988-1992 Remedial Investigation, EPA conducted a baseline risk assessment to
determine the current and future effects of contaminants on human health and environment. A
baseline risk assessment is an analysis of the potential adverse human health and ecological
effects caused by hazardous substance exposure in the absence of any actions to control or
mitigate these exposures under current and future site uses. It provides the basis for taking an
action and identifies the contaminants and exposure pathways to be addressed by the remedial
action. This section of the ROD Amendment specifically focuses on the results of the 1992 risk
assessment associated with the groundwater, since the remedy selected in the 1992 ROD and
modified by the 1998 ESD successfully addressed soil contamination at the Site.

In the human health risk assessment (HHRA), cancer risk and noncancer health hazard estimates
are based on current reasonable maximum exposure (RME) scenarios. The estimates were
developed by taking into account various health protective estimates about the concentrations,
frequency and duration of an individual’s exposure to chemicals selected as contaminants of
potential concern (COPCs), as well as the toxicity of these contaminants.

Human Health Risk Assessment

A four-step process is utilized for assessing site-related human health risks for a reasonable
maximum exposure scenario:

   Hazard Identification – uses the analytical data collected to identify the contaminants of
    potential concern at the site for each medium (e.g., groundwater), with consideration of a
    number of factors explained below;
                                                10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Exposure Assessment - estimates the magnitude of actual and/or potential human exposures,
      the frequency and duration of these exposures, and the pathways (e.g., ingesting
      contaminated well-water) by which humans are potentially exposed;

     Toxicity Assessment - determines the types of adverse health effects associated with chemical
      exposures, and the relationship between magnitude of exposure (dose) and severity of
      adverse effects (response); and

     Risk Characterization - summarizes and combines outputs of the exposure and toxicity
      assessments to provide a quantitative assessment of site-related risks. The risk
      characterization also identifies contamination with concentrations which exceed acceptable
      levels, defined by the NCP as an excess lifetime cancer risk greater than 1 x 10-6 – 1 x 10-4,
      an excess of lifetime cancer risk greater than 1 x 10-6 (i.e., point of departure) combined with
      site-specific circumstances, or a Hazard Index (HI) greater than 1; contaminants at these
      concentrations are considered chemicals of concern (COCs) and are typically those that will
      require remediation at the site. Also included in this section is a discussion of the
      uncertainties associated with these risks.

Hazard Identification

In this step, the COPCs1 in each medium were identified based on such factors as toxicity,
frequency of occurrence, fate and transport of the contaminants in the environment,
concentrations, mobility, persistence and bioaccumulation. The 1992 risk assessment focused on
the groundwater at the Site that may pose significant risk to human health. The HHRA began
with selecting COPCs in groundwater that could potentially cause adverse health effects in
exposed populations. COPCs are typically selected by comparing the maximum detected
concentrations of each chemical identified with state and federal risk-based screening values. In
the 1992 HHRA, however, all positively detected compounds for which toxicological data was
available were conservatively retained as COPCs. Analytical information that was collected to
determine the nature and extent of contamination revealed the presence of VOCs, SVOCs,
metals, pesticides and PCBs. Tables listing COPCs can be found in Table 3.2-2 of the HHRA
and tables listing the COCs can be found in Table 2 of the 1992 ROD in the administrative
record. Table 2 is also provided in Appendix II of this ROD Amendment.

Exposure Assessment

Consistent with Superfund policy and guidance, the HHRA is a baseline human health risk
assessment and therefore assumes no remediation or institutional controls to mitigate or remove
hazardous substance releases. Cancer risks and noncancer hazard indices were calculated based
on an estimate of the reasonable maximum exposure (RME) expected to occur under current and
future conditions at the Site. The RME is defined as the highest exposure that is reasonably
expected to occur at a site.



1
    Note that the 1992 HHRA referenced COPCs and COCs synonymously.

                                                    11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The HHRA assumed that future land use at the Site could include residential development. Thus,
the HHRA focused on health effects for both children and adults resulting from future direct
contact with contaminated groundwater (e.g., through ingestion of volatile contaminants) in the
event a well was installed at the Site for potential use as tap water. Tables listing exposure
pathways can be found in Table 3.3-1 of the HHRA and Table 3 of the 1992 ROD in the
administrative record. Table 3 is also provided in Appendix II of this ROD Amendment.

Toxicity Assessment

In this step, the types of adverse health effects associated with contaminant exposures and the
relationship between magnitude of exposure and severity of adverse health effects were
determined. Potential health effects are contaminant-specific and may include the risk of
developing cancer over a lifetime or other noncancer health effects, such as changes in the
normal functions of organs within the body (e.g., changes in the effectiveness of the immune
system). Some contaminants are capable of causing both cancer and noncancer health effects.

Under current EPA guidelines, the likelihood of carcinogenic risks and noncancer hazards due to
exposure to site chemicals are considered separately. Consistent with current EPA policy, EPA
assumed that the toxic effects of the Site-related chemicals would be additive. Thus, cancer and
noncancer risks associated with exposures to individual COPCs were summed to indicate the
potential risks and hazards associated with mixtures of potential carcinogens and
noncarcinogens, respectively. Tables listing toxicity data can be found in Tables 3.4-1 to 3.4-2 of
the HHRA and Table 4 of the 1992 ROD in the administrative record. Table 4 is also provided in
Appendix II of this ROD Amendment.

Risk Characterization

This step summarized and combined outputs of the exposure and toxicity assessments to provide
a quantitative assessment of site risks. Exposures were evaluated based on the potential risk of
developing cancer and the potential for noncancer health hazards.

Noncarcinogenic risks were assessed using an HI approach, based on a comparison of expected
contaminant intakes and benchmark comparison levels of intake (reference doses, reference
concentrations). Reference doses (RfDs) and reference concentrations (RfCs) are estimates of
daily exposure levels for humans (including sensitive individuals) which are thought to be safe
over a lifetime of exposure. The estimated intake of chemicals identified in environmental media
(e.g., the amount of a chemical ingested from contaminated drinking water) is compared to the
RfD or the RfC to derive the hazard quotient (HQ) for the contaminant in the particular medium.
The HI is obtained by adding the hazard quotients for all compounds within a particular medium
that impacts a particular receptor population.

The HQ for oral and dermal exposures is calculated below. The HQ for inhalation exposures is
calculated using a similar model that incorporates the RfC, rather than the RfD.




                                                12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

HQ = Intake/RfD

Where:         HQ = hazard quotient
               Intake = estimated intake for a chemical (mg/kg-day)
               RfD = reference dose (mg/kg-day)

The intake and the RfD will represent the same exposure period (i.e., chronic, subchronic, or
acute).

As previously stated, the HI is calculated by summing the HQs for all chemicals for likely
exposure scenarios for a specific population. An HI greater than 1 indicates that the potential
exists for noncarcinogenic health effects to occur as a result of Site-related exposures, with the
potential for health effects increasing as the HI increases. When the HI calculated for all
chemicals for a specific population exceeds 1, separate HI values are then calculated for those
chemicals which are known to act on the same target organ. These discrete HI values are then
compared to the acceptable limit of 1 to evaluate the potential for noncancer health effects on a
specific target organ. The HI provides a useful reference point for gauging the potential
significance of multiple contaminant exposures within a single medium or across media.

For carcinogens, risks are generally expressed as the incremental probability of an individual
developing cancer over a lifetime as a result of exposure to a carcinogen, using the cancer slope
factor (SF) for oral and dermal exposures and the inhalation unit risk (IUR) for inhalation
exposures. Excess lifetime cancer risk for oral and dermal exposures is calculated from the
following equation, while the equation for inhalation exposures uses the IUR, rather than the SF:

Risk = LADD x SF

Where:         Risk = a unitless probability (1 x 10-6) of an individual developing cancer
               LADD = lifetime average daily dose averaged over 70 years (mg/kg-day)
               SF = cancer slope factor, expressed as [1/(mg/kg-day)]

These risks are probabilities that are usually expressed in scientific notation (such as 1 x 10-4).
An excess lifetime cancer risk of 1 x 10-4 indicates that one additional incidence of cancer may
occur in a population of 10,000 people who are exposed under the conditions identified in the
exposure assessment. Current Superfund guidance identifies the range for determining whether a
remedial action is necessary as an individual lifetime excess cancer risk of 1 x 10-4 to 1 x 10-6
(corresponding to a one-in-ten-thousand to a one-in-a-million excess cancer risk), with 1 x 10-6
being the point of departure.

In summary, EPA determined that ingestion of contaminated groundwater in a future use
scenario presented an elevated risk to human health since the hazard indices were estimated to be
16 for children and 11 for adults, exceeding EPA’s noncancer hazard threshold (i.e., HI of 1).
Additionally, residential adult ingestion of groundwater as drinking water yielded a cancer risk
of 3x10-4, exceeding EPA’s target risk range of 1x10-6 to 1x10-4. Tables for cancer and
noncancer risk associated with groundwater can be found in Tables 3.5-19 to 3.5-22 of the

                                                13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

HHRA and Table 5 of the 1992 ROD in the administrative record. Table 5 is also provided in
Appendix II of this ROD Amendment, and is summarized below:

Summary cancer risks and hazard indices associated with groundwater
 Receptor                           Cancer Risk          Hazard Index
                                         -4
 Future Resident Ingestion (Adult) 3x10                  11
 Future Resident Ingestion (Child)  9x10-5               16

The majority of risk and hazard identified in the 1992 risk assessment and displayed in the
summary table above was driven by inorganic compounds (i.e., beryllium, antimony, arsenic and
manganese) in shallow groundwater, which was impacted by contamination in overlying soils
and has since been addressed. However, the concentrations of the following contaminants
continue to be found in groundwater above promulgated federal and/or state Maximum
Contaminant Levels (drinking water standards) and also contributed to the human health risk:
toluene, ethylbenzene, xylene and trichloroethene. As an effect of the pilot study, chromium and
lead currently exceed drinking water standards. These exceedances are expected to be transitory
and will re-equilibrate so that the metal concentrations return to the pre-injection levels over
time. The most recent sampling data from April and May 2021 showed concentrations of these
VOCs and metals above drinking water standards, as well as the New Jersey GWQS, and can be
found in Table 6.

As mentioned in the “Site History” section above, vapor intrusion exposure was evaluated in
March 2004 via groundwater sampling. EPA determined that the vapor intrusion pathway was
not complete because no VOCs were detected above EPA’s screening criteria.

Uncertainties

The procedures and inputs used to assess risks in this evaluation, as in all such assessments, are
subject to a wide variety of uncertainties. In general, the main sources of uncertainty include:

      environmental chemistry sampling and analysis;
      environmental parameter measurement;
      fate and transport modeling;
      exposure parameter estimation; and
      toxicological data.

Uncertainty in environmental sampling arises in part from the potentially uneven distribution of
chemicals in the media sampled. Consequently, there is significant uncertainty as to the actual
levels present. Environmental chemistry analysis error can stem from several sources including
the errors inherent in the analytical methods and characteristics of the matrix being sampled.

Uncertainties in the exposure assessment are related to estimates of how often an individual
would actually come in contact with the COCs, the period of time over which such exposure
would occur, and in the models used to estimate the concentrations of the COCs at the point of
exposure.


                                                14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Uncertainties in toxicological data occur in extrapolating both from animals to humans and from
high to low doses of exposure, as well as from the difficulties in assessing the toxicity of a
mixture of chemicals. These uncertainties are addressed by making conservative assumptions
concerning risk and exposure parameters throughout the assessment. As a result, the risk
assessment provides upper-bound estimates of the risks to populations near the Site, and is
highly unlikely to underestimate actual risks related to the Site.

More specific information concerning uncertainty in the health risks is presented in the HHRA in
the administrative record.

Ecological Risk Assessment

The environmental evaluation provides a qualitative assessment of the actual or potential impacts
associated with the Site on plants and animals (other than people or domesticated species). The
primary objectives of this assessment are to identify the ecosystems, habitats, and populations
likely to be found at the Site and to characterize the contaminants, exposure routes and potential
impacts on the identified environmental components.

The ecological risk assessment portion of the 1992 risk assessment did not identify any
endangered species, sensitive ecosystems, or sensitive habitats on the Site and concluded that
adverse impacts to on-site plants and animals from site related contamination are not likely.

The response action selected in this decision document is necessary to protect the public health,
welfare or the environment from actual or threatened releases of contaminants into the
environment.

REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES

RAOs were developed to address the human health risks and environmental concerns posed by
Site-related contamination in the 1992 ROD and remain unchanged in this ROD Amendment.
The 1992 ROD identified the following RAOs for the remedy:

      Prevent exposure to contaminant sources that present a significant human health risk;
       and,
      Restore contaminated groundwater to drinking water standards.

This ROD Amendment adds an additional RAO to the existing remedy by addressing the
remaining groundwater source area contamination where concentrations are the highest,
including in the vicinity of monitoring wells MW-03, MW-103, MW-105, MW-109 and MW-
110 at the Site. This source area RAO supplements the existing Site RAOs:

      Reduce contaminant mass in the source area such that the maximum dissolved-phase
       concentration of xylene is lowered between 97-98 percent.
       



                                                15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

Section 121(b)(1) of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. § 9621(b)(1), mandates that remedial actions be
protective of human health and the environment, cost-effective, and utilize permanent solutions
and alternative treatment technologies and resource recovery alternatives to the maximum extent
practicable. Section 121(b)(1) of CERCLA also establishes a preference for remedial actions that
employ, as a principal element, treatment to reduce permanently and significantly the volume,
toxicity, or mobility of the hazardous substances, pollutants, and contaminants at a site. Section
121(d) of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. § 9621(d), further specifies that a remedial action must attain a
level or standard of control of the hazardous substances, pollutants, and contaminants which
assures protection of human health and the environment and that at least attain applicable or
relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs) under federal and state laws, unless a waiver can
be justified pursuant to Section 121(d)(4) of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. § 9621(d)(4).

Based on the FFS Report, and as presented in the Proposed Plan, the alternatives for modifying
the remedy selected in the 1992 ROD, as modified by the ESD, are described below. The time
frames presented below for construction do not include the time for pre-design investigations,
remedial design, or contract procurements. For each alternative, a review would be conducted
every five years after the initiation of the remedial action, until remediation goals were achieved.

This ROD Amendment is only for the remaining groundwater source area contamination where
concentrations are the highest at the Site. All other elements of the 1992 ROD remain in effect
and are unchanged.

Common Elements for the Alternatives

Both alternatives described below include institutional controls (ICs) consisting of a
Classification Exception Area/Well Restriction Area (CEA/WRA), which is a restriction
established under New Jersey regulations that will provide notice that the groundwater does not
meet designated use requirements and will restrict groundwater uses or activities which could
result in direct contact with contaminated groundwater. A NJDEP CEA/WRA would restrict
future groundwater use activities that would expose users to contaminants at levels that may pose
human health risk, until the RAO for groundwater restoration is met. Long-Term Monitoring
(LTM) will be used as a basis for evaluating the terms of the CEA/WRA and monitoring the
progress of lowering the concentration of COCs.

Original Remedy – Groundwater Extraction and Treatment

Capital Cost:                         $555,650
Annual O&M Cost:                      $747,000
Total Present Worth Cost:             $10,322,320
Time to attain RAO:                   30 years
Construction Timeframe:               1 year




                                                 16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The Groundwater Extraction and Treatment remedial alternative consists of groundwater
collection, treatment, and reinjection of the treated groundwater. This alternative also includes a
LTM program. As part of the remedy selected in 1992, a groundwater extraction and treatment
system was constructed at the Site and operated from July 2009 through June 2018.
Contaminated groundwater was pumped from the subsurface through two extraction wells,
identified as RW-1 and RW-2, and conveyed to the treatment system, which is located within a
dedicated building on the Site. The treatment system includes a pretreatment system for metals
removal by addition of hydrogen peroxide and multi-media filtration. The water then passes
through two granular activated carbon (GAC) vessels, in series, to remove VOC contamination.
The treated water then is routed to a tank for filter and GAC vessel backwashing or is discharged
to the reinjection trenches. The reinjection trenches consist of two banks and each bank contains
two trenches for a total of four possible reinjection trenches. The system was shut down in June
2018 when EPA decided to perform the ISCO pilot study.

This alternative consists of repairing the treatment plant, and would include supervisory control
and data acquisition (SCADA) system upgrades, replacement of media in both the multi-media
and carbon filters, other general repairs, and the installation of two new extraction wells that
would be placed to target the remaining source area contamination. The treatment plant would
then be operated for an estimated 30 years to attain groundwater RAOs.

Preferred Alternative – In-Situ Treatment

Capital Cost:                         $913,500
Annual O&M Cost:                      $40,000
Total Present Worth Costs:            $1,409,900
Time to attain RAO:                   ~5 years
Construction Timeframe:               N/A

This in-situ treatment alternative consists of ISCO which utilizes oxidants injected into the
groundwater aquifer in the source areas to transform harmful contaminants (specifically, VOCs)
into less toxic byproducts. This alternative also includes an LTM program. At the Site, the ISCO
pilot study involved the injection of sodium persulfate oxidant and sodium hydroxide activator
into the subsurface to determine the effectiveness in reducing levels of remaining VOC
contamination in the groundwater. This remedial alternative involves several rounds of
additional ISCO injections, followed by sampling after each injection event. Additional sampling
and analysis will need to be performed to evaluate if additional injection treatment, such as in-
situ alternative chemical oxidants or in-situ chemical reduction, will be required to fully address
the residual contaminants at the Site. EPA does not expect it will be necessary to treat metals that
may become elevated after the ISCO injections because such ISCO-induced increases are
typically transitory, with the metal concentrations returning to their pre-injection levels over
time.

Based on the findings of the ISCO pilot study, this alternative will consist of an estimated five
rounds of ISCO injections targeting the remaining source areas, followed by an estimated 10
years of monitoring to ensure additional injections are not needed and metal concentrations re-
equilibrate.

                                                17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES

In selecting a remedy, EPA considered the factors set out in CERCLA Section 121, 42 U.S.C.
§9621, by conducting a detailed analysis of the viable remedial response measures pursuant to
the NCP, 40 CFR §300.430(e)(9) and EPA’s Guidance for Conducting Remedial Investigations
and Feasibility Studies under CERCLA (OSWER Directive 9355.3-01). The detailed analysis
consisted of an assessment of the individual response measure against each of nine evaluation
criteria in the NCP and a comparative analysis focusing upon the relative performance of each
response measure against the criteria.

Threshold Criteria - The first two criteria are known as "threshold criteria" because they are the
minimum requirements that each response measure must meet in order to be eligible for selection
as a remedy.

1. Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment
Overall protection of human health and the environment addresses whether each alternative
provides adequate protection of human health and the environment and describes how risks
posed through each exposure pathway are eliminated, reduced, or controlled, through treatment,
engineering controls, and/or institutional controls.

Both alternatives are considered equally protective of human health. The Original Remedy
achieves protection through groundwater collection, treatment, and reinjection of the treated
groundwater into the aquifer. The Preferred Alternative reduces contaminant concentrations
through in-situ treatment consisting of ISCO injections into the groundwater aquifer targeted at
the source areas. The exposure pathways to human receptors will be eliminated by restrictions
placed on the use of groundwater within the area of groundwater contamination.

2. Compliance with applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs)
Section 121(d) of CERCLA and NCP § 300.430(f)(1)(ii)(B) require that remedial actions at
CERCLA sites at least attain legally applicable or relevant and appropriate federal and state
requirements, standards, criteria, and limitations which are collectively referred to as "ARARs,"
unless such ARARs are waived under CERCLA section 121(d)(4).

Applicable requirements are those cleanup standards, standards of control, and other
substantive requirements, criteria, or limitations promulgated under federal environmental or
state environmental or facility siting laws that specifically address a hazardous substance,
pollutant, contaminant, remedial action, location, or other circumstance found at a CERCLA
site. Only those state standards that are identified by a state in a timely manner and that are
more stringent than federal requirements may be applicable. Relevant and appropriate
requirements are those cleanup standards, standards of control, and other substantive
requirements, criteria, or limitations promulgated under federal environmental or state
environmental or facility siting laws that, while not "applicable" to a hazardous substance,
pollutant, contaminant, remedial action, location, or other circumstance at a CERCLA site,
address problems or situations sufficiently similar to those encountered at the CERCLA site that
their use is well-suited to the particular site. Only those state standards that are identified in a
timely manner and are more stringent than federal requirements may be relevant and

                                                 18

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

appropriate.

Compliance with ARARs addresses whether a remedy will meet all the applicable or relevant
and appropriate requirements of federal and state environmental statutes or provides a basis for
invoking a waiver. ARARs are divided into three broad categories. These categories are
chemical-specific, location-specific and action-specific. The full list of ARARs for this remedy
amendment can be found in Table 7 of Appendix II.

The 1992 ROD identified state and federal drinking water standards as chemical-specific
ARARs. Both source area alternatives are expected to help the remedy achieve compliance with
these standards (as well as the New Jersey GWQS). In the Original Remedy, the contaminants
would be removed by the groundwater extraction and treatment system. In the Preferred
Alternative, the contaminants in the remaining source area would be reduced through in-situ
treatment to meet the RAO.

Action-specific ARARs are determined by the specific technology of each alternative. Both
alternatives will comply with action-specific ARARs, such as those applicable to managing
stormwater runoff; minimizing land disturbances; installation, operation, and abandonment of
wells; waste characterization and storage; air quality control; and noise pollution. No location-
specific ARARs were identified.

Primary Balancing Criteria - The next five criteria, criteria 3 through 7, are known as "primary
balancing criteria." These criteria are factors with which tradeoffs between response measures
are assessed so that the best option will be chosen, given site-specific data and conditions.

3. Long-term effectiveness and permanence
A similar degree of long-term effectiveness and permanence refers to expected residual risk and
the ability of a remedy to maintain reliable protection of human health and the environment over
time, once cleanup levels have been met. This criterion includes the consideration of residual
risk that will remain on-site following remediation and the adequacy and reliability of controls.

Both alternatives are expected to be protective in the long-term and permanent because they both
will permanently treat groundwater contamination. The Original Remedy treats the contaminated
groundwater by collection, treatment, and reinjection of the treated groundwater into the aquifer
and the Preferred Alternative treats the contaminant mass in the source area using in-situ
treatment. However, the Preferred Alternative is estimated to attain the RAO for reducing source
area contaminant mass in a significantly shorter time than the Original Remedy, so that long-
term effectiveness could be achieved more quickly.

Long-term monitoring and ICs, including a CEA/WRA, will help ensure that each alternative
remains effective in preventing exposure to contaminants. Although residents in the Site vicinity
are currently connected to a municipal drinking water supply, ICs, such as groundwater use
restrictions, will be used to prevent the installation of any private wells within the area of the
aquifer covered by the restrictions, until the RAO for groundwater restoration is met. A deed notice
would be recorded in property records if it is determined that future land use at the Site would
result in exposure leading to unacceptable risk.

                                                19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Potential impacts to the Site from climate change have been assessed, and the performance of the
remedy is currently not at risk due to the expected effects of climate change in the region and
near the Site.

4. Reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume
Reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment refers to the anticipated
performance of the treatment technologies that may be included as part of a remedy.

Both alternatives reduce toxicity, mobility, and volume of the VOCs in groundwater through
treatment of COCs. The Original Remedy will treat less contaminant mass than the Preferred
Alternative since direct treatment with injection will directly target the primary source areas of
contamination. During the treatment process for the Original Remedy, contaminants are removed
from the groundwater by chemical precipitation and filtration in the pretreatment stage and
carbon adsorption in the treatment stage resulting in wastes in the form of sludge and spent
carbon. Treatment residuals will be transferred off-site for further treatment (if necessary) and
disposal.

For the Preferred Alternative, in-situ treatment transforms harmful contaminants into less toxic
byproducts, thereby significantly eliminating or reducing VOCs, as demonstrated in the pilot
study, which showed a volume reduction of approximately 73% after four rounds of injections.
Increases in the metal concentrations that occurred during the pilot study are expected to be
transitory, with metal concentrations returning to their pre-injection levels over time.

5. Short-Term Effectiveness
Short-term effectiveness addresses the period of time needed to implement the remedy and any
adverse impacts that may be posed to workers, the community and the environment during
construction and operation of the remedy until cleanup levels are achieved.

The Preferred Alternative is expected to attain the RAO for reducing source area contaminant
mass in approximately five years, whereas the Original Remedy is expected to attain the RAO in
30 years. Both alternatives rely on ICs, including a CEA/WRA, to protect human health until the
RAO for groundwater restoration is achieved.

There are no significant short-term risks to the community or the environment associated with
either alternative although there is normal construction related health and safety risks for
construction workers performing upgrades to the groundwater extraction and treatment system as
part of the Original Remedy. Workers performing in-situ treatment injections under the Preferred
Alternative and groundwater sampling/monitoring under both alternatives have the potential to
be exposed temporarily to contaminants, but this risk will be minimized by the use of personal
protective equipment and implementation of a Health and Safety Plan.

6. Implementability
Implementability addresses the technical and administrative feasibility of a remedy from design
through construction and operation. Factors such as availability of services and materials,
administrative feasibility, and coordination with other governmental entities are also considered.

                                                20

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Both alternatives are implementable. There are no significant technical implementability issues
associated with either alternative. The goods and services needed to implement both alternatives
are readily available. However, the Original Remedy has greater implementability challenges
associated with start-up and long-term operation of the groundwater extraction and treatment
system. There are no implementation issues associated with the Preferred Alternative since the
treatment system is temporary and relatively easy to construct, operate and remove at
completion. Pursuant to the permit exemption at Section 121(e)(1) of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. §
9621(e)(1), no permits will be required for on-site work although substantive requirements of
otherwise required permits will be met.

7. Cost
Includes estimated capital and O&M costs, and net present worth value of capital and O&M
costs.

Cost includes estimated capital and annual O&M costs, as well as the total present worth cost. A
present worth cost is the total cost of an alternative over time in terms of today's dollar value.
Cost estimates are expected to be accurate within a range of +50 to -30 percent. The cost
estimates are based on the best available information and assumes a seven percent discount rate.

The Original Remedy has a higher cost for groundwater extraction and treatment, with a total
present worth cost of $10.3 million over a period of 30 years. The total present worth cost for the
Preferred Alternative is substantially lower than the Original Remedy, with a total present worth
cost of $1.4 million over a period of five years.

Cost Summary
 Alternative                     Capital Cost        O&M Cost      Total Present Worth Cost
 Original Remedy                    $556,000           $747,000                 $10.3 million
 Preferred Alternative              $914,000            $40,000                  $1.4 million

Modifying Criteria - The final two evaluation criteria, criteria 8 and 9, are called "modifying
criteria" because new information or comments from the state or the community on the Proposed
Plan may modify the preferred response measure or cause another response measure to be
considered.

8. State acceptance
Indicates whether based on its review of the FFS report and the Proposed Plan, the state
supports, opposes, and/or has identified any reservations with the selected response measure.

The State of New Jersey concurs with this ROD Amendment.

9. Community acceptance
Summarizes the public’s general response to the response measures described in the Proposed
Plan and the FFS report. This assessment includes determining which of the response
measures the community supports, opposes, and/or has reservations about.


                                                21

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

EPA received input from the community on the two alternatives proposed for amending the
ROD. The Proposed Plan was released for public comment on July 29, 2022. The
comment period closed on August 29, 2022. A virtual public meeting took place on August 16,
2022. A transcript of the public meeting is included at Appendix III. Comments submitted during
the public comment period and EPA’s responses are included in the Responsiveness Summary in
Appendix III. Overall, the community was supportive of EPA’s Preferred Alternative.

PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTES

Principal threat wastes are considered source materials, i.e., materials that include or contain
hazardous substances, pollutants or contaminants that act as a reservoir for migration of
contamination to groundwater, surface water, or as a source for direct exposure. This ROD
Amendment addresses groundwater. Contaminated groundwater is generally not considered to be
source material and is therefore not categorized as a “principal threat.” No non-aqueous phase
liquid (NAPL) has not been found in wells since 2010, and NAPL was not visually noted in any
boring in at least the past five years. In addition, contaminated soil, a source of groundwater
contamination was removed from the Site during remedial action activities between June 1999
and March 2002.

SELECTED REMEDY AMENDMENT

Based upon consideration of the results of Site investigations, the requirements of CERCLA, and
the detailed analysis of the remedial alternatives and public comments, EPA has determined that
the Preferred Alternative, In-Situ Treatment, is the appropriate remedy to address the remaining
groundwater source area contamination. This remedy amendment best satisfies the requirements
of CERCLA Section 121 and the NCP’s nine evaluation criteria for remedial alternatives at 40
CFR § 300.430(e)(9).

This remedy amendment modifies the groundwater remedy selected in the 1992 ROD to include
in-situ treatment. The major components of the remedy amendment include the following:

   In-situ groundwater treatment targeting remaining groundwater source area contamination,
    and

   Long‐term groundwater monitoring to assess the progress of lowering the concentration of
    contaminants in the groundwater over time.

The remaining groundwater source area contamination will be addressed through in-situ
treatment. The in-situ treatment consists of ISCO which utilizes oxidants injected into the
groundwater aquifer in the source areas to transform harmful contaminants into less toxic
byproducts. At the Site, a pilot study was performed between 2017 and 2021 using in-situ
treatment to determine the effectiveness in reducing levels of remaining source area
contamination. Based on the findings of the ISCO pilot study, the remedy consists of an
estimated five rounds of in-situ chemical injections targeting the remaining groundwater source
area contamination, with sampling to be completed before, between, and after each round of
injections. After all injection rounds are completed, a period of monitoring will follow to allow
for re-equilibration of metal concentrations and ensure that additional injections are not needed.
                                                22

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The remedy includes ICs, consisting of a CEA/WRA, which will restrict groundwater uses or
activities which could result in direct contact with contaminated groundwater. The estimated
total present worth cost for the selected remedy is $1,409,900.

Based on all available information, EPA and the State of New Jersey believe that the selected
remedy amendment provides the best balance of trade-offs among the response measures with
respect to the nine evaluation criteria. The selected remedy amendment will be protective of
human health and the environment, will comply with ARARs, will be cost effective, and will
utilize permanent solutions to the maximum extent practicable.

Consistent with EPA Region 2’s Clean and Green policy, EPA will evaluate the use of
sustainable technologies and practices with respect to the selected remedy amendment.

Expected Outcomes of the Selected Remedy Amendment

Implementation of the selected remedy amendment will reduce the remaining groundwater
source area contamination where concentrations are the highest and is expected to achieve the
source area RAO established in this remedy amendment within five years after an estimated five
rounds of in-situ treatment.

Summary of the Rationale for the Selected Remedy Amendment

EPA has determined that the selected remedy amendment is appropriate because a pilot study
was performed at the Site to determine the effectiveness in reducing levels of remaining source
area contamination and found that the in-situ treatment was successful in eliminating or reducing
contaminant concentrations at monitoring wells within targeted treatment zones. EPA estimates
that the remedy amendment will achieve the source area RAO within five years, as opposed to
the estimated 30 years for the original groundwater remedy.

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

As was previously noted, CERCLA Section 121(b)(1) mandates that a remedial action must be
protective of human health and the environment, cost-effective, and utilize permanent solutions
and alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery technologies to the maximum extent
practicable. Section 121(b)(1) also establishes a preference for remedial actions which employ
treatment to permanently and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity, or mobility of the
hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants at a site. CERCLA Section 121(d) further
specifies that a remedial action must attain a degree of cleanup that satisfies ARARs under
federal and state laws unless a waiver can be justified pursuant to CERCLA Section 121(d)(4).




                                               23

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Protection of Human Health and the Environment

The selected remedy amendment will be protective of human health and the environment
because in-situ treatment will reduce the remaining groundwater source area contamination
where concentrations are the highest. Implementation of the selected remedy amendment will not
pose unacceptable short-term risks or adverse cross-media impacts.

Compliance with ARARs

EPA expects that the selected remedy amendment for the remaining groundwater source area
contamination will help the Site remedy achieve compliance with chemical-specific ARARs,
consistent with the ROD. It will be implemented in compliance with action-specific ARARs.

Cost Effectiveness

EPA has determined that the selected remedy amendment is cost-effective and represents a
reasonable value for the money to be spent. In making this determination, the following
definition was used: “A remedy shall be cost-effective if its costs are proportional to its overall
effectiveness.” (40 C.F.R. §300.430(f)(1)(ii)(D)). EPA evaluated the “overall effectiveness” of
the alternatives that satisfied the threshold criteria (i.e., were both protective of human health
and the environment and ARAR-compliant). Overall effectiveness was evaluated by assessing
three of the five balancing criteria in combination (long-term effectiveness and permanence;
reduction in toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment; and short-term effectiveness).
Overall effectiveness was then compared to costs to determine cost-effectiveness. The
relationship of the overall effectiveness of the selected remedy amendment was determined to be
proportional to costs and hence, the selected remedy amendment represents a reasonable value
for the money to be spent. The selected remedy amendment is cost-effective, as EPA has
determined that its overall protectiveness is proportional to its present-worth cost.

Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment Technologies

EPA has determined that the selected remedy amendment utilizes permanent solutions and
treatment technologies to the maximum extent that is practicable. The selected remedy
amendment will permanently address groundwater contamination through in-situ treatment, the
effectiveness of which has been documented.

Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element

The selected remedy amendment meets the statutory preference for the use of remedies
that involve treatment as a principal element.

Five-Year Review Requirements

A policy five-year review for the Site was completed on May 31, 2022. The selected remedy,
including actions taken pursuant to the 1992 ROD, as modified by the 1998 ESD and this ROD
Amendment, will not result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants remaining on-
site above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure, but is anticipated to take
                                                 24

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

more than five years to attain remedial action objectives and cleanup levels, and therefore a
policy review will continue to be required.

DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES

The Proposed Plan for the ROD Amendment was released for public comment on July 29,
2022. The comment period closed on August 29, 2022. Comments were submitted during the
public comment period. Based on these comments, no changes to the remedy amendment, as
presented in the Proposed Plan, are warranted. The comments are addressed in the
Responsiveness Summary in Appendix III.




                                                25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX I


 FIGURES

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Figure 1. Location Map of the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corp. Superfund Site

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Figure 2. Soil Removal locations at the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corp. Superfund Site, 2003 Remedial Action Report

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Figure 3. Groundwater Flow Map at Cosden Chemical Coatings Corp. Superfund Site, May 2021

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Figure 4. Groundwater Analytical Results for Ethylbenzene, Toluene and Total Xylene during ISCO Pilot Study

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Figure 5. Total Xylene Concentrations in Groundwater Before and After ISCO Pilot Study

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Figure 6. Off-Property Monitoring Well Locations

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX II


 TABLES

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 1. Calculated Percent Change and Concentrations of Individual Contaminants Before and
After the ISCO Pilot Study

 Analyte          Percent         Pre-Injection Average        Post-Injection Average
                  Decrease        Concentration                Concentration
 Toluene          78%             336 µg/L                     75 µg/L

 Ethylbenzene     74%             5,881 µg/L                   1,516 µg/L

 Total Xylenes    75%             26,789 µg/L                  6,728 µg/L

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 2. Summary of Contaminants of Concern

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 2. Summary of Contaminants of Concern (cont’d)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 3. Potential Exposure Pathways and Populations

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 4. Summary of Toxicity Data for Noncarcinogenic and Carcinogenic Effects

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 4. Summary of Toxicity Data for Noncarcinogenic and Carcinogenic Effects (cont’d)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 5. Summary of Risk Across Pathways

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 6. Summary of Contaminants of Concern

           Contaminant      Maximum Contaminant Levels   NJDEP GWQS   2021 Maximum Concentration
                                     (µg/L)                 (µg/L)              (µg/L)
 Ethylbenzene                          700                  700                 13,800

 Toluene                               1000                 600                  957

 Xylenes (total)                        44                  1,000               59,100

 Trichloroethene                        1                    1                   53.3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 7. Action-Specific ARARs and TBCs for the Remedy Amendment

        Action                                           Requirements                                                                  Prerequisite                               Comments                                    Citation                           Website

 General Site Remediation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         https://www.nj.gov/dep/rules/rules/nj
 NJ Technical Requirements               Established to provide requirements for remedial activities under NJ cleanup       Substantive elements may be Relevant and              Overall state requirements for remedial     N.J.A.C. 7:26E             ac7_26e.pdf
 for Site Remediation                    programs.                                                                          Appropriate                                           investigation and action


 Monitoring, Extraction and Injection Wells – Installation, Operation and Abandonment


 Construction of extraction, injection
 and monitoring wells
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NJ Well Construction and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Maintenance; Sealing of    https://www.nj.gov/dep/rules/rules/nj
                                         Provides state standards for the siting, construction, operation,
 Operation & Maintenance of                                                                                                 Activities related to construction, operation,        Activities related to wells necessary for   Abandoned Wells            ac7_9d.pdf
                                         maintenance, and abandonment of wells and boreholes to protect public
 extraction, injection and                                                                                                  maintenance and abandonment of wells.                 the remedy, to comply with substantive      (N.J.A.C.7:9D)
                                         health and water resources of the State and requires certain permits and
 monitoring wells                                                                                                           Applicable                                            requirements.                                                          https://www.nj.gov/dep/rules/rules/nj
                                         licenses.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NJ Water Pollution         ac7_14.pdf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Control Act
 Abandonment of extraction,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (N.J.A.C. 7:14)
 injection and monitoring wells and
 boreholes

                                         Federal and state standards for injection activity to prevent the movement of fluid                                                                                                  40 CFR 144;                https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/4
                                         containing any contaminant into drinking water, if the presence of that             Construction, operation, maintenance, conversion,
 Activity associated with Class V                                                                                                                                                 Activities related to wells necessary for                              0/part-144/subpart-A
 injection wells (e.g., remediation      contaminant may cause a violation of the primary drinking water standards under plugging and closure of Class V injection wells          the remedy, to comply with substantive      Underground Injection
                                         40 CFR Part141, other health-based standards, or may otherwise adversely            associated with remedial activity.                                                               Control, NJPDES,           https://www.state.nj.us/dep/dwq/714
 injections)                             affect the health of persons.                                                                                                            requirements.
                                                                                                                             Applicable                                                                                       N.J.A.C.7:14A-1.9          a.htm
 Waste Characterization – Primary Waste (e.g., drill cuttings, purge water) and Secondary Waste (e.g., contaminated equipment or treatment residuals)
                              Must determine if solid waste is a hazardous waste:
                                                                                                        Generation of solid waste as defined in 40 CFR
                              -First determine if waste is excluded from regulation under 40 CFR 261.4;                                                         Hazardous waste characterization                                                         https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/4
                                                                                                        261.2.                                                                                                                40 CFR 262.11(a) and (b)
                              -Then determine if waste is listed as a hazardous waste under                                                                                                                                                              0/part-262
                                                                                                        Relevant and Appropriate,
                              subpart D 40 CFR Part 261.                                                However, applies only if waste characterization results
                                                                                                                            show RCRA Hazardous Waste was generated during
                                                                                                                            remedial activities
 Characterization of solid               Must determine whether the waste is characteristic waste identified in             Generation of solid waste which is not excluded
 waste (all primary and                  Subpart C of 40 CFR part 261 by either: (1) Testing the waste according to the     under 40 CFR 261.4(a).                                  Hazardous waste characterization
 secondary wastes)                       methods set forth in subpart C of 40 CFR part 261, or according to an                                                                                                                                           https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/4
                                                                                                                            Relevant and Appropriate,                                                                         40 CFR 262.11(c )
                                         equivalent method approved by the Administrator under 40 CFR 260.21; or            However, applies only if waste characterization results                                                                      0/part-262
                                         (2) Applying knowledge of the hazard characteristic of the waste in light of       show RCRA Hazardous Waste was generated during
                                         the materials or the processes used.                                               remedial activities

                                         Refer to Parts 261, 262, 264, 265, 266, 268, and 273 of Chapter 40 for possible    Generation of solid waste which is determined to be
                                                                                                                                                                                    Hazardous waste characterization and                                 https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/4
                                         exclusions or restrictions pertaining to management of the specific                hazardous waste.                                                                                  40 CFR 262.11(d)
                                         waste.                                                                                                                                     management                                                           0/part-262
                                                                                                                            Relevant and Appropriate,
                                                                                                                            However, applies only if waste characterization results
                                                                                                                            show RCRA Hazardous Waste was generated during
                                                                                                                            remedial activities

                                         Must obtain a detailed chemical and physical analysis on a representative
                                                                                                                            Generation of RCRA hazardous waste for storage,
                                         sample of the waste(s), which at a minimum contains all the information that                                                             Hazardous waste characterization and                                   https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/4
                                                                                                                            treatment or disposal.                                                                            40 CFR 264.13(a)(1)
                                         must be known to treat, store, or dispose of the waste in accordance with                                                                management                                                             0/part-264
                                         pertinent sections of 40 CFR 264 and 268.                                          Applicable

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      Action                                    Requirements                                                             Prerequisite                                       Comments              Citation                                   Website

                                Must determine each EPA Hazardous Waste Number (waste code) is                  Accumulation of RCRA hazardous waste on site
                                applicable to determine the applicable treatment standards under 40             as defined in 40 CFR 260.10.
Determination of waste code for CFR268 et seq. This determination may be made concurrently with                 Relevant and Appropriate,
                                                                                                                However, applies only if the waste generated                                      40 CFR 268.9(a),              https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/40/part-268
management of hazardous waste the hazardous waste determination required in Sec. 262.11.                                                                       Hazardous waste treatment
                                                                                                                during remedial activities is characterized as                                    40 CFR 268.7(a)
                                 Must comply with the special requirements of 40 CFR 268.9 in                   RCRA hazardous waste for storage, treatment or
                                 addition to any applicable requirements in CFR 268.7.                          disposal.
                                                                                                                Accumulation of 55 gal. or less of RCRA
                                 Established to manage the discovery, storage, treatment or                     hazardous waste or one quart of acutely            Hazardous waste                NJ Waste                      https://www.state.nj.us/dep/dshw/resource/njac726g.pdf
Hazardous waste regulations
                                 disposal of hazardous waste.                                                   hazardous waste listed in 261.33(e) at or near any management during              Regulations
                                                                                                                point of generation.                               remediation                    (N.J.A.C. 7:26G)
                                                                                                                Relevant and Appropriate,
                                                                                                                However, applies only if the waste generated
                                                                                                                during remedial activities is characterized as
                                                                                                                RCRA hazardous waste.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  NJ Solid Waste Regulations
                                                                                                                Applies to Solid waste is generated during remedial Solid waste management                                   https://www.nj.gov/dep/dshw/resource/26sch01.pdf
Solid waste management           Established to manage the storage, treatment or disposal of solid waste.       activities.                                                                       (N.J.A.C. 7:26, N.J.S.A.
                                                                                                                                                                    during remediation
                                                                                                                                                                                                  13:1E-
                                                                                                                Applicable                                                                        1 et seq.)
Hazardous Waste Storage – Primary Waste (e.g., drill cuttings, purge water) and Secondary Waste (e.g., contaminated equipment or treatment residuals)

                                                                                                                                                              Hazardous waste storage
                                 A generator may accumulate hazardous waste at the facility provided that:                                                                                        40 CFR 262.34(a);
                                                                                                                                                              during remediation
                                                                                                                Accumulation of RCRA hazardous waste on site
                                 Waste is placed in containers that comply with 40 CFR 265.171 – 180            as defined in 40 CFR 260.10.                  Hazardous waste storage during
                                 (USDOT Hazardous Materials Transportation Regulations) and                                                                   remediation                         40 CFR 262.34(a)(1)(i);
                                                                                                                Relevant and Appropriate,
Temporary on–site storage of
                                 The date upon which accumulation begins is clearly marked and                  However, applies only if RCRA Hazardous Waste Hazardous waste storage                                           https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/40/part-262
hazardous waste in containers                                                                                                                                                                     40 CFR 262.34(a)(2) and (3)
                                 visible for inspection on each container; Container is marked with the         is generated during remedial activities.
                                                                                                                                                              during remediation
                                 words “hazardous waste”; or waste pending analysis which is
                                 update appropriately following the receipt of results.

                                                                                                                Accumulation of 55 gal. or less of RCRA
                                                                                                                hazardous waste or one quart of acutely
                                                                                                                                                               Hazardous waste storage
                                 Container may be marked with other words that identify the contents.           hazardous waste listed in 261.33(e) at or near                                    40 CFR 262.34(c)(1)
                                                                                                                                                               during remediation
                                                                                                                any point of generation.
                                                                                                                Relevant and Appropriate,
                                                                                                                However, applies only if RCRA Hazardous Waste
                                                                                                                is generated during remedial activities.
                                 If container is not in good condition (e.g., severe rusting, structural
                                                                                                                                                                Hazardous waste storage
                                 defects) or if it begins to leak, must transfer waste from this container to   If Hazardous Waste is generated, applies to the                                   40 CFR 265.171
                                                                                                                                                                during remediation
                                 a container that is in good condition.                                         storage of RCRA hazardous waste in containers.
Use and management of                                                                                           Relevant and Appropriate,
                                                                                                                However, applies only if RCRA Hazardous Waste Hazardous waste storage during                                    https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/40/part-265
hazardous waste in               Must use container made or lined with materials compatible with waste to
                                 be stored so that the ability of the container to contain is not impaired.     is generated during remedial activities.        remediation                       40 CFR 265.172
containers

                                 Containers must be closed during storage, except when necessary to                                                              Hazardous waste storage during
                                 add/remove waste.                                                                                                               remediation                      40 CFR 265.173(a)
                                 Container must not opened, handled and stored in a manner that may                                                              Hazardous waste storage during
                                 rupture the container or cause it to leak.                                                                                      remediation                      40 CFR 265.173(b)

                                                                                                                Applies to the storage of RCRA hazardous waste in
                                 Area must have a containment system designed and                                                                                  Hazardous waste storage
                                                                                                                containers with free liquids.                                                     40 CFR 264.175(a)
                                 operated in accordance with 40 CFR 264.175(b)                                                                                     during remediation
Storage of hazardous waste in                                                                                   Relevant and Appropriate,
                                                                                                                However, applies only if RCRA Hazardous Waste
container area
                                                                                                                is generated during remedial activities.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/40/part-264
                                 Area must be sloped or otherwise designed and operated to drain liquid         Applies to the storage of RCRA hazardous waste in
                                 resulting from precipitation, or                                               containers that do not contain free liquids (other Hazardous waste storage
                                                                                                                                                                                                  40 CFR 264.175(c)(1) and
                                 Containers must be elevated or otherwise protected from contact                than F020,F021, F022, F023,F026 and F027).         during remediation
                                                                                                                                                                                                  (2)
                                 With accumulated liquid.                                                       Relevant and Appropriate,
                                                                                                                However, applies only if RCRA Hazardous Waste
                                                                                                                is generated during remedial activities.
                                                                                                                If Hazardous waste is generated, applies to the
Closure of RCRA container        At closure, all hazardous waste and hazardous waste residues must be                                                           Hazardous waste storage
storage unit                                                                                                    storage of RCRA hazardous waste in containers   During remediation                40 CFR 264.178
                                 removed from the containment system. Remaining containers, liners,
                                                                                                                in a unit with a containment system.
                                 bases, and soils containing or contaminated with hazardous waste and
                                                                                                                Relevant and Appropriate,
                                 hazardous waste residues must be decontaminated or removed.
                                                                                                                However, applies only if RCRA Hazardous Waste
                                                                                                                is generated during remedial activities.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       Action                                    Requirements                                                           Prerequisite                                               Comments                       Citation                       Website
Waste Transportation – Primary Waste (e.g., treated groundwater, drill cuttings, purge water) and Secondary Waste (e.g., contaminated equipment or treatment residuals)
                                                                                                           Transportation of hazardous wastes on a public or
                            The generator manifesting requirements of 40 CFR 262.20-262.32(b) do not       private right-of-way within or along the border of
Transportation of hazardous apply. Generator or transporter must comply with the requirements set forth in contiguous property under the control of the same                                                                             https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/4
                                                                                                                                                                Hazardous waste transport on-site          40 CFR 262.20(f)
waste on-site               40 CFR 263.30 and 263.31 in the event of a discharge of hazardous waste on a person, even if such contiguous property is divided by                                                                          0/part-262
                            private or public right-of-way.                                                a public or private right-of-way.
                                                                                                           Relevant and Appropriate,
                                                                                                           However, applies only if RCRA Hazardous Waste is
                                                                                                           generated during remedial activities.

                                Must comply with the generator standards of Part 262 including 40 CFR         Preparation and initiation of shipment of
Transportation of hazardous                                                                                                                                                                                40 CFR 262.10(h);             https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/4
                                262.20-23 for manifesting, Sect. 262.30 for packaging, Sect. 262.31 for       hazardous waste off-site.                               Hazardous waste transport off-site
waste off-site                  labeling, Sect. 262.32 for marking, Sect. 262.33 for placarding,                                                                                                           40 CFR 262, Subpart B and C   0/part-262
                                                                                                              Relevant and Appropriate,
                                                                                                              However, applies only if RCRA Hazardous Waste is
                                                                                                              generated during remedial activities.

                                                                                                              Any person who, under contract with a department
                                Shall be subject to and must comply with all applicable provisions of the
                                                                                                              or agency of the federal government, transports “in
Transportation of hazardous     Hazardous Materials Transportation Act and Hazardous Materials                                                                                                             49 CFR 171.(c);               https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/4
                                                                                                              commerce,” or causes to be transported or shipped,      Hazardous waste transport off-site
materials                       Regulations at 49 CFR 171-180 related to marking, labeling, placarding,                                                                                                    40 CFR 262, Subpart B and C   9/part-171
                                                                                                              a hazardous material.
                                packaging, emergency response, etc.
                                                                                                              Relevant and Appropriate,
                                                                                                              However, applies only if RCRA Hazardous Waste is
                                                                                                              generated during remedial activities.

                                Are not subject to any requirements of 40 CFR Parts 261 through 268 or
                                270 when:
                                -The sample is being transported to a laboratory for the purpose of           Samples of solid waste or a sample of water, soil for
Transportation of samples
                                testing; or                                                                   purpose of conducting testing to determine its                                               40 CFR                        https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/4
(soil and wastewaters)                                                                                                                                                Hazardous waste transport off-site
                                -The sample is being transported back to the sample collector after           characteristics or composition.                                                              261.4(d)(1)(i)-(iii)          0/part-261
                                testing                                                                       Applicable
                                -The sample is being stored by sample collector before transport to a
                                lab for testing
Miscellaneous
                                Established to set maximum limits of sound from any industrial, commercial,                                                                                              NJ Restrictions of Noise        https://www.nj.gov/dep/rules/rules/nj
Noise Pollution                 public service, or community service facility.                                To be considered (TBC) for any noise                    Any noise generated during         (N.J.A.C. 7:29)                 ac7_29.pdf
                                                                                                              generated during remedial activities.                   advancing injection points to
                                                                                                                                                                      target depths and ISCO injection
                                                                                                                                                                      will occur only on weekdays during
                                                                                                                                                                      normal business hours or as
                                                                                                                                                                      specified by local ordinance.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      APPENDIX III


RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                     APPENDIX III

                            RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

                     Cosden Chemical Coatings Corp. Superfund Site

                     City of Beverly, Burlington County, New Jersey


INTRODUCTION
This Responsiveness Summary provides a summary of the public’s comments and concerns
regarding the Proposed Plan for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corp. Superfund Site (Site)
remedy modification and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) responses to
those comments.
All comments summarized in this document have been considered in EPA’s final decision for the
selection of the cleanup response for the Site. This Responsiveness Summary is divided into the
following sections:

   I.     BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS: This
          section provides the history of the community involvement and interests regarding the
          Site.

   II.    SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT QUESTIONS, COMMENTS, CONCERNS, AND
          EPA’s RESPONSES: This section contains summaries of oral and written comments
          received by EPA at the public meeting and during the public comment period, and
          EPA’s responses to these comments.
The last section of this Responsiveness Summary includes attachments, which document public
participation in the remedy selection process for this Site. They are as follows:
Attachment A contains the Proposed Plan that was distributed to the public for review and
comment;

Attachment B contains the public notice that appeared in the Burlington County Times;

Attachment C contains the transcript of the public meeting; and

Attachment D contains the written comments received during the public comment period.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

I.     BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS

On July 29, 2022, EPA released the Proposed Plan for the ROD Amendment for public
comment. The Proposed Plan and supporting analysis and information were made available to
the public on the EPA Region 2 website at https://www.epa.gov/superfund/cosden-chemical.
The notice of availability for these documents was published in the Burlington County Times on
July 29, 2022. A public comment period was held from July 29, 2022 through August 29, 2022.

On August 16, 2022, EPA conducted a virtual public meeting to discuss the Proposed Plan to
amend the groundwater remedy. The purpose of this meeting was to inform local officials and
interested citizens about the Superfund process, to explain the proposed groundwater remedy
amendment, and respond to questions and take comments from area residents and other
attendees. At the meeting, EPA reviewed the history of the Site, the results of the remediation
activities at the Site since the 1992 ROD, as modified by the 1998 ESD, were issued, and the
basis for proposing to modify the groundwater remedy. The transcript of this public meeting is
included in this Responsiveness Summary as Attachment C.

The meeting was attended by two members of the community. There were few comments or
questions from the public at the meeting.

II.    SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT QUESTIONS, COMMENTS, CONCERNS, AND
       EPA’S RESPONSES

Questions, comments, or concerns were expressed by the public at the public meeting. Written
comments were submitted by one commenter during the public comment period, before the
public meeting. These comments were discussed with the commenter during the public meeting.

A.     Written comments received during the public comment period:

Comment 1: Will chromium levels fall within allowable limits after ISCO injections cease or
will this heavy metal contaminant require other treatment alternatives to obtain levels below
NJDEP GWQS?
EPA Response: Total chromium concentrations were below NJDEP GWQS in groundwater
before the ISCO pilot study, with the exception of one monitoring well. Total chromium
concentrations are now above NJDEP GWQS primarily in portions of the Site where ISCO
injections were concentrated. This is due to the oxidizing conditions created by the persulfate
that was injected for the ISCO treatment. These increases in chromium concentrations due to
ISCO are typically transitory and are expected to re-equilibrate after injections cease, so that the
metal concentrations return to the pre-injection levels over time.
Comment 2: Since the PFNA, PFOS, and PFOA are not being addressed in this ROD
Amendment, is there a plan to address these contaminants at a later date and/or is it necessary to
address them?
EPA Response: Additional investigation of PFAS contamination will be needed to determine the
nature and extent of that contamination and whether the PFAS contaminants are Site-related.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

This will not be addressed as part of this ROD Amendment but concurrently as a separate
process. Additional investigation will first establish if the contamination was from the Site or
from an off-site source. If the contamination is from the Site, EPA would evaluate the risk
associated with the PFAS contaminants and, if necessary, go through a similar process as this
ROD Amendment.

Comment 3: Will ISCO injections have any effect on PFNA, PFOS, PFOA levels or will these
contaminants require alternative treatment method?
EPA Response: The ISCO injections have not been specifically designed or tested for the
treatment of PFAS compounds at the Site, so EPA does not know if ISCO would affect PFAS
levels. There are treatment options available for the treatment of PFAS compounds.
Comment 4: Are the PFNA, PFOS, PFOA and 1,4-dioxane contaminants from this Site or are
they migrating from an off-site location; if determinable?

EPA Response: Additional investigation of PFAS contamination will be needed to determine the
nature and extent of that contamination and whether the PFAS contaminants are Site-related. The
highest reported concentration of PFAS was found at the most hydraulically upgradient
monitoring well on the Site. Lower concentrations still above NJDEP GWQS were found at the
most downgradient Site wells. Monitoring wells sampled for 1,4-dioxane were reported non-
detect values with the exception of one sample that was slightly above the NJDEP GWQS.
Comment 5: Are there any related “off-site” monitoring wells in the community with any
contaminant levels over NJDEP GWQS?
EPA Response: There are eight monitoring wells located outside the Cosden property
boundaries. They were installed in 2001 as part of an “off-property” groundwater investigation.
These off-property monitoring wells were most recently sampled in September 2017, March
2018, and April 2021. The off-property monitoring wells have not reported any exceedances of
NJDEP GWQS or ROD standards for VOCs or metals in the past five years.
B.     Verbal Comments received during the public meeting:
The commenter of the written comments above attended the public meeting. These comments
were discussed throughout the public meeting. Additional comments are provided below:
Comment 6: A commenter was concerned about the PFAS levels found in Neshaminy Creek
across the Delaware River and possibly migrating to the Site.
Response 6: EPA does not yet know the nature and extent of the PFAS contamination and
whether the PFAS contaminants are Site-related. It is unlikely that PFAS compounds from
Neshaminy Creek are migrating to the Site.
Comment 7: A commenter mentioned that vacant land in the City of Beverly was limited to 19
acres, which includes the Site. The commenter expressed support for the Preferred Alternative
and having the property remediated and eventually returned to the tax roll.
Response 7: Comment noted.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ATTACHMENT A


PROPOSED PLAN

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              Superfund Program
                                     U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
                                                   Region 2
                                    Proposed Plan for Remedy Modification

                                   Cosden Chemical Coatings Superfund Site
                                 City of Beverly, Burlington County, New Jersey
                                                    July 2022




EPA ANNOUNCES PROPOSED PLAN FOR                             MARK YOUR CALENDAR
      REMEDY MODIFICATION
                                                            PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD:
                                                            July 29, 2022 - August 29, 2022
This Proposed Plan describes the alternatives that          EPA will accept written comments on the Proposed Plan
the United States Environmental Protection Agency           during the public comment period.
(EPA) considered to remediate contaminated
groundwater source areas at the Cosden Chemical             PUBLIC MEETING:
                                                            August 16, 2022 at 6:00 PM
Coatings Superfund Site (Site) located in the of City       EPA will hold a Virtual Public Meeting on EST to
of Beverly, Burlington County, New Jersey, as an            explain the Proposed Plan and the other alternatives
amendment to the remedy for contaminated                    presented in the Feasibility Study. To register for the
groundwater selected in the 1992 Record of                  public meeting, visit
Decision (ROD), as modified by the 1998                     https://USEPACosdenChemical.eventbrite.com
Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD). This          To learn more about the public meeting,
Proposed Plan also identifies EPA’s preferred               visit www.epa.gov/superfund/cosden-chemical or contact
alternative for amending the ROD and provides the           Natalie Loney, Community Involvement Coordinator
rationale for this preference.                              at loney.natalie@epa.gov or (212) 637-3639.

                                                            Anyone interested in receiving materials for the public
The Site cleanup is being addressed in one phase or         meeting in hard copy should either email or call Ms. Loney
Operable Unit. In 1992, a ROD was issued for the            with such a request by August 11, 2022.
Site building demolition and disposal; cleanup of
contaminated soil with onsite treatment and                 The Administrative Record file containing the documents
disposal; and extraction, treatment, and reinjection        used in developing the alternatives and preferred cleanup
                                                            plan is available for public review at
of contaminated groundwater associated with the             www.epa.gov/superfund/cosden-chemical
Site. In 1998, EPA issued an ESD to: 1) clarify that
offsite disposal of polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB)-         EPA’s website for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Site:
contaminated soil (estimated to be 3,700 cubic              www.epa.gov/superfund/cosden-chemical
yards) would occur instead of onsite treatment; 2)
require the excavation and offsite disposal of a
                                                           contamination where concentrations are the highest
relatively small amount of soil contaminated with
                                                           including in the vicinity of monitoring wells MW-
volatile organic compounds (VOCs); 3) incorporate
                                                           03, MW-103, MW-105, MW-109 and MW-110 at
a soil vapor extraction (SVE) component in the
                                                           the Site. The preferred alternative described in this
remedy; and 4) clarify cleanup objectives. The lead
                                                           Proposed Plan includes groundwater remediation
soil cleanup goal was changed from 500 milligrams
                                                           using in-situ treatment in source areas.
per kilogram (mg/kg) to 400 mg/kg. The Site’s
building demolition and soil remedy conducted in
                                                           This Proposed Plan was developed by EPA, the lead
accordance with the 1992 ROD and 1998 ESD are
                                                           agency for the Site, in consultation with the New
complete and are not being modified by this
                                                           Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Proposed Plan. This plan evaluates alternatives for
                                                           (NJDEP), the support agency. EPA is issuing this
addressing the remaining groundwater source area
                                                           Proposed Plan as part of its public participation

                                                                                             *645021*
                                                                                                   645021

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

responsibilities under Section 117(a) of the               EPA may modify the preferred alternative or select
Comprehensive       Environmental          Response,       another response action presented in this Proposed
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, as                Plan based on new information or public comments.
amended (CERCLA or Superfund) and Section                  Therefore, the public is encouraged to review and
300.430(f)(2) of the National Oil and Hazardous            comment on all the alternatives presented in this
Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP).               Proposed Plan.
EPA will select a final remedy for contaminated
groundwater source areas at the Site after reviewing       SITE DESCRIPTION
and considering all information submitted during
the 30-day public comment period.                          The Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation
                                                           (Cosden Chemical) was a paint formulation and
This Proposed Plan summarizes information that             manufacturing company that began operating in
can be found in greater detail in the Focused              1945 and produced coatings for industrial
Feasibility Study (FFS) and other documents                applications. The company recycled solvents
contained in the administrative record file for this       (substances that can dissolve other substances) used
Site. EPA and the State encourage the public to            in the manufacturing process until 1974. After 1974,
review these documents to gain a more                      the company stored solvents onsite in drums and in
comprehensive understanding of the Site and                underground tanks. Some of these drums and tanks
Superfund activities that have been conducted at the       leaked,      causing    soil     and     groundwater
Site.                                                      contamination. On April 22, 1980, the Burlington
                                                           County Department of Public Safety reported the
Community Role in Selection Process                        Site conditions to NJDEP after a grass fire occurred
                                                           at the Site. Subsequent visits by the NJDEP revealed
EPA relies on public input to ensure that the              the presence of surface spills and several hundred
concerns of the community are considered in                unsecured drums.
selecting an effective remedy for each Superfund
site. To this end, the FFS report and this Proposed        NJDEP undertook various court actions against
Plan have been made available to the public for a          Cosden Chemical and engaged in negotiations with
public comment period that begins on July 29, 2022         the company, resulting in a judicial consent order on
and concludes on August 29, 2022. A virtual public         February 5, 1985 that ordered Cosden Chemical to
meeting will be held via webinar and telephone             clean up the facility. Cosden Chemical initiated the
conference on August 16, 2022 at 6:00 PM to                cleanup in February 1985 but abandoned cleanup
present the conclusions of the FFS, to elaborate           efforts after removing 88 of 695 drums. In January
further on the reasons for recommending the                1986, NJDEP undertook an emergency removal of
preferred alternative, and to receive public               the drummed material and cleanup of surface spills
comments. Written comments on the Proposed Plan            around the drum storage areas.
should be addressed to: Tamara Rossi, Remedial
Project Manager, New Jersey Remediation Branch,            In June 1989, EPA initiated emergency cleanup
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 290                  activities at the Site by constructing a fence around
Broadway, 19th floor, New York, NY 10007 or via            areas of soil contamination and began removing the
e-mail at rossi.tamara@epa.gov. Comments                   remaining drums, paint cans, pigment bags, mixing
received at the public meeting, as well as written         tanks, and underground storage tank contents. On
comments, will be documented in the                        May 28, 1990, as the removal action was nearly
Responsiveness Summary section of the Amended              completed, a fire occurred inside the process
ROD, the document that will formalize the selection        building which consumed a majority of the building.
of the remedy.

                                                       2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

On May 31, 1990, the building was condemned by
the Beverly City building inspector.

EPA placed the Site on the National Priorities List
in July 1987. The additional actions EPA took to
address Site contamination are discussed in the
“Scope and Role of Response Action” section
below.

The plant owner ceased operations in May 1989
and subsequently did not finance or undertake the
remedial investigation or feasibility study (RI/FS)
or remediation of the Site.

EPA issued the ROD in September 1992, selecting
a remedy for contaminated buildings, soil, and
groundwater, and the ESD in September 1998 to
explain changes made to the remedy based on data            Figure 1 Site Location City of Beverly, NJ
EPA collected during the remedial design. The
issuance of both included public meetings and
public comment periods.                                     national percentiles for communities over age 64,
                                                            low income, and linguistically isolated.
SITE CHARACTERISTICS
                                                            The Delaware River is approximately 4,000 feet to
The Site is located in the southeastern corner of the       the north of the Site, and Rancocas Creek is
City of Beverly in Burlington County, New Jersey            approximately 1.5 miles to the southwest of the Site.
(Figure 1) at the intersection of Manor Road and            The population within a one-mile radius of the Site
Cherry Street within a residential area of Beverly.         is approximately 800 people.
The property is bounded on the north and east by
residential streets, on the south by Conrail tracks         Two former public supply wells owned and
and farmland, and on the west by undeveloped land.          operated by New Jersey American Water Company
The nearest residence is approximately 300 feet to          are located approximately 3,200 feet north of the
the north of the Site. The Beverly Elementary               Site but are no longer in use. New Jersey American
School is located 0.2 miles to the northeast. The           Water closed the two supply wells more than twenty
neighboring area is suburban with some light                years ago and replaced them with a larger surface
industry.                                                   water treatment plant along the Delaware River.

According to EPA’s EJSCREEN, there are no                   The hazardous substances still present at the Site are
demographic indicators for the City of Beverly that         VOCs and metals in groundwater. Specifically, the
identify it as a community with environmental               VOCs consist of total xylenes, ethylbenzene,
justice concerns. South of the Site, there are some         toluene, and trichloroethene and the metals are lead
demographic indicators that indicated that this area        and chromium. The Conceptual Site Model for the
is above the 80th percentile when compared to               Site indicates that these contaminants are currently




                                                        3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

located only in groundwater on the Site in a plume
estimated to be approximately 9,000 square feet                      WHAT ARE THE “CONTAMINANTS OF
(0.21 acres) in size and located 20 to 25 feet below                           CONCERN?”
the ground’s surface (bgs).
                                                               EPA WHAT       ARE
                                                                     identified     THEOrganic
                                                                                Volatile    “CONTAMINANTS
                                                                                                   Compounds and   OF metals
                                                                                      CONCERN?”
                                                               as the contaminants that pose the greatest potential risk to
No non-aqueous phase liquid (NAPL) has been                    human health at this site.
found in wells since 2010, and NAPL was not                    EPA identified Volatile Organic Compounds and metals
visually noted in any boring in at least the past five         as the contaminants
                                                               Volatile              that pose the greatest
                                                                         Organic Compounds         (VOCs)-  potential risk to
                                                                                                              The primary
                                                               human   health at this site.
years (see “What is a Principal Threat” text box               VOCs of concern present on the Site are toluene,
below). Only groundwater contamination from                    ethylbenzene, trichloroethene (TCE), and total xylenes.
                                                               Volatile
                                                               VOCs are     Organic     Compounds
                                                                                 colorless,     highly (VOCs)-
                                                                                                           flammable    Theindustrial
                                                                                                                               primary
contaminated soils which have been removed from                VOCs
                                                               chemicals that easily evaporate. They occur naturallyare
                                                                         of concern     present   on   the    Cosden    property      in
the Site remains. Thus, no principal threats currently         toluene,   ethylbenzene,
                                                               coal tar and                  trichloroethene
                                                                               petroleum. They      are commonly  (TCE),usedand    total
                                                                                                                               in paint,
exist at the Site.                                             xylenes.
                                                               thinners, VOCs
                                                                           lacquerare  colorless,
                                                                                     thinners,      highly
                                                                                                 moth         flammable
                                                                                                        repellents,          industrial
                                                                                                                       air fresheners,
                                                               chemicals     that easily  evaporate.     They    occur
                                                               hobby supplies, wood preservatives, aerosol sprays,        naturally   in
                                                               coal  tar and   petroleum.   They   are   commonly
                                                               degreasers, automotive products, and dry cleaning fluids.used   in paint,
SCOPE AND ROLE OF RESPONSE ACTION                              thinners,
                                                               They arelacquer
                                                                            also usedthinners,   moth repellents,
                                                                                         in a variety                 air fresheners,
                                                                                                          of industrial     processes,
                                                               hobby
                                                               such as in the solvents that Cosden Chemical used.sprays,
                                                                         supplies,    wood      preservatives,      aerosol       VOCs
EPA conducted an RI/FS between 1988 and 1992,                  degreasers,
                                                               do not readily automotive
                                                                                   bind to products,
                                                                                              soil, so itandcandry   cleaning
                                                                                                                  easily   move  fluids.
                                                                                                                                    into
after the Site was listed on the NPL. The 1992 ROD             They    are also Health
                                                               groundwater.       used ineffects
                                                                                            a variety     of industrial
                                                                                                     of VOCs       can vary processes,
                                                                                                                                greatly
                                                               such    as in to
                                                               according      thethe
                                                                                   solvents
                                                                                      compound the Cosden
                                                                                                     and canChemical
                                                                                                                 range from   Coatings
                                                                                                                                  being
identified the following Remedial Action                       Corporation      used.  VOCs     do not  readily    bind  to  soil, so it
Objectives (RAOs) for the remedy:                              highly toxic to having no known health effects. Some,
                                                               can    easily   move    into   groundwater.       Health
                                                               such as TCE, are known to cause cancer. VOCs can cause       effects   of
                                                               VOCs     can   vary  greatly   according      to the  compound
                                                               damage to the liver, kidneys, and central nervous system.            and
•   Prevent exposure to contaminant sources that               can   range from
                                                               Short-term           beingcan
                                                                              exposure      highly
                                                                                                causetoxic
                                                                                                        eye toandhaving     no known
                                                                                                                    respiratory    tract
                                                               health
                                                               irritation, headaches, dizziness, visual disorders,tofatigue,
                                                                        effects.  Some,    such   as  TCE,     are  known         cause
    present a significant human health risk; and,
                                                               cancer.   VOCs can cause       damage     to reactions,
                                                                                                            the liver, kidneys,      and
•   Restore contaminated groundwater to drinking               loss of coordination,
                                                               central   nervous
                                                                                          allergic
                                                                                    system.
                                                                                                     skin
                                                                                               Short-term      exposure
                                                                                                                         nausea, and
                                                                                                                            can   cause
                                                               memory impairment.
    water standards.                                           eye and respiratory tract irritation, headaches, dizziness,
                                                               visual
                                                               Metals-disorders,
                                                                           The primaryfatigue,   lossofofconcern
                                                                                            metals          coordination,
                                                                                                                      presentallergic
                                                                                                                                 on the
The 1992 ROD was modified by an ESD that EPA                   skin   reactions,  nausea,   and   memory      impairment.
                                                               Site are lead and chromium. Metals are naturally
issued in 1998. As a result of the 1992 ROD and                occurring elements and are generally mined and
1998 ESD, the remedy included the following                    Metals-   The or
                                                               concentrated    primary
                                                                                 refinedmetals
                                                                                         for useofin concern
                                                                                                     industry.present
                                                                                                               They areonused
                                                                                                                          the
                                                               Cosden   property    are lead  and    chromium.    Metals
                                                               in a wide range of applications, including to make paint   are
components to meet the Site RAOs:                              naturally
                                                               pigments occurring    elements
                                                                          such as those    madeandbyareCosden
                                                                                                        generally mined and
                                                                                                               Chemical.   In
                                                               concentrated   or refined for use in  industry. They
                                                               very small amounts, many of these metals are necessaryare used
•   Decontamination and demolition of the building             in a wide range
                                                               to support         of applications,
                                                                           life. However,  in largerincluding
                                                                                                      amounts,tothey
                                                                                                                  make  paint
                                                                                                                     become
    on the Site with disposal of the building debris           pigments   such   as those  made   by  the Cosden
                                                               toxic. They may build up in biological systems and  Chemical
                                                               Coatings
                                                               become a Corporation.     In very   small amounts, many of
    at an appropriate offsite facility;                                   significant health  hazard.
                                                               these metals are necessary to support life. However, in
•   Excavation of soils with offsite treatment (if
    necessary) and disposal;
                                                             This amendment described in this Proposed Plan
•   Construction of a soil vapor extraction (SVE)            adds an additional RAO (described below) to the
    system to address the remaining contaminants             existing remedy addressing the remaining
    present in soil above the water table (the vadose        groundwater source area contamination where
    zone); and,                                              concentrations are the highest, including in the
•   Extraction of contaminated groundwater with              vicinity of monitoring wells MW-03, MW-103,
    onsite treatment and recharge to the underlying          MW-105, MW-109 and MW-110 at the Site. This
    aquifer.                                                 RAO supplements the existing Site RAOs.




                                                         4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE BACKGROUND

Building Demolition                                                 The soil cleanup was conducted to meet the NJDEP
                                                                    Residential Direct Contact Soil Cleanup Criterion
In 1995 and 1996, EPA decontaminated and                            (RDCSCC) for lead in effect at that time, 400
demolished the remnants of the former Cosden                        milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg). For PCBs, the soil
Chemical process building. All demolition debris,                   cleanup objective was based on the EPA PCB
including asbestos, was disposed of offsite.                        cleanup policy recommending a residential cleanup
                                                                    goal of 1 mg/kg for unrestricted residential use.
Soils                                                               However, post-excavation sampling indicated that
                                                                    the soil remediation ultimately met NJDEP's more
The contaminated soils remediation was conducted                    stringent RDCSCC in effect at that time of 0.49
by the EPA Region 2 Removal Action Branch with                      mg/kg for PCBs.
technical     support    provided     by     EPA’s
Environmental Response Team (ERT). ERT                              All contaminated soils, underground storage tanks,
performed an extensive screening effort at the Site                 and residual liquids were sent offsite for disposal
employing x-ray fluorescence (XRF) technology to                    and/or treatment, as necessary. A remedial action
identify the concentrations and depths of inorganic                 report, dated September 2003, was prepared to
contamination (principally lead and chromium).                      document the soil portion of the cleanup which
The data were used to define the area and depth of                  included the excavation and disposal of 13,000 tons
the excavation. The soil remediation was                            of contaminated soil, solid waste, and debris, four
accomplished in phases between June 1999 and                        underground storage tanks, and 2,600 gallons of
March 2002.                                                         liquid waste.

         WHAT IS A "PRINCIPAL THREAT"?                              Groundwater

 The NCP establishes an expectation that EPA will use               EPA entered into an Interagency Agreement with
 treatment to address the principal threats posed by a site
                                                                    the United States Army Corps of Engineers
 wherever practicable (NCP Section 300.430(a)(1)(iii)(A)).
 The "principal threat" concept is applied to the                   (USACE) Baltimore District to prepare the remedial
 characterization of "source materials" at a Superfund site.        design for the groundwater remediation and oversee
 A source material is material that includes or contains            remedial construction. The largest element of the
 hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants that act         remedial design/remedial construction was the
 as a reservoir for migration of contamination to ground
                                                                    groundwater extraction and treatment system
 water, surface water or air, or acts as a source for direct
 exposure. Contaminated groundwater generally is not                (GETS). Construction of the GETS began in July
 considered to be a source material; however, Non-                  2006. The remedy achieved construction
 Aqueous Phase Liquids (NAPLs) in groundwater may be                completion status in July 2007. Award of the long
 viewed as source material. Principal threat wastes are             term remedial action (LTRA) contract was made in
 those source materials considered to be highly toxic or
                                                                    June 2009, at which time ten years of LTRA began.
 highly mobile that generally cannot be reliably contained
 or would present a significant risk to human health or the
 environment should exposure occur. The decision to treat           In addition to the GETS, an SVE system was
 these wastes is made on a site-specific basis through a            installed, including three banks of SVE wells and
 detailed analysis of the alternatives using the nine remedy        collection lines that allowed contaminated vapors to
 selection criteria This analysis provides a basis for making
                                                                    be extracted from the vadose zone, the subsurface
 a statutory finding that the remedy employs treatment as a
 principal element.                                                 area that extends from the ground surface to the
                                                                    groundwater table. A fence was installed around the
                                                                    treatment facilities to provide security and prevent

                                                                5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

trespassing. The SVE system started operation in          Since the pilot study began, EPA has installed 16
2007, and was shut down in June 2010, after               monitoring wells to focus monitoring activities
groundwater levels increased when the nearby              where VOC concentrations are highest, including
public supply wells were closed, thus submerging          monitoring wells MW-03, MW-103, MW-105,
the SVE wells underwater.                                 MW-109 and MW-110. Four rounds of injections
                                                          of persulfate with a sodium hydroxide activator
Data indicated that the GETS efficiently removed          were performed between 2017 and 2021.
contaminants from the groundwater prior to onsite         Groundwater monitoring was conducted before
reinjection. The primary contaminants of concern in       and after each injection event to establish baseline
groundwater, as identified in the 1992 ROD, are           concentrations that could be used to evaluate
ethylbenzene, toluene, xylene, trichloroethene            treatment effectiveness.
(TCE), lead, and chromium. The GETS reduced
levels of all contaminants present in extracted           Vapor Intrusion
groundwater to meet the New Jersey Groundwater
Quality Standards (GWQS) Class IIa standards              Vapor intrusion can occur when volatile
before the groundwater was reinjected back into the       contaminants in groundwater underneath enter
aquifer.                                                  commercial and residential buildings volatilize and
                                                          enter the buildings as contaminated vapors. Since
EPA began a pilot study in August 2017 to test the        the primary contaminants of concern at the Site are
effectiveness of In-Situ Chemical Oxidation               VOCs, vapor intrusion was evaluated in March
(ISCO) in reducing VOC concentrations in                  2004 via vapor intrusion sampling. There were no
groundwater. The pilot study was conducted to             VOCs detected above EPA's screening criteria, and
address remaining contamination that had been             EPA determined that the vapor intrusion pathway
identified using a Membrane Interface                     was not complete. The results of this evaluation
Probe/Hydraulic Profiling Tool (MIPHPT). The              remain valid since the concentrations of VOCs in
revised conceptual Site model for soil and                groundwater have continued to decline since 2004
groundwater includes a fairly uniform layer of soil       and no VOCs are detected above standards in
impacted largely by xylenes. This layer ranges            offsite wells. There are no buildings unrelated to
from 20-24 feet deep and two to four feet thick;          the extraction/treatment/reinjection on the Site.
however, most of the contamination is located in
the interval of 20-22 feet bgs. Some evidence             CURRENT NATURE AND EXTENT OF
suggests that a shallow lower permeability unit           CONTAMINATION
could be present resulting in a shallow perched
water-bearing unit in some portions of the Site. It       In 2015 and 2016, EPA performed MIPHPT
appears that in limited areas, high concentrations        investigations at the Site to identify where
of VOCs or limited immobile solvent material              contamination was still present in groundwater and
could be sorbed to soil particles beneath the water       found that contamination was generally present at
table particularly in the area where the Cosden           depths between 20 and 25 feet bgs. Sixteen new
Chemical production plant underground storage             monitoring wells were installed on the Site to target
tanks existed. EPA and USACE determined that              this depth. As described above, EPA initiated an
ISCO could more quickly address this remaining            ISCO pilot study to determine if ISCO could
contamination than the GETS. The GETS was                 address the remaining contamination. Field work
shut-down in May 2018, due in part to the potential       took place between August 2017 and May 2021.
for ISCO treatment materials to enter the treatment       Thousands of individual groundwater contaminant
plant during the pilot study.                             analyses were obtained during the ISCO pilot study.


                                                      6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The most recent concentrations of contaminants in            injections cease, so that the metal concentrations
the new monitoring wells after four rounds of ISCO           will return to the pre-injection state.
injections as part of the pilot study are summarized
below:                                                       The area of residual higher levels of toluene,
                                                             ethylbenzene,     and     total   xylenes    (TEX)
Ethylbenzene – After injections, some of the new             contamination       generally    coincides     with
monitoring wells did not report any detectable               groundwater total xylene concentration greater than
concentrations of ethylbenzene (non-detect). The             1,000 μg/L and was reduced from 0.77 acres prior
highest detected concentration was 13,800                    to the ISCO pilot study to 0.21 acres post-pilot
micrograms per liter (µg/L) in 2021. This is a               study. This area is the remaining source area at the
reduction    from     the   previous   maximum               Site. See Figure 2.
concentration of 25,200 µg/L in 2018.
                                                             Major Conclusions of the Pilot Study
Toluene – Concentrations ranged from non-detect to
957 µg/L in 2021. This is a reduction from the               •   The 16 new monitoring wells installed during
maximum concentration of 3,220 µg/L in 2018.                     the pilot study helped to delineate the extent of
                                                                 TEX and the magnitude of the remaining TEX
Total Xylenes – Concentrations in 2021 ranged from               groundwater contamination at the site. In
1.1 µg/L to 59,100 µg/L. This is a reduction from                addition, water-level elevations measured using
the previous maximum concentration of 114,000                    new and existing monitoring wells confirmed
µg/L in 2018. The highest concentrations are                     the direction of shallow groundwater flow was
around monitoring wells MW-03, MW-103, MW-                       westerly across the Site.
105, MW-109 and MW-110.
                                                             •   Overall, the ISCO injections were successful in
Trichloroethene – Concentrations in 2021 ranged                  eliminating or reducing TEX concentrations at
from non-detect to 53.3 µg/L. This is a reduction                monitoring wells within targeted treatment
from the previous maximum concentration of 3,220                 zones. Fourteen monitoring wells showed
µg/L in 2018.                                                    significant declines (greater than 50%) in TEX
                                                                 compound concentrations between initial
Total Lead – Concentrations in 2021 ranged from                  sampling in 2017 and the May 2021 sampling.
non-detect to 15 µg/L.
                                                             •   Total xylene concentrations in groundwater
Total Chromium – Concentrations in 2021 ranged                   remained high in some monitoring wells. For
from non-detect to 1,500 µg/L.                                   example, the total xylene concentration at MW-
                                                                 103 was 37,400 μg/L in May 2021 and the total
With the exception of total chromium in a single                 xylene result for MW-110 was 28,600 μg/L in
monitoring well, total lead and total chromium                   October 2020 indicating additional injections
concentrations remained below NJDEP GWQS in                      would be necessary to achieve drinking water
groundwater before the ISCO pilot study. Total lead              standards (1,000 μg/L) established as cleanup
and total chromium concentrations are now above                  levels.
NJDEP GWQS primarily in portions of the Site
where ISCO injections were concentrated. This is             •   Ethylbenzene levels during the same period
due to the oxidizing conditions created by the                   decreased by nearly 50%. At well MW-105,
persulfate that was injected for the ISCO treatment.             total xylene concentrations decreased from
These metal concentration increases due to ISCO                  59,000 μg/L (November 2017) to 5,160J
are typically transitory and will re-equilibrate after           (estimated) μg/L (May 2021), and ethylbenzene

                                                         7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    concentrations showed a similar approximate                   WHAT IS RISK AND HOW IS IT CALCULATED?
    10-fold decrease.
                                                            A Superfund baseline human health risk assessment is an analysis
                                                            of the potential adverse health effects caused by hazardous
•   Based upon pilot study calculations, the volume         substance releases from a site in the absence of any actions to
    of contaminated groundwater was reduced by              control or mitigate these releases. A four-step process is utilized for
    the four rounds of ISCO injections by                   assessing site-related human health risks for reasonable maximum
                                                            exposure scenarios.
    approximately 73%. This calculation used the
    saturated aquifer thickness of 25 feet and the          Step 1. Hazard Identification: In this step, the chemicals of
    square footage of the total xylene plume greater        potential concern (COPCs) at the site in various media (i.e., soil,
                                                            groundwater, surface water, and air) are identified based on such
    than 1,000 μg/L before and after injections.            factors as toxicity, frequency of occurrence, fate and transport of
    More specifically, the plume was estimated as           the contaminants in the environment, concentrations of the
    roughly 33,500 ft2 (0.77 acres) prior to                contaminants in specific media, mobility, persistence, and
                                                            bioaccumulation.
    injections and about 9,000 ft2 (0.21 acres) after
    injections.                                             Step 2. Exposure Assessment: In this step, the different pathways
                                                            through which people might be exposed to the contaminants
                                                            identified in the previous step are evaluated. Examples of exposure
Emerging Contaminants                                       pathways include incidental ingestion of and dermal contact with
                                                            contaminated soil and/or groundwater. Factors relating to the
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) – Six            exposure assessment include, but are not limited to, the
                                                            concentrations in specific media that people might be exposed to
monitoring wells were sampled for PFAS in April             and the frequency and duration of that exposure. Using these
2021. NJDEP has developed GWQS for three                    factors, a “reasonable maximum exposure” scenario, which portrays
specific PFAS chemicals: Perfluorononanoic Acid             the highest level of human exposure that could reasonably be
                                                            expected to occur, is calculated.
(PFNA, 13 nanograms per liter (ng/L)),
Perfluorooctane Sulfonate (PFOS, 13 ng/L), and              Step 3. Toxicity Assessment: In this step, the types of adverse health
Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA, 14 ng/L). PFNA                effects associated with chemical exposures, and the relationship
                                                            between magnitude of exposure and severity of adverse effects are
concentrations ranged from non-detect at MW-10I             determined. Potential health effects are chemical-specific and may
to 19 ng/L at MW-8S. MW-8S is the most                      include the risk of developing cancer over a lifetime or other
hydraulically upgradient monitoring well on the             noncancer health hazards, such as changes in the normal functions
                                                            of organs within the body (e.g., changes in the effectiveness of the
Site. PFOS concentrations ranged from non-detect            immune system). Some chemicals are capable of causing both
at MW-9S to 66.8 ng/L at MW-3.             PFOA             cancer and noncancer health hazards.
concentrations ranged from 41.8 ng/L at MW-10I to           Step 4. Risk Characterization: This step summarizes and combines
253 ng/L at MW-8S. MW-10I and PZ-10S, the most              outputs of the exposure and toxicity assessments to provide a
downgradient Site wells, reported detections of             quantitative assessment of site risks for all contaminants of concern.
PFAS above NJDEP GWQS. The highest reported                 Exposures are evaluated based on the potential risk of developing
                                                            cancer and the potential for noncancer health hazards. The
concentrations of PFAS at PZ-10S was PFOA at 81             likelihood of an individual developing cancer is expressed as a
ng/L.                                                       probability. For example, a 10-4 cancer risk means a “one in ten
                                                            thousand excess cancer risk;” or one additional cancer may be seen
                                                            in a population of 10,000 people as a result of exposure to site
1,4-Dioxane - Four on-site monitoring wells were            contaminants under the conditions identified in the Exposure
sampled for 1,4-dioxane in November 2019. All of            Assessment. Current Superfund regulations for exposures identify
the monitoring wells sampled reported non-detect            the range for determining whether remedial action is necessary as
                                                            an individual excess lifetime cancer risk of 10-4 to 10-6,
values. Downgradient monitoring well MW-10I did             corresponding to a one in ten thousand to a one in a million excess
not report detections of 1,4-dioxane, but                   cancer risk. For noncancer health effects, a “hazard index” (HI) is
downgradient monitoring well MW-108 reported                calculated. The key concept for a noncancer HI is that a
                                                            “threshold” (measured as an HI of less than or equal to 1) exists
1.3J µg/L in November 2019. In 2021, eight on-site          below which noncancer health hazards are not expected to occur.
monitoring    wells,   including    downgradient            The goal of protection is 10-6 for cancer risk and an HI of 1 for a
monitoring well MW-108, were sampled for 1,4-               noncancer health hazard. Chemicals that exceed a 10-4 cancer risk
                                                            or an HI of 1 are typically those that will require remedial action at
dioxane, with a detection limit below NJDEP                 the site.

                                                        8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

GWQS (0.4 µg/L). MW-108 reported 0.406 µg/L in               Human Health Risks
April 2021. All other monitoring wells reported
non-detect values in 2021.                                   EPA conducted a four-step human health risk
                                                             assessment (HHRA) to assess Site-related cancer
1,2,3-Trichloropropane - Four on-site monitoring             risks and noncancer health hazards in the absence of
wells (MW-103, MW-104, MW-105, and MW-110)                   any remedial action. The four-step process is
were sampled for 1,2,3-tricholoropropane in March            comprised of: Hazard Identification, Exposure
2021. All monitoring wells were non-detect for               Assessment, Toxicity Assessment, and Risk
1,2,3-trichloropropane with a detection limit below          Characterization (refer to the text box “What is Risk
the 0.03 µg/L NJDEP GWQS.                                    and How is it Calculated”).

Additional investigation of PFAS contamination is            The HHRA began with selecting COPCs in
required in order to determine the nature and extent         groundwater that could potentially cause adverse
of that contamination and whether the PFAS                   health effects in exposed populations. COPCs are
contaminants are Site-related. The amendment                 selected by comparing the maximum detected
described in this Proposed Plan does not address             concentrations of each chemical identified with
PFAS contamination.                                          state and federal risk-based screening values. The
                                                             COPCs identified included VOCs, SVOCs, metals,
SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS                                        pesticides, and PCBs.

As part of the 1988-1992 Remedial Investigation,             The HHRA assumed that future land use at the Site
EPA conducted a baseline risk assessment to                  could include residential development. Thus, the
determine the current and future effects of                  HHRA focused on health effects for both children
contaminants on human health and environment. A              and adults resulting from future direct contact with
baseline risk assessment is an analysis of the               contaminated groundwater (e.g., through ingestion
potential adverse human health and ecological                of volatile contaminants) in the event a well was
effects caused by hazardous substance exposure in            installed at the Site for potential use as tap water. A
the absence of any actions to control or mitigate            complete summary of all exposure scenarios can be
these exposures under current and future site uses.          found in the HHRA.

In the human health risk assessment (HHRA),                  In the HHRA, two types of toxic health effects were
cancer risk and noncancer health hazard estimates            evaluated for COPCs: cancer risk and noncancer
are based on current reasonable maximum exposure             hazard. Calculated cancer risk estimates for each
(RME) scenarios. The estimates were developed by             receptor were compared to EPA’s target risk range
taking into account various health protective                of 1x10-6 (one-in-one million) to 1x10-4 (one-in-ten
estimates about the concentrations, frequency and            thousand) for excess cancer risks. The calculated
duration of an individual’s exposure to chemicals            noncancer hazard index (HI) estimates were
selected as contaminants of potential concern                compared to EPA’s target threshold value of 1. The
(COPCs), as well as the toxicity of these                    following section provides an overview of the
contaminants. Since this Proposed Plan addresses             cancer risks and noncancer hazard associated with
groundwater and the remedy selected in the 1992              exposure to groundwater at the Site.
ROD and modified by the 1998 ESD successfully
addressed soil contamination at the Site, this section       Groundwater - EPA determined that ingestion of
specifically focuses on risks in the 1992 risk               contaminated groundwater in a future use scenario
assessment associated with groundwater.                      presented an elevated risk to human health since the
                                                             hazard indices were estimated to be 16 for children

                                                         9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

and 11 for adults, exceeding EPA’s noncancer                on the Site and concluded that adverse impacts to
hazard threshold (i.e., HI of 1). Additionally,             onsite plants and animals from site related
residential adult ingestion of groundwater as               contamination are not likely.
drinking water yielded a cancer risk of 3x10-4,
exceeding EPA’s target risk range of 1x10-6 to              Based on the findings of the HHRA, it is EPA’s
1x10-4.                                                     current judgment that the preferred alternative
                                                            identified in this Proposed Plan is necessary to
Table 1: Summary cancer risks and hazard indices            protect public health or welfare or the environment.
associated with groundwater.
 Receptor                   Cancer Hazard                   REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES
                            Risk     Index
 Future Resident Ingestion 3x10-4    11                     The following additional RAO is identified for the
 (Adult)                                                    amended remedial action and supplements the
 Future Resident Ingestion 9x10-5    16                     existing Site RAOs:
 (Child)
                                                            •   Reduce contaminant mass in the source area
The majority of risk and hazard identified in the               such that the maximum dissolved-phase
1992 risk assessment and displayed in Table 1 was               concentration of xylene is lowered between
driven by inorganic compounds (i.e., beryllium,                 97-98 percent.
antimony, arsenic and manganese) in shallow
groundwater,       which      was     impacted   by         SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES
contamination in overlying soils and has since been
addressed. However, the concentrations of the               Section 121(b)(1) of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. §
following contaminants were found in groundwater            9621(b)(1), mandates that remedial actions must be
above promulgated federal and/or state Maximum              protective of human health and the environment,
Contaminant Levels (drinking water standards) and           cost-effective, and utilize permanent solutions and
also contributed to the human health risk: toluene,         alternative treatment technologies and resource
ethylbenzene, xylene and trichloroethene. As a              recovery alternatives to the maximum extent
result of the pilot study, chromium and lead                practicable. Section 121(b)(1) of CERCLA also
currently exceed drinking water standards. These            establishes a preference for remedial actions that
exceedances are expected to be transitory and will          employ, as a principal element, treatment to reduce
re-equilibrate so that the metal concentrations will        permanently and significantly the volume, toxicity,
return to the pre-injection state over time.                or mobility of the hazardous substances, pollutants,
                                                            and contaminants at a site. Section 121(d) of
As mentioned in the “Site Background” section               CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. § 9621(d), further specifies
above, vapor intrusion exposure was evaluated in            that a remedial action must attain a level or standard
March 2004 via vapor intrusion sampling. There              of control of the hazardous substances, pollutants,
were no VOCs detected above EPA’s screening                 and contaminants which assures protection of
criteria, and it was determined that the vapor              human health and the environment and that at least
intrusion pathway was not complete.                         attains ARARs under federal and state laws, unless
                                                            a waiver can be justified pursuant to Section
Ecological Risks                                            121(d)(4) of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. § 9621(d)(4).

The ecological risk assessment portion of the 1992          EPA is proposing to modify the remedy selected in
risk assessment did not identify any endangered             the 1992 ROD, as modified by the 1998 ESD, to
species, sensitive ecosystems, or sensitive habitats        include alternatives for addressing the remaining

                                                       10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

groundwater source area contamination where                  would be pumped from the subsurface through two
concentrations are the highest including in the              extraction wells, identified as RW-1 and RW-2, and
vicinity of monitoring wells MW-03, MW-103,                  conveyed to the treatment system, which is located
MW-105, MW-109 and MW-110 at the Site.                       within a dedicated building on the Site. The
                                                             treatment system includes a pretreatment system for
Detailed descriptions of the remedial alternatives           metals removal by addition of hydrogen peroxide
summarized in this Proposed Plan for addressing              and multi-media filtration. The water then passes
site-wide groundwater contamination are provided             through two granular activated carbon (GAC)
in the FFS report.                                           vessels, in series, to remove VOC contamination.
                                                             The treated water then is routed to a tank for filter
Common Elements for the Alternatives                         and GAC vessel backwashing or is discharged to the
                                                             reinjection trenches. The reinjection trenches
Both alternatives described below would require              consist of two banks and each bank contains two
ICs, such as a Classification Exception Area/Well            trenches for a total of four possible reinjection
Restriction Area (CEAs/WRA), which is a                      trenches. The system was shut down in June 2018
restriction established under New Jersey regulations         when EPA decided to perform the ISCO pilot study.
that would provide notice that the groundwater does
not meet designated use requirements and would               This alternative consists of repairing the treatment
restrict groundwater uses or activities which could          plant, specifically supervisory control and data
result in direct contact with contaminated                   acquisition      (SCADA)       system      upgrades,
groundwater. A NJDEP CEA/WRA would be                        replacement of media in both the multi-media and
established to restrict future groundwater use               carbon filters, other general repairs, and the
activities that would expose users to contaminants           installation of two new extraction wells that would
at levels that may pose human health risk, until the         be placed to target the remaining source area
RAO is met. Long Term Monitoring (LTM) would                 contamination. The treatment plant would then be
be used as a basis for evaluating the terms of the           operated for an estimated 30 years to attain
CEA/WRA and monitoring the progress of lowering              groundwater RAOs.
the concentration of COCs.


                                                             Capital Cost:                         $913,500
                                                             Annual O&M Cost:                      $40,000
Capital Cost:                         $555,650               Total Present Worth Costs:            $1,409,900
Annual O&M Cost:                      $747,000               Time to attain RAO:                   ~5 years
Total Present Worth Cost:             $10,322,320            Construction Timeframe:               N/A
Time to attain RAO:                   30 years
Construction Timeframe:               1 year                 This in-situ treatment alternative consists of ISCO
                                                             which utilizes oxidants injected into the
The Groundwater Extraction and Treatment                     groundwater aquifer in the source areas to transform
remedial alternative consists of groundwater                 harmful contaminants into less toxic byproducts. At
collection, treatment, and reinjection of the treated        the Site, the ISCO pilot study involved the injection
groundwater. This alternative also includes a LTM            of sodium persulfate oxidant and sodium hydroxide
program. As part of the remedy selected in 1992, a           activator into the subsurface to determine its
groundwater extraction and treatment system was
constructed at the Site and operated from July 2009
through June 2018. Contaminated groundwater

                                                        11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

effectiveness in reducing levels of remaining VOC
contamination from the groundwater. This remedial                  THE NINE SUPERFUND EVALUATION
alternative involves several rounds of additional                             CRITERIA
ISCO injections, followed by sampling after each
                                                             1. Overall Protectiveness of Human Health and the
injection event. Additional sampling and analysis            Environment evaluates whether an alternative
would need to be performed to evaluate if additional         eliminates, reduces, or controls threats to public health
injection treatment, such as in-situ alternative             and the environment through institutional controls,
chemical oxidants or in-situ chemical reduction,             engineering controls, or treatment.
would be required to fully address the residual
                                                             2. Compliance with Applicable or Relevant and
contaminants at the Site. EPA does not expect                Appropriate Requirements (ARARs) evaluates
additional treatment for metals that may become              whether the alternative meets federal and state
elevated after the ISCO injections will be necessary         environmental statutes, regulations, and other
because metal concentration increases due to ISCO            requirements that pertain to the site, or whether a waiver
are typically transitory and will re-equilibrate so          is justified.
that the metal concentrations will return to the pre-        3. Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence considers
injection state over time.                                   the ability of an alternative to maintain protection of
                                                             human health and the environment over time.
Based on the findings of the ISCO pilot study, this
alternative would consist of an estimated five               4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume (TMV)
                                                             of Contaminants through Treatment evaluates an
rounds of ISCO injections targeting the remaining            alternative's use of treatment to reduce the harmful effects
source areas, followed by an estimated 10 years of           of principal contaminants, their ability to move in the
monitoring to ensure additional injections are not           environment, and the amount of contamination present.
needed and metal concentrations re-equilibrate.
                                                             5. Short-term Effectiveness considers the length of time
                                                             needed to implement an alternative and the risks the
EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES                                   alternative poses to workers, the community, and the
                                                             environment during implementation.
In evaluating the remedial alternatives, each
alternative is assessed against nine evaluation              6. Implementability considers the technical and
criteria set forth in the NCP, namely overall                administrative feasibility of implementing the alternative,
                                                             including factors such as the relative availability of goods
protection of human health and the environment;              and services.
compliance with ARARs; long-term effectiveness
and permanence; reduction of toxicity, mobility, or          7. Cost includes estimated capital and annual operations
volume through treatment; short-term effectiveness;          and maintenance costs, as well as present worth cost.
implementability; cost; and state and community              Present worth cost is the total cost of an alternative over
                                                             time in terms of today's dollar value. Cost estimates are
acceptance. See box entitled “The Nine Superfund             expected to be accurate within a range of +50 to -30
Evaluation Criteria” for a more detailed description         percent.
of these criteria.
                                                             8. State/Support Agency Acceptance considers
This section of the Proposed Plan evaluates the              whether the State agrees with the EPA's analyses and
                                                             recommendations, as described in the RI/FS and
relative performance of each alternative against the         Proposed Plan.
nine criteria, noting how each alternative compares
to the other options under consideration. A more             9. Community Acceptance considers whether the local
detailed analysis of alternatives can be found in the        community agrees with EPA's analyses and preferred
FFS report.                                                  alternative. Comments received on the Proposed Plan
                                                             are an important indicator of community acceptance.



                                                        12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Threshold Criteria                                            Although residents in the Site vicinity are currently
                                                              connected to a municipal drinking water supply,
Overall Protection of Human Health and the                    ICs, such as groundwater use restrictions, would be
Environment                                                   used to prevent the installation of any private wells
                                                              within the area covered by the restrictions, until the
Both alternatives would be equally protective of              RAO is met.
human health. The exposure pathways to human
receptors would be eliminated by restrictions placed          Potential impacts to the Site from climate change
on the use of groundwater within the area of                  have been assessed, and the performance of the
groundwater contamination, while groundwater is               remedy is currently not at risk due to the expected
treated by either extraction and treatment (Original          effects of climate change in the region and near the
Remedy) or in-situ treatment (Preferred                       Site.
Alternative).
                                                              Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume
Compliance with ARARs                                         through Treatment

Both alternatives are expected to achieve                     Both alternatives reduce toxicity, mobility, and
compliance with chemical-specific ARARs for                   volume of the VOCs in groundwater through
groundwater, consisting of New Jersey GWQS.                   treatment of COCs.
Both alternatives also would comply with potential
action-specific ARARs, such as those applicable to            The Original Remedy would treat less contaminant
managing stormwater runoff; minimizing land                   mass than the Preferred Alternative since direct
disturbances; installation, operation, and                    treatment with injection would directly target the
abandonment of wells; waste characterization and              primary source areas of contamination.
storage; air quality control; and noise pollution. No
location-specific ARARs were identified.                      Short-Term Effectiveness

Balancing Criteria                                            The Preferred Alternative is expected to attain the
                                                              RAO for reducing source area contaminant mass in
Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence                        approximately 5 years, whereas the Original
                                                              Remedy is expected to attain the RAO in 30 years.
Both alternatives are expected to be protective in the        Both alternatives rely on ICs, including a
long term and permanent because both alternatives             CEA/WRA, to protect human health until the RAO
would        permanently       treat     groundwater          is achieved.
contamination. Long-term monitoring, and ICs,
including a CEA/WRA, would help ensure that each              There are no significant short-term risks to the
alternative remains effective in preventing exposure          community or the environment associated with
to contaminants. However, the Preferred                       either alternative although there are normal
Alternative is estimated to attain the RAO for                construction related risk for construction workers
reducing source area contaminant mass in a                    performing upgrades to the groundwater extraction
significantly shorter time than the Original Remedy,          and treatment system as part of the Original
so that long-term effectiveness could be achieved             Remedy.
more quickly.
                                                              Workers performing ISCO injections under the
                                                              Preferred Alternative and groundwater sampling/

                                                         13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

monitoring under both alternatives have the                   State / Support Agency Acceptance
potential to be exposed temporarily to
contaminants, but this risk would be minimized by             The State of New Jersey concurs with EPA’s
the use of personal protective equipment and                  Preferred Alternative as presented in this Proposed
implementation of a Health and Safety Plan.                   Plan.

Implementability                                              Community Acceptance

Both alternatives are implementable onsite. There             Community acceptance of the Preferred Alternative
are no significant technical implementability issues          will be evaluated after the public comment period
associated with either alternative. The goods and             ends and will be described in the ROD Amendment
services needed to implement both alternatives are            for the Site.
readily available. However, the Original Remedy
has greater implementability challenges associated            SUMMARY     OF             THE       PREFERRED
with start-up and long-term operation of the                  ALTERNATIVE
groundwater extraction and treatment system. There
are no implementation issues associated with the              Based upon an evaluation of the remedial
Preferred Alternative since set up and operation of           alternatives, EPA proposes in-situ treatment as the
treatment system is temporary and relatively easy to          preferred remedial alternative for the remaining
construct, operate and remove at completion.                  source of groundwater contamination at the Cosden
Pursuant to the permit exemption at Section                   Chemical Coatings Superfund Site.
121(e)(1) of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. § 9621(e)(1), no
permits would be required for on-site work although           This Alternative consists of an estimated five
substantive requirements of otherwise required                rounds of in-situ chemical injections targeting the
permits would be met.                                         remaining groundwater contamination source areas
                                                              with sampling rounds completed before, between,
Cost                                                          and after each round of injections. After all
                                                              injection rounds are completed, a period of
The Original Remedy has a higher cost for                     monitoring will follow to allow for re-equilibration
groundwater extraction and treatment, with a total            of metal concentrations and ensure that additional
present worth cost of $10.3 million over a period of          injections are not needed.
30 years. The Preferred Alternative has a lower
cost, with a total present worth cost of $1.4 million.        ISCO injections would be designed to achieve the
The present worth calculation assumes that                    source area RAO by destroying the remaining
construction would begin in 2023 and assumes a 7              COCs in their groundwater source areas. It is
percent discount rate.                                        estimated that five injections would be required for
                                                              concentrations to attain the RAO. The exact
                                                              placement of the injections, concentrations of
 Alternative        Capital     O&M        Total Present      injection chemicals, and sampling plan would be
                    Cost        Cost       Worth Cost
                                                              determined based upon the ISCO pilot study results.
 Groundwater         $556,000   $747,000    $10.3 million
 Extraction and
 Treatment                                                    The LTM program would be implemented to track
 In-Situ             $914,000    $40,000     $1.4 million     and monitor changes in the groundwater
 Chemical                                                     contamination to ensure the RAO is attained. The
 Treatment                                                    results from the long-term monitoring program
                                                              would be used to evaluate the migration of

                                                         14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

contaminants and changes in site-related COCs over           remaining sources     of   contamination    in   the
time.                                                        groundwater.

Institutional controls in the form of a CEA/WRA              EPA expects that the Preferred Alternative will not
would be established to ensure that the remedy               disrupt residences since it requires minimal,
remains protective until the RAO is achieved for             temporary infrastructure that will not need to be
protection of human health over the long term.               maintained, whereas the extraction and treatment
Institutional controls such as a deed notice would be        equipment needed for the Original Remedy would
recorded in property records if it is determined that        require maintenance over time.
future land use at the Site would result in exposure
leading to unacceptable risk.                                The Preferred Alternative is predicted to attain
                                                             remediation goals in a shorter time frame than the
The total estimated present worth cost for the               Original Remedy, at a lower cost. Residents in the
Preferred Alternative is $1,409,900. Further details         Site vicinity are currently connected to a municipal
of the cost are presented in the FFS Report. This is         drinking water supply. This water supply is treated
an engineering cost estimate that is expected to be          to meet federal and state drinking water standards
within the range of plus 50 percent to minus 30              before distribution.
percent of the actual project cost.
                                                             The Preferred Alternative will achieve ARARs.
This alternative would ultimately result in a                While the Preferred Alternative will not treat metal
reduction of contaminant levels in groundwater               concentrations in groundwater, metal concentration
within approximately five years to achieve the               increases due to ISCO are typically transitory and
RAO.                                                         will re-equilibrate so that the metal concentrations
                                                             will return to the pre-injection state over time.
Basis for the Remedy Preference                              Thus, the Preferred Alternative is expected to
                                                             result in compliance with ARARs for VOCs and
In-situ treatment uses proven technologies which             metals.
are effective at reducing contaminant mass to
achieve VOC reductions in groundwater, as was                The LTM program would be implemented to track
demonstrated by the ISCO Pilot Study performed               and monitor changes in the groundwater
at the Site. The Preferred Alternative will be more          contamination to ensure the RAO is attained. The
effective than the Original Remedy in eliminating            results from the LTM program will be used to
the remaining source areas for the groundwater               evaluate the migration of contaminants and changes
contamination by targeting ISCO injections                   in site-related COCs over time.
precisely where the remaining contamination is
located.                                                     ICs in the form of a CEA/WRA would be
                                                             established to ensure that the remedy remains
Furthermore, during implementation, EPA can                  protective until the RAO is achieved for protection
adjust additional injection locations and                    of human health over the long term.
concentrations to target the contamination
depending on sampling results collected between              The environmental benefits of the Preferred
injection rounds. This can be completed at a finer           Alternative could be enhanced by giving
scale than could be achieved with the Original               consideration, during the remedial activities, to
Remedy. Thus, the Preferred Alternative is expected          technologies and practices that are sustainable in
to be more effective than the Original Remedy in             accordance with EPA Region 2’s Clean and Green
achieving the desired results of treating the                Energy Policy.

                                                        15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Though EPA proposes in-situ treatment as the                  The dates for the public comment period, the date,
preferred alternative, the groundwater extraction             location and time of the public meeting, and the
and treatment system would remain in place in its             locations of the administrative record file are
current condition, though not operating, until the            provided on the front page of this Proposed Plan.
effectiveness of the source remedy is determined to
be fully successful.
                                                               For further information on the Cosden Chemical
Based upon the information currently available,                Coatings Superfund Site, please contact:
EPA believes the preferred alternative meets the
threshold criteria (protection of human health and             Tamara Rossi
                                                               Remedial Project Manager
the environment and compliance with ARARs) and                 (212) 637-4368
provides the best balance of tradeoffs among the               rossi.tamara@epa.gov
other alternatives with respect to the balancing
criteria. The preferred alternative satisfies the              or
following statutory requirements of CERCLA: 1)
                                                               Natalie Loney
the proposed remedy is protective of human health              Community Involvement Coordinator
and the environment; 2) it complies with ARARs;                (212) 637- 3639
3) it is cost effective; 4) it utilizes permanent              loney.natalie@epa.gov
solutions and alternative treatment technologies or
resource recovery technologies to the maximum                  Written comments on this Proposed Plan should be
                                                               submitted on or before to Tamara Rossi at the
extent practicable; and 5) it satisfies the preference         address or email below.
for treatment as a principal element. LTM would be
performed to assure the protectiveness of the                  U.S. EPA
remedy. With respect to the two modifying criteria             290 Broadway, 19th Floor
of the comparative analysis (state acceptance and              New York, New York 10007-1866
                                                               rossi.tamara@epa.gov
community acceptance), NJDEP concurs with the
proposed remedy.                                               The public liaison for EPA’s Region 2 is:

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION                                        George H. Zachos
                                                               Regional Public Liaison
                                                               Toll-free (888) 283-7626
EPA and NJDEP provided information regarding                   (732) 321-6621
the cleanup of the Site to the public through
meetings, the administrative record file for the Site,         U.S. EPA Region 2
and announcements published in the local                       2890 Woodbridge Avenue, MS-211
newspaper. EPA and NJDEP encourage the public                  Edison, New Jersey 08837-3679
to gain a more comprehensive understanding of the
Site and the Superfund activities that have been
conducted.




                                                         16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              Figure 2. Total xylene concentrations in groundwater before and after ISCO pilot study




012134
         1ÿ5100                         178 3ÿ5100ÿ08 983                          <      701ÿ3 03814ÿ713834ÿ;804932ÿ971
         1ÿ9932                 17 1 ;307138131                                    =     7 3 0ÿ93 12 14ÿ87834
         1 9 932ÿ78398 932ÿ5100     80 80131                                           79 82 7ÿ1 ÿ091
         315ÿ78398 932ÿ5100        30 8 30131ÿ98 0:                                       383ÿ41 1
         1  983ÿ5100               012 !"#$%#&'%ÿ#)*+#&*+,ÿ-#./'ÿ+'- &ÿ$!ÿ            8 0ÿ30131ÿ8313 9834
                                                                                      56222 ÿ9381771  ÿ>?@:ÿ94 ;14ÿ5;1 1ÿ931 14:                   
         890ÿ78 932                 1 97 14ÿ10
         918871 1 ÿ5100              490 14ÿ10 ÿ                                 56222 ÿ97 3ÿ>>?: 8313 9834
                                                                                               8  0ÿ 30131ÿ
                                                                                                                                             01ÿ93ÿ11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ATTACHMENT B


PUBLIC NOTICE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     ATTACHMENT C


PUBLIC MEETING TRANSCRIPT

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022              ·

 ·1

 ·2
 · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·)
 ·3· ·COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS· · · )
 · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·)
 ·4· ·SUPERFUND SITE· · · · · · · · )
 · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·)
 ·5· ·PROPOSED REMEDY· · · · · · · ·)
 · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·)
 ·6· ·MODIFICATION· · · · · · · · · )

 ·7

 ·8

 ·9

 10· · · · · · · · · · · PUBLIC MEETING

 11· · · · · · · · · · REMOTELY VIA ZOOM

 12· · · · · · · · ·------------------------

 13· · · · · · · · ·Tuesday, August 16, 2022

 14· · · · · · · · · 6:03 p.m. to 7:15 p.m.

 15

 16

 17

 18

 19· ·Reported by:

 20· ·Dawn Mack-Boaden

 21· ·Registered Professional Reporter; CSR# 153120

 22· ·APPEARING REMOTELY FROM NORFOLK COUNTY, MA

 23

 24


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022         Page 2

 ·1· ·REMOTE APPEARANCES:

 ·2
 · · ·Natalie Loney
 ·3· ·Community Involvement Coordinator

 ·4· ·Perry Katz
 · · ·Remedial Project Manager
 ·5
 · · ·Tamara Rossi
 ·6· ·Remedial Project Manager

 ·7· ·Jeff Josephson, EPA

 ·8· ·Shereen Kandil, EPA

 ·9· ·Emily Terjimanian
 · · ·Army Corps of Engineers
 10

 11

 12

 13

 14

 15

 16

 17

 18

 19

 20

 21

 22

 23

 24


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                   YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                      Public Meeting on 08/16/2022         Page 3

 ·1· · · · · · P-R-O-C-E-E-D-I-N-G-S
 ·2
 ·3· · · · MS. LONEY:· Okay.· It's now 6:04 and so
 ·4· ·we're going to get started.· Thank you
 ·5· ·everyone for joining us for the Cosden
 ·6· ·Chemical Coatings proposed remedy
 ·7· ·modification.· This, of course, is a virtual
 ·8· ·public meeting.· My name is Natalie Loney.
 ·9· ·I'm the community involvement coordinator
 10· ·for the site.
 11· · · · And so just a quick overview of
 12· ·tonight's agenda.· I'll be doing the
 13· ·introduction of the meeting itself, followed
 14· ·by Perry Katz, who will be doing the
 15· ·overview of the Superfund process along with
 16· ·the presentation of the proposed change to
 17· ·the remedy, after which I'll come back on
 18· ·and we will open up the floor for Q&A.
 19· · · · Since this is a public meeting, it is
 20· ·being recorded by a stenographer, and we ask
 21· ·that if you are called upon to ask a
 22· ·question, that you state your name for the
 23· ·record and ask your question as clearly as
 24· ·possible.


www.huseby.com          Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                    YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022         Page 4

 ·1· · · · With us tonight, apart from myself, the
 ·2· ·community involvement coordinator, and Perry
 ·3· ·Katz, who is the remedial project manager
 ·4· ·for the site, we also have Tami Rossi, who
 ·5· ·is the RPM, or remedial project manager, for
 ·6· ·the site; Jeff Josephson; and Shereen
 ·7· ·Kandil, all from EPA who will be supporting
 ·8· ·this effort.
 ·9· · · · In addition, Emily Terjimanian from the
 10· ·Army Corps of Engineers is also here to help
 11· ·field any technical questions.
 12· · · · Before we go into the Superfund process,
 13· ·Rich, you really are the only individual who
 14· ·is following along online, and so I don't
 15· ·think we need to worry too much about all of
 16· ·the features of this platform.· When you're
 17· ·ready to ask a question, you can just
 18· ·un-mute and, you know, you'll -- you can ask
 19· ·your question then.
 20· · · · Other than that, I think everything is
 21· ·pretty much standard in terms of remote
 22· ·access or virtual meeting platform.· Is
 23· ·there anything that you need explained,
 24· ·Rich, or are you comfortable with the


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                   YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022         Page 5

 ·1· ·platform that we're presenting on?
 ·2· · · · MR. RICH:· No.· I'm very familiar with
 ·3· ·Teams.
 ·4· · · · MS. LONEY:· Okay.· So without further
 ·5· ·ado, I'm going to turn the presentation over
 ·6· ·to Perry.· Perry.
 ·7· · · · MR. KATZ:· Thanks, Natalie.· So it's
 ·8· ·Rich and Robert; correct?· Is that the
 ·9· ·audience as it currently stands?
 10· · · · MS. LONEY:· Correct.
 11· · · · MR. KATZ:· Okay.· Well, this is an
 12· ·intimate setting then, I guess, even though
 13· ·it's Teams and virtual.
 14· · · · So, first, thanks for the interest in
 15· ·the ongoing cleanup at Cosden.· This may be
 16· ·old hat for both of you, but what I wanted
 17· ·to start with was an overview of our
 18· ·environmental clean-up process, and I'll try
 19· ·to -- I assume you have familiarity to some
 20· ·level by virtue of Cosden, but it might
 21· ·serve to reaffirm what our process is.
 22· · · · Typically what happens is we have the
 23· ·initial phase of discovery where potential
 24· ·hazardous waste sites get identified, and


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                   YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022         Page 6

 ·1· ·there's a variety of ways that happens:
 ·2· ·Through historic records from state, local,
 ·3· ·federal records, citizen notifications, and
 ·4· ·other sources.
 ·5· · · · Once a potential hazardous waste site is
 ·6· ·identified, the first steps are a
 ·7· ·preliminary assessment and site inspection.
 ·8· · · · The preliminary assessment is really
 ·9· ·just a formal initial records review, and
 10· ·it's used in association with developing a
 11· ·sampling plan of the different environmental
 12· ·media:· Groundwater, surface water, soil
 13· ·layer.· And the purpose of that is to try to
 14· ·ascertain if the site warrants inclusion on
 15· ·EPA's Superfund National Priorities List.
 16· ·In this case, of course Cosden met that
 17· ·threshold and was -- is on the National
 18· ·Priorities List.
 19· · · · Once that happens, there's a
 20· ·characterization phase that includes what we
 21· ·call remedial investigation, and it's simply
 22· ·the environmental investigations that
 23· ·determine the nature and extent of the
 24· ·contamination in the various environmental


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                   YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022         Page 7

 ·1· ·media:· Soil, sediment surface, water,
 ·2· ·groundwater, air.
 ·3· · · · And once the nature and extent of
 ·4· ·contamination is determined, then the next
 ·5· ·step is a feasibility study.· And that
 ·6· ·evaluates clean-up technologies.· It
 ·7· ·develops clean-up alternatives and we are
 ·8· ·required to use nine evaluation criteria to
 ·9· ·select a clean-up alternative or propose a
 10· ·clean-up alternative.
 11· · · · In conjunction with those steps, we do a
 12· ·risk assessment, which the purpose of that
 13· ·is to figure out the nature and the extent
 14· ·of human health and/or ecological risk posed
 15· ·by the site conditions.
 16· · · · Once we do those things and we are ready
 17· ·to, as we are tonight, go out to the public,
 18· ·we issue a proposed plan that was issued
 19· ·ahead of this virtual public meeting and it
 20· ·summarizes those steps:· The remedial
 21· ·investigation, feasibility study, the risk
 22· ·assessment.· And we present our preferred
 23· ·approach to clean up the site.· And that is
 24· ·subject to state input as well as input from


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                   YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022         Page 8

 ·1· ·the community and the greater public.
 ·2· · · · Once we go through that process, we
 ·3· ·document our decision making in a record of
 ·4· ·decision.· Again, I'm guessing both of you
 ·5· ·are somewhat familiar with these processes,
 ·6· ·but I'll go through them.
 ·7· · · · The record of decision documents EPA's
 ·8· ·selection of a preferred clean-up approach,
 ·9· ·and it also summarizes any questions and
 10· ·provides responses that were obtained during
 11· ·the public comment period -- whether they
 12· ·were written or presented, for example,
 13· ·tonight, orally.
 14· · · · Once we have that decision made about
 15· ·our approach to the environmental cleanup,
 16· ·we have to design that remedy, basically.
 17· ·And that engineering design is -- basically,
 18· ·it's a design of what's described in the
 19· ·record of decision.
 20· · · · Once it's designed, we go ahead and
 21· ·implement that design.· That's literally the
 22· ·physical construction of the action, and
 23· ·it's based on the design and it's based on
 24· ·the alternative that's described in the


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                   YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                      Public Meeting on 08/16/2022         Page 9

 ·1· ·record of decision.
 ·2· · · · Once the remedy's constructed, there are
 ·3· ·post-construction activities.· They can
 ·4· ·involve operation and maintenance, as is the
 ·5· ·case at Cosden where there was a groundwater
 ·6· ·treatment plant constructed and there was an
 ·7· ·ongoing operation, and then maintenance of
 ·8· ·that facility.· It could be maintenance of a
 ·9· ·cap -- not the case at Cosden -- but where
 10· ·things like maintaining a security fence,
 11· ·cutting the grass, making sure any
 12· ·monitoring wells that are on landfill, for
 13· ·example, are intact and functioning
 14· ·properly.
 15· · · · There are some other -- those stages
 16· ·that I described to you all were part of
 17· ·what went on at Cosden.· Then there are some
 18· ·other features.· There are some other
 19· ·features in the Superfund process, just to
 20· ·wrap up the overview of that.· Ultimately,
 21· ·and we know the wheels of progress can move
 22· ·slow with these environmental cleanups to
 23· ·say the least, but we ultimately get to a
 24· ·point where we can delete the site from the


www.huseby.com          Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                    YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 10

 ·1· ·National Priorities List and that's when the
 ·2· ·requirements and the record of decision are
 ·3· ·met and the technical evaluations that we do
 ·4· ·would support the decision that the site is,
 ·5· ·in fact, cleaned up.· And it does happen.
 ·6· · · · And there are a couple of other things
 ·7· ·as part of our process.· There are five-year
 ·8· ·reviews, which is a tool we use to deal with
 ·9· ·sites where waste is left behind.· We go
 10· ·back and take a look at it every five years
 11· ·to ensure that the remedy or the cleanup is
 12· ·progressing the way we envisioned it and
 13· ·we're moving towards trying to meet our
 14· ·clean-up goals.
 15· · · · And then just a couple of things that go
 16· ·on throughout this process.· There's
 17· ·community involvement.· Natalie is going to
 18· ·talk more about that, but it is done
 19· ·throughout our process, and it's our efforts
 20· ·to try to engage the community and get their
 21· ·input regarding milestone decisions that we
 22· ·make about the site.
 23· · · · And then, finally, probably in the more
 24· ·recent past, EPA has tried to incorporate


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 11

 ·1· ·considerations regarding site reuse and
 ·2· ·redevelopment, and you've probably heard or
 ·3· ·read stories, throughout New Jersey
 ·4· ·certainly, where a landfill is being
 ·5· ·repurposed for soccer fields or recreational
 ·6· ·fields after a cleanup has been complete or,
 ·7· ·more recently, land -- I'm using landfills
 ·8· ·as an example; but, you know, solar arrays
 ·9· ·are put on these landfills and alternative
 10· ·energy, you know, is being generated through
 11· ·solar array, for example.· The one thing --
 12· ·so that's an overview of the process.
 13· · · · One thing that's really important to
 14· ·note in the case of Cosden that I think, you
 15· ·know, as I delved into this -- I'm
 16· ·relatively new to the project -- is that,
 17· ·you know, clean-up work at Cosden has been
 18· ·going on literally since the mid 1980's.
 19· ·And I know, on the one hand, that's a long
 20· ·time, but what we're talking about tonight
 21· ·in terms of an amendment to the record of
 22· ·decision, it really supplements the previous
 23· ·work and will help us complete the
 24· ·restoration of groundwater that's an aspect


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 12

 ·1· ·of the environmental cleanup out here.
 ·2· · · · So I know it's probably obvious to both
 ·3· ·of you, but, you know, we're not starting
 ·4· ·from scratch with our first decision
 ·5· ·tonight.· This is much further along in the
 ·6· ·process with regard to what we're going to
 ·7· ·talk about tonight.
 ·8· · · · So just a brief overview of the cleanup.
 ·9· ·The site was listed on the National
 10· ·Priorities List in '87.
 11· · · · Again, this is a little bit of the
 12· ·history with the overall scope of things.
 13· ·There were early actions in the early '90s
 14· ·to secure the site and remove drums and
 15· ·tanks.
 16· · · · The remedial investigation feasibility
 17· ·study that I described earlier was completed
 18· ·in '92.
 19· · · · The record of decision -- the initial
 20· ·first record of decision was issued in 1992,
 21· ·and as you're probably well aware, included
 22· ·building demolition and disposal, the
 23· ·construction -- the design and construction
 24· ·of the groundwater and extraction treatment


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 13

 ·1· ·system.· At that time, it also included
 ·2· ·disposal of on-site soil as well.
 ·3· · · · In 1998, we had a -- we have a formal
 ·4· ·mechanism when we make changes; in this
 ·5· ·case, it was an explanation of significant
 ·6· ·differences.· It did some things to clarify
 ·7· ·the original clean-up plan.· It clarified
 ·8· ·that we would use excavation off-site
 ·9· ·disposal of a class of compounds called
 10· ·polychlorinated biphenyls that were in the
 11· ·soil versus what we originally had described
 12· ·in the record of decision regarding on-site
 13· ·treatment, and we also incorporated, among a
 14· ·couple of other things, a soil vapor
 15· ·extraction component in the remedy that
 16· ·wasn't previously there.
 17· · · · And based on some additional information
 18· ·about lead at that time, the clean-up level
 19· ·for lead in soil was modified to a more
 20· ·stringent level from 500 parts per million
 21· ·to 400 parts per million.
 22· · · · And so, again, I just want to
 23· ·re-emphasize that the clean-up work has been
 24· ·going on for a long period of time.· The ROD


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 14

 ·1· ·amendment that we're talking about tonight
 ·2· ·supplements previous work to complete really
 ·3· ·the groundwater restoration piece.
 ·4· · · · The ROD amendment doesn't deal with
 ·5· ·anything with regard to the building and the
 ·6· ·soil because that work has been completed.
 ·7· ·It just adds an additional remedial
 ·8· ·action -- and Jeff and I'll talk a little
 ·9· ·bit more about that -- to the existing
 10· ·groundwater cleanup so that we can address
 11· ·what we identified as some remaining areas
 12· ·-- source areas of groundwater
 13· ·contamination.
 14· · · · Some brief background.· Again, I'm
 15· ·guessing both of you are familiar.· Cosden
 16· ·originally manufactured paint for coating
 17· ·industrial equipment and operated from the
 18· ·mid '40s to the late '80s and also stored
 19· ·solvents on site after -- in the 1970s.· The
 20· ·Burlington County Department of Public
 21· ·Safety had reported those site conditions in
 22· ·conjunction with when a grass fire occurred
 23· ·at the site in 1980, and this is how the
 24· ·site was identified.· If you recall, I


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 15

 ·1· ·talked about ways sites were discovered.
 ·2· · · · For myself, I've worked at local, state,
 ·3· ·and federal levels of government over the
 ·4· ·course of my career.· I worked for the
 ·5· ·health department at one point in time.· And
 ·6· ·I'm probably a little older than most folks
 ·7· ·on the phone tonight, but I go back to the
 ·8· ·'80s and late '70s and, you know, health
 ·9· ·departments played a role in identifying
 10· ·some of these sites.· This was the
 11· ·Department of Public Safety; but, similarly,
 12· ·they surfaced this site based on what
 13· ·happened back in 1980.
 14· · · · So I don't know this for certain, but my
 15· ·guess is that the county interfaced with the
 16· ·State of New Jersey who followed up and did
 17· ·inspections and found the condition of the
 18· ·surface spills and un-secure drums, et
 19· ·cetera.
 20· · · · They initially interacted with Cosden
 21· ·through the issuance of a court order in the
 22· ·mid '80s and Cosden apparently initiated but
 23· ·never completed the cleanup.· Then the state
 24· ·took it on in, roughly, 1986 and they did an


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 16

 ·1· ·emergency removal of drum material and the
 ·2· ·cleanup of surface spills at that time.
 ·3· · · · I mentioned that the site ultimately got
 ·4· ·on the National Priorities List in 1987 and
 ·5· ·then EPA, the federal government, initiated
 ·6· ·a second emergency action in '89.· They
 ·7· ·constructed a fence around the area of the
 ·8· ·soil contamination, again, removing the
 ·9· ·remaining drums and containers that were
 10· ·still on site.· I had mentioned in '82, we
 11· ·issued a record of decision for the
 12· ·building, the soil, and the groundwater.
 13· · · · So that ROD for the building and the
 14· ·soil included, as I mentioned, a demolition
 15· ·of off-site disposal of the building and
 16· ·building debris, cleanup of soils containing
 17· ·lead, chromium, and polychlorinated
 18· ·biphenyls, and that occurred in phases
 19· ·between 1999 and 2002.
 20· · · · And you can see on the slide -- well,
 21· ·Rich, you can.· Robert, you should be able
 22· ·to if you have it now.
 23· · · · There were various volumes of waste
 24· ·materials removed from the site at that


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 17

 ·1· ·time, and there was a report that documented
 ·2· ·that work that was completed in '03.· 2003,
 ·3· ·I should say.· With regard to the
 ·4· ·groundwater --
 ·5· · · · MR. LOWDEN:· I'm following along there.
 ·6· · · · MR. KATZ:· Okay.· Excellent.· So with
 ·7· ·regard to the groundwater environmental
 ·8· ·clean-up approach in the decision, there was
 ·9· ·a groundwater and extraction treatment
 10· ·system that was constructed -- a plant was
 11· ·constructed in 2007, and it was intended to
 12· ·address the volatile organic compounds that
 13· ·were present at the site.· The soil removal
 14· ·largely involved metals -- chromium, for
 15· ·example, and polychlorinated biphenyls.
 16· · · · The long-term remedial option and the
 17· ·operation of the groundwater treatment plant
 18· ·began in 2009.· And in 2007, as part of the
 19· ·explanation of significances that I spoke
 20· ·about a little earlier, the soil vapor
 21· ·extraction system was installed in 2007, and
 22· ·that was to address vapors that contained
 23· ·contaminants between the ground surface and
 24· ·the groundwater table.


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 18

 ·1· · · · There was a -- vapor intrusion was
 ·2· ·addressed as well.· And I probably should
 ·3· ·take a quick digression to explain what
 ·4· ·vapor intrusion is if you're not familiar
 ·5· ·with that term.· It's really the movement of
 ·6· ·volatile organic compounds, those vapors,
 ·7· ·from the groundwater through forced spaces
 ·8· ·in the soil; and these vapors find their way
 ·9· ·through a bunch of pathways, like
 10· ·foundational cracks or basement sumps, into
 11· ·the living space of buildings, and they can
 12· ·impact indoor air.· You may be familiar with
 13· ·the term vis-à-vis radon.· Same idea.
 14· · · · So it's not just confined to volatile
 15· ·organic compounds, but that is the case --
 16· ·that was the case here in terms of the
 17· ·evaluation.· The evaluation that was done
 18· ·indicated that there weren't any volatile
 19· ·organic compounds detected above
 20· ·EPA-screening levels.· Therefore, there
 21· ·really wasn't a pathway to expose any
 22· ·building -- it wasn't considered complete.
 23· ·So vapor intrusion is not an issue at this
 24· ·point.


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 19

 ·1· · · · So with regard to the current nature and
 ·2· ·the extent of contamination, this is a
 ·3· ·summary of the work that led EPA to propose
 ·4· ·a modification to it's current environmental
 ·5· ·clean-up approach.
 ·6· · · · It includes some additional groundwater
 ·7· ·investigation, sampling, and analysis.· And
 ·8· ·as you can see on the slide, there was an
 ·9· ·area identified roughly 20 to 25 feet below
 10· ·the ground surface where there was
 11· ·contamination still present.· Mainly, we're
 12· ·speaking about volatile organic compound.
 13· · · · There were 16 new wells installed to
 14· ·target evaluating the extent of this
 15· ·contamination.
 16· · · · And then there was one study done in
 17· ·2017.· And you can see the in-situ chemical
 18· ·oxidation was the nature of a pilot study.
 19· · · · Let me just explain a little bit about
 20· ·what that is.· It's a technology that --
 21· ·well an oxidant, which is a substance that
 22· ·can use oxygen to break down other
 23· ·chemicals, is injected or mechanically mixed
 24· ·into a treatment -- in this case, the soil,


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 20

 ·1· ·and it promotes the chemical breakdown of
 ·2· ·those contaminants into less -- less harmful
 ·3· ·by-products.
 ·4· · · · The pilot study -- again, the definition
 ·5· ·of that, if you're not familiar, it's a
 ·6· ·smaller-scale study that's done in the field
 ·7· ·that, I'll say, test drives the technology
 ·8· ·and assesses its performance.· And what
 ·9· ·happens is when we do these types of things,
 10· ·if the pilot study is successful, then the
 11· ·potential exists to ramp up the pilot scale
 12· ·study into something full scale.
 13· · · · And so the purpose of the in-situ
 14· ·chemical oxidation pilot study was to
 15· ·determine if these injections using a
 16· ·particular compound, persulfate, would be
 17· ·effective at degrading volatile organic
 18· ·concentrations more quickly than if we
 19· ·continue to operate the groundwater and
 20· ·extraction treatment system.
 21· · · · There were four rounds of injections
 22· ·done over time, and we evaluated and
 23· ·monitored the performance of this particular
 24· ·compound, persulfate, and we completed a


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 21

 ·1· ·final report in 2021.
 ·2· · · · The next slide is a summary of the key
 ·3· ·results.· You can see the numbers on the
 ·4· ·slide, but the bottom line is the volume of
 ·5· ·the contaminated groundwater was
 ·6· ·significantly reduced.· The original
 ·7· ·footprint of the groundwater plume was
 ·8· ·substantially reduced after the injections.
 ·9· ·And the contaminants of concern in the
 10· ·sentinel wells were not detected.
 11· · · · Again, just by way of definition, a
 12· ·sentinel well is a monitoring well that is
 13· ·usually placed between the groundwater plume
 14· ·and a receptor to determine whether the
 15· ·plume has migrated beyond what its predicted
 16· ·boundaries would be.· So that's what a
 17· ·sentinel well is.· So we didn't have -- that
 18· ·indicated nothing had moved off site.
 19· · · · The table really quantifies the percent
 20· ·change in the concentrations pre- and post
 21· ·injection.· And, as you can see, anywhere
 22· ·from 74 to 78 percent change in the
 23· ·concentrations of the three chemicals that
 24· ·are listed:· Toluene, Ethylbenzene, and


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 22

 ·1· ·total xylenes, which are -- we focus on
 ·2· ·xylenes, but all of those are -- those three
 ·3· ·are contaminants of concern.
 ·4· · · · So I know this looks like a little bit
 ·5· ·of an eye exam, I suspect, but what this
 ·6· ·figure is is a depiction that shows the
 ·7· ·reduction of one of the primary contaminants
 ·8· ·of concern, the volatile organic compound
 ·9· ·xylene and -- pre- and post injection.· And
 10· ·what I'll convey to you is that the red
 11· ·line, both solid and dashed, represent
 12· ·xylene concentrations preinjection in,
 13· ·roughly, 2017; and the blue or purple,
 14· ·depending on how you perceive that color,
 15· ·that line represents xylene concentrations
 16· ·post injection in 2021.
 17· · · · And what you should be able to see is
 18· ·that there's a reduced footprint of
 19· ·contamination due to the effect on the
 20· ·in-situ treatment injections.· That's really
 21· ·the net of this figure.
 22· · · · So the conclusions and the
 23· ·recommendations that you see on this slide
 24· ·are based on the pilot study.· The ISCO


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 23

 ·1· ·injections -- I'll just paraphrase.· The
 ·2· ·ISCO injections -- in-situ chemical
 ·3· ·oxidation injections -- reduced the volatile
 ·4· ·organic compound concentrations.· The
 ·5· ·recommendation from the pilot study was to
 ·6· ·continue to perform these injections and
 ·7· ·focus on those areas that still had higher
 ·8· ·levels of contamination that are in the
 ·9· ·groundwater.
 10· · · · And the pilot study concluded that the
 11· ·in-situ chemical oxidation is a potential
 12· ·treatment option in addition to the
 13· ·groundwater and extraction treatment system.
 14· · · · So during the course of this work, there
 15· ·was some additional investigative work that
 16· ·was sampling and analysis performed on what
 17· ·we call emerging contaminants.· And by
 18· ·emerging contaminant, we define that as
 19· ·either a synthetic or a naturally occurring
 20· ·chemical that isn't commonly monitored in
 21· ·the environment but has potential to enter
 22· ·the environment and cause adverse health or
 23· ·ecological impacts.
 24· · · · And you're probably familiar with per-


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                      Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 24

 ·1· ·and polyfluoroalkyl substances, PFAS, and
 ·2· ·the related compounds.· 1,4 dioxane is
 ·3· ·another compound that's considered an
 ·4· ·emerging contaminant, and 1,2,3
 ·5· ·trichloropropane falls under the same
 ·6· ·category.
 ·7· · · · With regard to the PFAS compounds, they
 ·8· ·were detected above New Jersey's Department
 ·9· ·of Environmental Protection's groundwater
 10· ·quality standards, and we are going to need
 11· ·to do some additional investigation into
 12· ·that class of compounds.
 13· · · · You know, I know, Rich, you raised a
 14· ·question about them.· While we conveyed the,
 15· ·you know, the results in our proposed plan,
 16· ·there is going to be a plan to address these
 17· ·contaminants at a later time.· It will be in
 18· ·conjunction with our design, you know, the
 19· ·preferred remedy that we're going to talk
 20· ·about here.
 21· · · · And then I know you had a couple of
 22· ·other related questions to it about the ISCO
 23· ·injections having any affect on this class
 24· ·of compounds, and they -- you know, there's


www.huseby.com          Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                   YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                       Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 25

 ·1· ·some uncertainty associated with that.
 ·2· · · · Jeff, I think I'm going to ask you to
 ·3· ·elaborate a little bit on it because I think
 ·4· ·I'm going to stumble through the details on
 ·5· ·that.
 ·6· · · · But, in short, you know, there are
 ·7· ·treatment options for this class of
 ·8· ·compounds.· We just have to do more work to
 ·9· ·establish whether or not they come from the
 10· ·Cosden site.· The data we have right now
 11· ·indicates that it's possible that there's an
 12· ·off-site source because there are higher
 13· ·contaminations on the more up gradient
 14· ·portions of the Cosden property.· But that
 15· ·will all be wrapped up in our investigation
 16· ·on that.
 17· · · · Jeff, do you mind taking a second to
 18· ·elaborate on the whole thing with the
 19· ·treatment?
 20· · · · MR. JOSEPHSON:· Yeah, no problem.· The
 21· ·treatment with ISCO, those materials have
 22· ·never been tested specifically for treatment
 23· ·with the PFAS compounds at the site.· And so
 24· ·we don't know if it has an effect or not.


www.huseby.com           Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                    YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                       Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 26

 ·1· ·You know, the compounds -- the ISCO
 ·2· ·materials were not designed to treat PFAS
 ·3· ·compounds.
 ·4· · · · However, there are ways to treat it if
 ·5· ·it turns out they are site-related.· As
 ·6· ·Perry indicated, you know, the wells where
 ·7· ·we found the PFAS are right around the fence
 ·8· ·line that is up against the railroad tracks,
 ·9· ·and the water flow is towards the north in
 10· ·that area, towards the Delaware River.
 11· · · · And so we don't -- we just don't know if
 12· ·it's for sure at the site or not or if it's
 13· ·coming from the other side of the fence,
 14· ·basically.· And so that's where we are right
 15· ·now, and that's partially due to the fact
 16· ·that we just started to monitor for it, you
 17· ·know, as it became a more common contaminant
 18· ·and the state developed standards for it.
 19· · · · MR. KATZ:· Thanks, Jeff.· Rich, is that
 20· ·-- and I know you had some other questions.
 21· ·I'm going to try to circle -- you know, as
 22· ·we go through the rest of the presentation,
 23· ·I believe I'll pick those up and respond to
 24· ·those as well.· But did that answer your


www.huseby.com           Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                    YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 27

 ·1· ·question about that at least for the moment,
 ·2· ·Rich?
 ·3· · · · MR. RICH:· Yeah.· And just, you know,
 ·4· ·I'm pretty familiar with the PFAS and the
 ·5· ·PFAS family.
 ·6· · · · MR. KATZ:· Okay.
 ·7· · · · MR. RICH:· The concern there is we know
 ·8· ·that the Neshaminy Creek, which is right
 ·9· ·across the river from us, was finding levels
 10· ·of PFAS.
 11· · · · And so we're trying to figure out if it
 12· ·actually was something that came from the
 13· ·site or something that maybe is just in the
 14· ·area.· We know it's an emerging contaminant,
 15· ·and I knew there was -- the ISCO isn't
 16· ·something that normally would oxidize that.
 17· ·It's one of those forever chemicals.· So it
 18· ·would probably -- we'd have to use some
 19· ·other methodology.
 20· · · · MR. KATZ:· Rich, I actually live in
 21· ·Bucks County and, you know, I don't know if
 22· ·this is what you were suggesting.· I may
 23· ·have misheard you.· But this class of
 24· ·compounds, you know, are turning up


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 28

 ·1· ·ridiculously, if that's a word.
 ·2· · · · And that's a long haul between Beverly
 ·3· ·and Willow Grove.· I live in between,
 ·4· ·actually, right near Yardley.
 ·5· · · · MR. RICH:· Well -- well aware of that,
 ·6· ·but we know the levels seen in the Neshaminy
 ·7· ·Creek and -- and I know the Delaware River
 ·8· ·likes to exfiltrate and push out into
 ·9· ·eluvial layers and so forth and just didn't
 10· ·know -- it's a pretty long haul to get from
 11· ·there; but, you know, we didn't think it was
 12· ·any of the chemicals that might have been on
 13· ·site.· That's why I raised the concern.
 14· · · · Same thing with the 1,4 dioxane.· I know
 15· ·they picked up levels of that at the New
 16· ·Jersey American War surface treatment plant
 17· ·a couple of years ago, and they were working
 18· ·with DEP to come up with a treatment option
 19· ·for that.· But, again, that one looks like
 20· ·it's going to fall within the limits once
 21· ·this process continues.
 22· · · · MR. KATZ:· Yeah.· We didn't -- you know,
 23· ·just to close the loop on that emerging
 24· ·contaminant discussion, we didn't find any


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                      Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 29

 ·1· ·levels of 1,4 dioxane or 1,2,3
 ·2· ·trichloropropane above New Jersey's
 ·3· ·groundwater quality standards.· So that was
 ·4· ·good.
 ·5· · · · MR. RICH:· Actually, in one of the
 ·6· ·documents I think the limit is .4, and the
 ·7· ·level that was detected was .406.· So it was
 ·8· ·at background levels or nondetectable levels
 ·9· ·or quality levels back then, and that all
 10· ·attenuated.
 11· · · · MR. KATZ:· Okay.· So that takes care of
 12· ·that one.
 13· · · · So then the next part of the process.
 14· ·I'm going to try to zip through this,
 15· ·gentlemen, because it sounds like you may
 16· ·both have some familiarity.
 17· · · · But, you know, as we try to determine
 18· ·the nature and extent of the risk out there,
 19· ·as we tried to do that, we go through a
 20· ·standard four-step process to evaluate human
 21· ·health and -- potential human health and
 22· ·ecological risk.
 23· · · · And the steps are, first, hazard
 24· ·identification.· You know, we're trying to


www.huseby.com          Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                   YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 30

 ·1· ·identify potential chemicals of concern in
 ·2· ·various environmental media, looking at the
 ·3· ·toxicity and frequency of occurrence, their
 ·4· ·ability to move through the environment.
 ·5· · · · Once we identify them, there's an
 ·6· ·exposure of assessment step for different
 ·7· ·pathways that people could be exposed.· For
 ·8· ·example, dermal contact, ingestion,
 ·9· ·inhalation.· And those are evaluated.
 10· · · · And then the third step is assessment of
 11· ·toxicity, meaning the types of adverse
 12· ·health effects and what their relationship
 13· ·is between the magnitude of exposure and the
 14· ·severity of the health effects.· And we
 15· ·typically look at end points of cancer as
 16· ·well as noncancer health effects.
 17· · · · And the final step is we try to
 18· ·characterize the risk and we look at the
 19· ·first -- well, the exposure and toxicity,
 20· ·and we perform a quantitative assessment of
 21· ·the risk.· And that's our -- that's
 22· ·basically our process.
 23· · · · So at Cosden, we evaluated the current
 24· ·and future land use, including future


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 31

 ·1· ·residential redevelopment, for example,
 ·2· ·direct contact, ingestion, drinking water
 ·3· ·well on site.
 ·4· · · · Now, you know, if you're not already
 ·5· ·aware, we use fairly conservative
 ·6· ·assumptions when we do these risk
 ·7· ·assessments, very conservative assumptions
 ·8· ·in many cases.· So sometimes they're
 ·9· ·realistic; sometimes they're less realistic.
 10· · · · But, in this case, we looked at the
 11· ·potential in a future-use scenario of
 12· ·somebody drinking contaminated water from a
 13· ·well on site.· And once we went through our
 14· ·steps, we concluded that in a future-use
 15· ·scenario where an adult or a child was
 16· ·exposed to contaminated groundwater on site,
 17· ·that did result in a potential elevated risk
 18· ·to cancer and noncancer health effects.
 19· · · · On the ecological side, there was a
 20· ·determination that an elevated risk to the
 21· ·ecological receptors, plants and animals,
 22· ·was unlikely.· So that's a short summary of
 23· ·the risk assessment piece.
 24· · · · Trying to get a little more into where


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 32

 ·1· ·we are today, we have to establish remedial
 ·2· ·action objectives, and, as you know, we have
 ·3· ·existing ones.· There are media-specific
 ·4· ·goals that are established to protect human
 ·5· ·health and the environment.· Then we may
 ·6· ·use, for example, a value established by
 ·7· ·EPA, maximum contaminant level, or something
 ·8· ·from the state, New Jersey Groundwater
 ·9· ·Clean-up Standards -- both cases for
 10· ·groundwater -- for a particular contaminant
 11· ·concern as our basis for determining whether
 12· ·we achieve a cleanup or not.
 13· · · · For Cosden, as I mentioned, there were
 14· ·existing remedial action objectives.· They
 15· ·were established when the ROD was prepared
 16· ·and they're listed in the first bullet.
 17· ·This ROD amendment adds -- it supplements
 18· ·what already exists, and it establishes an
 19· ·additional remedial action objective that
 20· ·targets the remaining source areas of
 21· ·groundwater contamination that contain VOCs,
 22· ·mainly xylenes.
 23· · · · So we've established the remedial action
 24· ·objectives that exist and how we propose to


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 108 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 33

 ·1· ·supplement it, and then we turn towards
 ·2· ·evaluating clean-up alternatives.· And given
 ·3· ·that an existing cleanup was in place at
 ·4· ·Cosden, we really just looked at two
 ·5· ·alternatives that were evaluated as part of
 ·6· ·this ROD amendment.· Before we talk about
 ·7· ·each one of them, there are some common
 ·8· ·elements to both alternatives, and they're
 ·9· ·listed here.
 10· · · · One is institutional controls in the
 11· ·form of a classification exception area/well
 12· ·restriction area.· And that's a control
 13· ·established and utilized in New Jersey to
 14· ·delineate an area of groundwater
 15· ·contamination where there's restrictions for
 16· ·the groundwater's use as well as preventing
 17· ·the installation of wells within that
 18· ·delineated area.
 19· · · · That's a tool -- you might already be
 20· ·familiar with this.· That's a tool that the
 21· ·state uses and we incorporate into our
 22· ·cleanups where it's appropriate.
 23· · · · And then like on many of our sites,
 24· ·there's a long-term groundwater monitoring


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 109 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 34

 ·1· ·component that evaluates -- it will evaluate
 ·2· ·both the requirements of the classification
 ·3· ·exception area/well restriction area and, of
 ·4· ·course, it will monitor the progress of the
 ·5· ·groundwater cleanup.
 ·6· · · · And then there is a third common
 ·7· ·element, which would be five-year reviews,
 ·8· ·which I mentioned earlier are done, as we,
 ·9· ·you know, move through the cleanup of the
 10· ·site.
 11· · · · So the two clean-up alternatives are
 12· ·really as follows.· There's the original
 13· ·clean-up action that included the
 14· ·groundwater extraction and treatment system
 15· ·and monitoring.· What we would do there is
 16· ·supplement that with repairs to the existing
 17· ·treatment facility and add two additional
 18· ·extraction wells that would be targeted to
 19· ·the groundwater treatment -- it would target
 20· ·groundwater treatment in the remaining
 21· ·source areas.· And that duration for cleanup
 22· ·is estimated to require about 30 more years
 23· ·of operation to reach the remedial action
 24· ·objectives.


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 110 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                       Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 35

 ·1· · · · The existing groundwater and extraction
 ·2· ·treatment system, which is not currently
 ·3· ·operating, was estimated they were treating
 ·4· ·almost 300-million gallons of contaminated
 ·5· ·groundwater from 2009 to 2018, and it
 ·6· ·removed approximately 13,000 pounds of total
 ·7· ·volatile organic compounds.
 ·8· · · · So it was successful during the time of
 ·9· ·its operation.· We did shut it down because
 10· ·the equipment was aging and we saw the
 11· ·results of the in-situ chemical oxidation
 12· ·pilot study and, as I'll talk a little bit
 13· ·more about, is the preferred clean-up
 14· ·alternative.· Those two factors move us
 15· ·towards the preference of using in-situ
 16· ·treatment.
 17· · · · As I've already talked about, that
 18· ·involves injections into the groundwater.
 19· ·It will transform the groundwater
 20· ·contaminants to less toxic by-products.
 21· ·They'll be more stable and less mobile.
 22· ·There would be several rounds of injections
 23· ·and there would be associated sampling and
 24· ·analysis to monitor the performance of those


www.huseby.com           Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                    YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 111 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                      Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 36

 ·1· ·injections.
 ·2· · · · So we have these two alternatives.· And,
 ·3· ·again, part of our standard process is to
 ·4· ·evaluate -- whether it's two alternatives or
 ·5· ·nine alternatives -- to evaluate them
 ·6· ·against -- under the Superfund legislation,
 ·7· ·there are nine evaluation criteria that we
 ·8· ·use and we perform a comparative analysis of
 ·9· ·the alternatives, and that informs us on how
 10· ·to select a ROD -- environmental clean-up
 11· ·approach.
 12· · · · So, briefly, I'll go through them and
 13· ·how they -- how the two alternatives square
 14· ·up against each other.· The first criteria
 15· ·has to do with overall protectiveness of
 16· ·human health and the environment.· And that,
 17· ·as it sounds, addresses threats to public
 18· ·health and the environment through treatment
 19· ·engineering controls and institutional
 20· ·controls.
 21· · · · And, in this case, these two
 22· ·alternatives, the groundwater extraction and
 23· ·treatment system with the associated repairs
 24· ·or upgrades and in-situ treatment, were


www.huseby.com          Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                   YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 112 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                      Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 37

 ·1· ·considered equally protective in our
 ·2· ·analysis.
 ·3· · · · We also look at the ability of these
 ·4· ·alternatives to comply with what we call
 ·5· ·applicable or relevant appropriate
 ·6· ·requirements.· And that is an evaluation of
 ·7· ·the ability of an alternative to meet
 ·8· ·federal, state environmental statutes and
 ·9· ·regulations.· And, again, in the case of
 10· ·both of these alternatives, we expect that
 11· ·they would both achieve those requirements.
 12· · · · We also looked at long-term
 13· ·effectiveness, and that evaluates the
 14· ·ability of a clean-up alternative to protect
 15· ·human health and the environment over time.
 16· ·And there is a difference here, as you can
 17· ·see.
 18· · · · The in-situ treatment is going to
 19· ·achieve the remedial action objective in a
 20· ·significantly shorter period of time.· We're
 21· ·estimating five years versus what I had
 22· ·mentioned earlier that it would be 30 years
 23· ·for the groundwater extraction and treatment
 24· ·system.· You know, you don't need a degree


www.huseby.com          Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                   YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 113 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 38

 ·1· ·in math to know that that's a significant
 ·2· ·difference.· Right?· So that's noteworthy.
 ·3· · · · The other criteria -- next criteria we
 ·4· ·look at is reduction of toxicity, mobility
 ·5· ·in volume of contaminants via treatment.
 ·6· ·And, in our analysis here, we note that the
 ·7· ·groundwater extraction and treatment system
 ·8· ·is going to treat less contaminant mass
 ·9· ·versus in-situ treatment, which will have
 10· ·the capability of really directly targeting
 11· ·where the remaining sources of groundwater
 12· ·contamination are.· So that's also, I would
 13· ·say, a significant difference.
 14· · · · So the remaining criteria include what
 15· ·we call short-term effectiveness.· And that
 16· ·just considers the time it takes to
 17· ·implement the cleanup, and it looks at
 18· ·potential risks to the community or on-site
 19· ·workers and the environment during the
 20· ·construction of an environmental clean-up
 21· ·alternative.· And there weren't really any
 22· ·significant short-term risks associated with
 23· ·either alternative either to the community
 24· ·or the environment.


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 114 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                       Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 39

 ·1· · · · In terms of implementability, that looks
 ·2· ·at technical and administrative factors.
 ·3· ·For example, the availability of materials
 ·4· ·and services and, administratively, the
 ·5· ·degree of permitting involved, for example,
 ·6· ·during the implementation of a clean-up
 ·7· ·alternative.
 ·8· · · · And we consider both of these
 ·9· ·alternatives implementable.· The groundwater
 10· ·extraction and treatment system option has
 11· ·some grayer implementability challenges
 12· ·compared to the in-situ treatment because
 13· ·typically with groundwater extraction and
 14· ·treatment systems, there's a ramp-up or
 15· ·start-up period and so the level of effort
 16· ·involved in that is greater than what we
 17· ·anticipate would happen with in-situ
 18· ·treatment.
 19· · · · Cost is a consideration as well for the
 20· ·evaluation criteria.· We estimate capital
 21· ·and annual operation and maintenance costs
 22· ·as well as a calculation of present worth.
 23· ·And what you can see there -- hopefully
 24· ·that's reasonably easy to follow.· The first


www.huseby.com           Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                    YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 115 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 40

 ·1· ·numbers represent -- are associated with the
 ·2· ·groundwater extraction and treatment system.
 ·3· ·The second number is -- obviously is looking
 ·4· ·at in-situ treatment.
 ·5· · · · And, again, the net on this is that it
 ·6· ·is substantially more cost-effective to use
 ·7· ·the in-situ treatment on the present work
 ·8· ·basis, but what you see is the capital costs
 ·9· ·are greater for what we would be required to
 10· ·do to the existing groundwater extraction
 11· ·and treatment system; and given that we
 12· ·anticipate that the in-situ treatment may
 13· ·only take upwards of five injections
 14· ·compared to 30 years of operating and
 15· ·maintaining a groundwater extraction and
 16· ·treatment system, that's why you see that
 17· ·cost differential of, for example, $747,000
 18· ·versus $40,000.· So that's, in a nutshell,
 19· ·the cost analysis.
 20· · · · And then finally -- next slide.· The two
 21· ·remaining evaluation criteria have to do
 22· ·with whether the state -- where the state
 23· ·falls out on accepting our proposed
 24· ·environmental clean-up alternative.· And the


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 116 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                      Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 41

 ·1· ·state has concurred with us on the in-situ
 ·2· ·treatment as a preferred alternative.
 ·3· · · · And as far as community acceptance goes,
 ·4· ·we evaluate that after we go through our
 ·5· ·public comment period, have this virtual
 ·6· ·public meeting.· We look at input that's
 ·7· ·provided and provide responses to any
 ·8· ·questions that are posed, and we gauge what
 ·9· ·the level of community acceptance is for our
 10· ·proposed approach.· So that's a comparative
 11· ·analysis based on our required evaluation
 12· ·criteria.
 13· · · · And as you can see on the next slide
 14· ·where we fall out is -- and I don't think
 15· ·I'm breaking any news at this meeting; but
 16· ·we do prefer in-situ treatment to address
 17· ·the remaining source areas of groundwater
 18· ·contamination.· It will involve an estimated
 19· ·five rounds of injections targeting those
 20· ·source areas, and we would be doing sampling
 21· ·before, during, and after to monitor the
 22· ·performance after each injection.
 23· · · · Rich, here you raised another question,
 24· ·so I'll touch on it.· You had asked about


www.huseby.com          Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                   YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 117 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 42

 ·1· ·chromium levels, would they fall within
 ·2· ·allowable limits after the injection ceased.
 ·3· · · · And the short answer is yes, that
 ·4· ·there's -- in the technical documents,
 ·5· ·there's reference to some of the scientific
 ·6· ·literature that we utilized to, you know, in
 ·7· ·our assessment of things.· But that
 ·8· ·information indicates that those levels
 ·9· ·would re-equilibrate once the injections are
 10· ·done.· So that was another one of your --
 11· ·another one of your questions that you had
 12· ·raised with us.
 13· · · · And then our preferred approach would
 14· ·also incorporate, of course, long-term
 15· ·monitoring to make sure there is no
 16· ·migration or any changes in the site related
 17· ·to contamination that's in the groundwater.
 18· · · · And then, finally, there would be
 19· ·institutional controls in the form of a
 20· ·classification exception area/well
 21· ·restriction area and a deed notice
 22· ·implemented as part of this approach.
 23· · · · So you can see the bullet at the bottom
 24· ·is that the clean-up action will result in


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 118 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 43

 ·1· ·reduction of the levels within approximately
 ·2· ·five years to reach the remedial action
 ·3· ·objective that we've established.
 ·4· · · · As I mentioned -- well, maybe -- I don't
 ·5· ·think I did mention it.· There weren't any
 ·6· ·exceedances of New Jersey's Groundwater
 ·7· ·Quality standards for metals or VOCs in any
 ·8· ·of the off-site property wells during the
 ·9· ·ISCO pilot study.· So we don't have any data
 10· ·to suggest that there's any off-site
 11· ·contamination at this point.· Related to the
 12· ·site, that is.
 13· · · · Rich, that was another one of your
 14· ·questions, and I want to make sure I touched
 15· ·on that as well.
 16· · · · So I believe this is my final slide.· So
 17· ·just, in sum, the basis for our preferred
 18· ·approach is really summed up in these
 19· ·bullets.· You know, the in-situ treatment is
 20· ·a proven clean-up technology.· We truthed it
 21· ·with a pilot study which deals with the
 22· ·site-specific conditions.
 23· · · · We believe it will be more effective
 24· ·than the groundwater extraction and


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 119 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 44

 ·1· ·treatment system in terms of upgrading that
 ·2· ·and restarting that up by virtue of the
 ·3· ·in-situ treatment being able to target the
 ·4· ·contamination more effectively.
 ·5· · · · When we do the design in this, there
 ·6· ·will be flexibility to adjust the number and
 ·7· ·location of the objectives -- excuse me,
 ·8· ·injections if we need to.· There is less
 ·9· ·maintenance in the in-situ treatment
 10· ·alternative versus the groundwater
 11· ·extraction and treatment system.
 12· · · · As I mentioned a couple of times, we'll
 13· ·retain the remedial action objective in a
 14· ·much short time rate and at lower cost.
 15· · · · And the groundwater extraction and
 16· ·treatment system will remain in place until
 17· ·we achieve the remedial action objective in
 18· ·case things don't go as we expect them to go
 19· ·or we anticipate them to go.
 20· · · · The bottom bullet there that's
 21· ·highlighted, you'll see it in every one of
 22· ·our decision documents.· Preferred
 23· ·alternative -- for the option that we
 24· ·select, I should say -- it really provides


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 120 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 45

 ·1· ·the best balance of tradeoffs against EPA's
 ·2· ·evaluation criteria.
 ·3· · · · So that ends the technical portion of
 ·4· ·it.· Natalie's got just a few more slides.
 ·5· ·You don't have to hear me talk anymore
 ·6· ·unless you have a question for me.· Thanks
 ·7· ·for listening.· Natalie.
 ·8· · · · MS. LONEY:· Thank you, Perry.· So just
 ·9· ·to kind of give a quick overview of the next
 10· ·step, the information in this meeting is
 11· ·provide -- will be the responses to
 12· ·questions that are raised in this meeting,
 13· ·along with the transcript and EPA's final
 14· ·decision with regard to this proposed plan,
 15· ·will be published in the administrative
 16· ·record.
 17· · · · The comment period for this particular
 18· ·remedy, the comment period is a 30-day
 19· ·comment period.· So it closes on the 29th of
 20· ·August.· You have until August 29th to
 21· ·submit your comments, written either via
 22· ·e-mail or they can be mailed regular U.S.
 23· ·mail.· You can send that directly to the
 24· ·project manager for this site, which Tamara


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 121 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 46

 ·1· ·Rossi.
 ·2· · · · And, again, the questions that are
 ·3· ·raised that are submitted to us either
 ·4· ·through e-mail or even the questions that
 ·5· ·are raised tonight, we will be responding to
 ·6· ·them formally as part of that record of
 ·7· ·decision in a document called a
 ·8· ·responsiveness summary.
 ·9· · · · As I said, you can submit your comments
 10· ·in writing.· They need to be submitted to
 11· ·EPA.· They should be postmarked no later
 12· ·than August 29th, and you can send them to
 13· ·Tamara Rossi, who's the project manager, or
 14· ·you can e-mail them to her if you don't
 15· ·remember -- if you don't have a question
 16· ·tonight but remember it later on, you have
 17· ·until the 29th of August to submit it to
 18· ·her.
 19· · · · All the site-related information is
 20· ·available on EPA's site profile page for the
 21· ·Superfund site, which is listed here.
 22· ·Epa.gov/superfund/cosden.· All of the
 23· ·site-related information is housed there, or
 24· ·you can contact me for a hard copy.


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 122 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 47

 ·1· · · · Rich called me earlier today to get some
 ·2· ·information about tonight's meeting, so,
 ·3· ·Rich, I know you already have my number.
 ·4· ·And, Robert, if you need to reach out to me
 ·5· ·as well, my information is -- we'll provide
 ·6· ·my information to you.
 ·7· · · · So that's it.· That's it for the formal
 ·8· ·part of EPA's presentation.· We're now going
 ·9· ·to open up the floor for Q&A.· Don't
 10· ·everyone rush to ask their questions all at
 11· ·once.
 12· · · · MR. RICH:· I want to say thank you so
 13· ·much to Perry and Jeff and Natalie for just
 14· ·a phenomenal -- going over all those slides.
 15· · · · I have to go back and revisit something.
 16· ·When we did talk about the PFAS chemicals,
 17· ·understanding that it's something that we
 18· ·have to address at a later time, the
 19· ·question is are we going to attempt to
 20· ·address that concurrent with the ISCO
 21· ·injections or is this going to be do five
 22· ·years and then go back and visit the PFAS?
 23· · · · MR. JOSEPHSON:· I'll answer.· What we
 24· ·would do is we have to establish if there's


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 123 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 48

 ·1· ·a source on the site or if it's an off-site
 ·2· ·source.· So that's going to be the first
 ·3· ·thing we do because if it's an off-site
 ·4· ·source that's coming on, no matter what we
 ·5· ·do, it will never be taken care of.
 ·6· · · · MR. PERRY:· Right.· Yes.
 ·7· · · · MR. JOSEPHSON:· As long as you
 ·8· ·understand that.
 ·9· · · · The second part is that we would do that
 10· ·-- we would do installation of wells kind of
 11· ·over towards the railroad track area.· It's
 12· ·not towards the town and city center area
 13· ·and -- because that's where it seems to be
 14· ·the highest concentrations and just, you
 15· ·know, determine is there something -- there
 16· ·are commercial facilities on the other side
 17· ·of the railroad tracks, you know, is it
 18· ·coming from that direction or for some
 19· ·reason did it end up that was where material
 20· ·was dumped on the Cosden site.
 21· · · · Some of the historic monitoring raw data
 22· ·we have shows that the wells where there
 23· ·were the highest levels of PFAS didn't
 24· ·really ever necessarily have the highest


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 124 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                       Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 49

 ·1· ·levels or, in some cases, there were no
 ·2· ·levels of the VOCs.· And so that's another
 ·3· ·kind of, you know, more confusing
 ·4· ·information about it.· So we have to
 ·5· ·establish that.
 ·6· · · · The second part would be to determine if
 ·7· ·there's really -- what kind of a risk exists
 ·8· ·from it if it is from the site.· The levels
 ·9· ·are above the state standard, but they're
 10· ·not really, really very high above it.· And
 11· ·so we would -- the risk assessment
 12· ·information we have presented today was
 13· ·based on the CVOC type contaminants.· We
 14· ·probably would have to relook at a risk
 15· ·assessment and determine what kind of a risk
 16· ·exists from this.
 17· · · · We know that nobody is really drinking
 18· ·the water here, and we know that this isn't
 19· ·a highly volatile material.· And so it's
 20· ·likely that the risk isn't going to be all
 21· ·that high.
 22· · · · But we would probably want to, if we
 23· ·need to, you know, come up with some --
 24· ·either a plan for monitoring, if they're not


www.huseby.com           Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                    YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 125 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 50

 ·1· ·that high and they're not really presenting
 ·2· ·a real risk, to ensure that they are, you
 ·3· ·know, maintaining a stable low level.
 ·4· · · · Or if we feel as though treatment would
 ·5· ·be effective, you know, we would have to go
 ·6· ·through a process similar to this and
 ·7· ·establish what we're going to do.
 ·8· · · · But it can happen concurrently.· If we
 ·9· ·get the data and we get it early enough and
 10· ·it's clear, we can do that at the same time
 11· ·and try not to have to do it sequentially,
 12· ·you know, rather, to do it concurrently.
 13· · · · MR. RICH:· Okay.· And would that be
 14· ·another remedy modification or is that going
 15· ·to be something separate?
 16· · · · MR. JOSEPHSON:· If we had to do another
 17· ·remedy modification, we would do that.
 18· · · · MR. RICH:· Okay.
 19· · · · MR. JOSEPHSON:· That would be a result
 20· ·of what the risk assessment says, really.
 21· · · · MR. RICH:· Right.· Understand.· And that
 22· ·was really the only real other question.
 23· · · · I'll put a statement out just so
 24· ·everybody on this call and this Teams


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 126 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                      Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 51

 ·1· ·meeting understands.· The reason that
 ·2· ·Beverly is so interested in this property,
 ·3· ·aside from the environmental issues that
 ·4· ·that site has posed for decades, you know,
 ·5· ·Cosden is about 6.7 acres.· The City of
 ·6· ·Beverly only has 19.1 acres of vacant land,
 ·7· ·and Cosden is 6.7 acres of that.
 ·8· · · · So from our perspective, we're only a
 ·9· ·half square mile.· So we are very
 10· ·geographically constrained.· So any
 11· ·available property that can be used for
 12· ·economic development and redevelopment
 13· ·obviously is very important to us, even
 14· ·aside from the environmental aspect of it.
 15· ·It's something that we'd like to see
 16· ·remediated.
 17· · · · And, quite frankly, it's a no-brainer to
 18· ·do ISCO versus the groundwater extraction.
 19· ·It's a much better process.· It's much more
 20· ·effective.· The longer the contaminant sits
 21· ·there, it's not going to stay in one place;
 22· ·it's going to migrate.· So it's always
 23· ·better to try to mitigate that as quickly as
 24· ·possible.


www.huseby.com          Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                   YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 127 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 52

 ·1· · · · So we appreciate everything everybody is
 ·2· ·doing.· This is a great plan.· We're happy
 ·3· ·to see you guys on are on top of the PFAS
 ·4· ·and also the heavy metal contaminant loads.
 ·5· ·Hopefully we can get this remediated and
 ·6· ·clear the site sooner rather than later.· So
 ·7· ·thank you for everybody who allowed us to
 ·8· ·join this evening.
 ·9· · · · MR. JOSEPHSON:· You're welcome.· Thank
 10· ·you for attending.
 11· · · · MR. KATZ:· Thanks for your interest,
 12· ·Rich.
 13· · · · MR. RICH:· Bob, do you have anything?
 14· · · · MR. KATZ:· Maybe not.· We might have
 15· ·lost him three-quarters of the way through.
 16· ·The Phillies started at 6:40.· So, I don't
 17· ·know, Robert, maybe -- did you dual task?
 18· · · · MR. LOWDEN:· I'll be watching it, but
 19· ·not yet.
 20· · · · I appreciate, you know, all the
 21· ·information tonight.· Rich and I have gone
 22· ·over different things that were given to us,
 23· ·but from day one, I've been following.· It
 24· ·sounds like it's finally coming to a close.


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 128 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 53

 ·1· · · · And like Rich said, we would -- you
 ·2· ·know, we'll be happy to start thinking of
 ·3· ·what we could put there.· Definitely no
 ·4· ·housing, no parks or anything like that, but
 ·5· ·something to help, you know, a little bit --
 ·6· ·get some taxes for that property.· It's not
 ·7· ·going to make or break us, but it's going to
 ·8· ·be -- it's a pretty significant size
 ·9· ·compared to everything else we have.
 10· · · · But I do appreciate, you know, all the
 11· ·work you're putting into this and we're --
 12· ·I'm also the chairman of the sewer
 13· ·authority.· So we -- I mean, we get hit from
 14· ·different things with all these contaminants
 15· ·too, and sometimes you scratch your head,
 16· ·you know, like, we have to cave out so much.
 17· ·Well, we found out the water company is
 18· ·putting that much in, you know, so it's,
 19· ·like, okay.
 20· · · · But that property is definitely
 21· ·something we'd like to get back on the tax
 22· ·roles in a few years.· Hopefully I'm still
 23· ·around then.
 24· · · · MR. RICH:· And just for context for the


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 129 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 54

 ·1· ·people on the call, Bob was born and raised
 ·2· ·in Beverly and he was our mayor for many
 ·3· ·years.· In fact, he was our mayor when a lot
 ·4· ·of this went on with Cosden and the initial
 ·5· ·plaintiffs and so forth.· He's joining us
 ·6· ·again as a council person and he's been on
 ·7· ·council again since 2013.· So he's been one
 ·8· ·of our community's leaders for very many
 ·9· ·years.
 10· · · · MS. LONEY:· Thank you for that.· So I
 11· ·don't think there are any more questions
 12· ·since the team members of the audience asked
 13· ·their questions.· We're going to close out
 14· ·the meeting.
 15· · · · Again, the comment period closes on the
 16· ·29th.· Any questions, concerns, issues that
 17· ·may come up between now and then, please
 18· ·make sure to send that to us.
 19· · · · And, again, I think that's pretty much
 20· ·it for the night.· So thank you so much for
 21· ·participating, and this officially ends the
 22· ·public meeting.· Thank you.
 23
 24· ·(PUBLIC MEETING CONCLUDED AT 7:05 p.m.)


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 130 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                     Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       Page 55

 ·1· · · · · · · · · C E R T I F I C A T E

 ·2

 ·3· ·COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
 · · ·Norfolk, SS.
 ·4

 ·5· · · · · · I, DAWN MACK-BOADEN, CSR #153120, RPR, and
 · · ·a Notary Public duly qualified in and for the
 ·6· ·Commonwealth of Massachusetts, do hereby certify
 · · ·that:
 ·7
 · · · · · · · THE ABOVE PUBLIC MEETING NOTES are a true
 ·8· ·and correct transcription of my original
 · · ·stenographic notes taken in the forgoing matter, to
 ·9· ·the best of my knowledge, skill and ability.

 10· · · · · · I further certify that I am neither
 · · ·attorney or counsel for, nor related to or employed
 11· ·by any of the parties to the action in which this
 · · ·deposition is taken; and furthermore, that I am not
 12· ·a relative or employee of any attorney or counsel
 · · ·employed by the parties thereto or financially
 13· ·interested in the action.

 14· · · · · · IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my
 · · ·hand and affixed my Notarial seal this 22nd day of
 15· ·August, 2022.

 16

 17

 18· · · · · · · · ·Dawn Mack-Boaden, RPR
 · · · · · · · · · ·Notary Public
 19

 20
 · · ·My Commission Expires:· August 26, 2027
 21

 22
 · · ·THE FOREGOING CERTIFICATION OF THIS TRANSCRIPT DOES
 23· ·NOT APPLY TO ANY REPRODUCTION AND/OR DISTRIBUTION OF
 · · ·THE SAME BY ANY MEANS UNLESS UNDER THE DIRECT
 24· ·CONTROL AND/OR SUPERVISION OF THE CERTIFYING COURT
 · · ·REPORTER.


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 131 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                              Public Meeting on 08/16/2022     ·Index: $40,000..address
                      2002     16:19                           acceptance
          $                                             5         41:3,9
                      2003     17:2
 $40,000                                      500    13:20     accepting
                      2007    17:11,
   40:18                  18,21                                   40:23
 $747,000             2009    17:18                     6      access       4:22
   40:17                  35:5                                 achieve
                                              6.7    51:5,7
                      2013     54:7                               32:12
          0                                   6:04     3:3        37:11,19
                      2017    19:17           6:40     52:16      44:17
 03     17:2              22:13
                                                               acres      51:5,
                      2018     35:5                     7         6,7
          1
                      2021    21:1                             action   8:22
                                              70s    15:8
 1,2,3     24:4           22:16                                   14:8 16:6
   29:1                                       74     21:22        32:2,14,
                      25     19:9
 1,4  24:2                                    78     21:22        19,23
                      29th    45:19,
   28:14 29:1                                 7:05     54:24      34:13,23
                          20 46:12,
                                                                  37:19
 13,000       35:6        17 54:16
                                                                  42:24 43:2
                                                        8
 16     19:13                                                     44:13,17
                                 3
 19.1     51:6                                80s  14:18       actions
                      30    34:22               15:8,22           12:13
 1970s     14:19
                          37:22               82     16:10     activities
 1980  14:23              40:14
   15:13                                      87     12:10        9:3
                      30-day         45:18                     add     34:17
 1980's       11:18                           89     16:6
                      300-million
 1986     15:24                                                addition        4:9
                          35:4                          9         23:12
 1987     16:4
                                                               additional
 1992     12:20                  4            90s    12:13
                                                                  13:17 14:7
 1998     13:3        4     29:6              92     12:18        19:6 23:15
 1999     16:19                                                   24:11
                      400     13:21                     A         32:19
                      406     29:7                                34:17
          2                                   ability 30:4
                      40s     14:18             37:3,7,14      address
 20     19:9                                                      14:10


www.huseby.com                   Huseby Global Litigation                800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 132 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                           Public Meeting on 08/16/2022           ·Index: addressed..aware
   17:12,22            8:24 11:9            apparently               51:14
   24:16               35:14                  15:22                assesses
   41:16               37:7,14              applicable               20:8
   47:18,20            38:21,23               37:5
                       39:7 40:24                                  assessment
 addressed
                       41:2                 approach                 6:7,8
   18:2                                       7:23 8:8,              7:12,22
                       44:10,23
 addresses                                    15 17:8                30:6,10,20
                      alternatives
   36:17                                      19:5 36:11             31:23 42:7
                       7:7 33:2,              41:10                  49:11,15
 adds  14:7            5,8 34:11
   32:17                                      42:13,22               50:20
                       36:2,4,5,              43:18
                       9,13,22                                     assessments
 adjust    44:6
                       37:4,10              approximately            31:7
 administrative                               35:6 43:1
                       39:9                                        association
   39:2 45:15
                      amendment             area  16:7               6:10
 administrative                               19:9 26:10
 ly 39:4               11:21                                       assume      5:19
                       14:1,4                 27:14
 ado     5:5                                  33:12,14,            assumptions
                       32:17 33:6
                                              18 34:3                31:6,7
 adult     31:15      American                42:21                attempt
 adverse               28:16                  48:11,12               47:19
   23:22              analysis
   30:11                                    area/well              attending
                       19:7 23:16             33:11 34:3             52:10
 affect    24:23       35:24 36:8             42:20
                       37:2 38:6                                   attenuated
 agenda    3:12                             areas  14:11,            29:10
                       40:19
 aging     35:10       41:11                  12 23:7
                                                                   audience       5:9
           7:19                               32:20
 ahead                and/or     7:14                                54:12
   8:20                                       34:21
                      animals                 41:17,20             August  45:20
 air  7:2              31:21                                         46:12,17
   18:12                                    Army     4:10
                      annual     39:21                             authority
                                            array     11:11
 allowable                                                           53:13
                      anticipate
   42:2                                     arrays        11:8
                       39:17                                       availability
 allowed       52:7    40:12                ascertain                39:3
                       44:19                  6:14
 alternative                                                       aware  12:21
   7:9,10             anymore     45:5      aspect        11:24      28:5 31:5


www.huseby.com                 Huseby Global Litigation                      800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 133 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                      COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                          Public Meeting on 08/16/2022           ·Index: back..chromium
                      14:9 19:19           bunch     18:9          44:18
          B           22:4 25:3            Burlington            cases  31:8
                      35:12 53:5             14:20                 32:9 49:1
 back  3:17
   10:10             blue     22:13        by-products           category
   15:7,13           Bob 52:13               20:3 35:20            24:6
   29:9               54:1                                       cave     53:16
   47:15,22                                          C
                     born     54:1                               ceased      42:2
   53:21
                     bottom     21:4       calculation           center      48:12
 background
                      42:23                  39:22
   14:14 29:8                                                    cetera      15:19
                      44:20
 balance      45:1                         call  6:21
                     boundaries                                  chairman
                                             23:17 37:4
 based  8:23          21:16                                        53:12
                                             38:15
   13:17                                     50:24 54:1          challenges
                     break     19:22
   15:12                                                           39:11
                      53:7                 called  3:21
   22:24
   41:11             breakdown               13:9 46:7           change  3:16
   49:13              20:1                   47:1                  21:20,22
                     breaking              cancer        30:15   characterizati
 basement
                                             31:18               on 6:20
   18:10              41:15
                                           cap     9:9           characterize
 basically           briefly
                      36:12                                        30:18
   8:16,17                                 capability
   26:14             Bucks     27:21         38:10               chemical      3:6
   30:22                                                           19:17
                     building              capital
                                                                   20:1,14
 basis  32:11         12:22 14:5             39:20 40:8
                                                                   23:2,11,20
   40:8 43:17         16:12,13,            care  29:11             35:11
 began     17:18      15,16                  48:5                chemicals
                      18:22
 Beverly      28:2                         career        15:4      19:23
   51:2,6            buildings                                     21:23
                                           case  6:16
   54:2               18:11                                        27:17
                                             9:5,9
 biphenyls           bullet     32:16        11:14 13:5            28:12 30:1
   13:10              42:23                  18:15,16              47:16
   16:18              44:20                  19:24               child     31:15
   17:15             bullets                 31:10               chromium
 bit     12:11        43:19                  36:21 37:9            16:17


www.huseby.com                Huseby Global Litigation                    800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 134 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                         Public Meeting on 08/16/2022          ·Index: circle..confined
   17:14 42:1        11:6 12:1,             23:20                24 25:8,23
 circle     26:21    8 14:10              community              26:1,3
                     15:23                  3:9 4:2              27:24 35:7
 citizen     6:3     16:2,16                8:1 10:17,         concentrations
 city  48:12         32:12 33:3             20 38:18,            20:18
   51:5              34:5,9,21              23 41:3,9            21:20,23
                     38:17                                       22:12,15
 clarified                                community's
   13:7             cleanups                54:8                 23:4 48:14
                     9:22 33:22                                concern       21:9
 clarify     13:6                         company
                    clear     50:10         53:17                22:3,8
 class  13:9
                     52:6                                        27:7 28:13
   24:12,23                               comparative
                    close 28:23                                  30:1 32:11
   25:7 27:23                               36:8 41:10
                     52:24                                     concerns
 classification                           compared
                     54:13                                       54:16
   33:11 34:2                               39:12
   42:20            closes     45:19        40:14 53:9         concluded
                     54:15                                       23:10
 clean     7:23                           complete
                    coating                                      31:14
 clean-up                                   11:6,23              54:24
                     14:16                  14:2 18:22
   5:18 7:6,
                                                               conclusions
   7,9,10 8:8       Coatings     3:6      completed              22:22
   10:14            color     22:14         12:17 14:6
   11:17                                                       concurred
                    comfortable             15:23 17:2
   13:7,18,23                               20:24                41:1
   17:8 19:5         4:24
                                                               concurrent
   32:9 33:2        comment     8:11      comply        37:4
                                                                 47:20
   34:11,13          41:5                 component
                                                               concurrently
   35:13             45:17,18,              13:15 34:1
   36:10             19 54:15                                    50:8,12
                                          compound
   37:14            comments                19:12              condition
   38:20 39:6        45:21 46:9             20:16,24             15:17
   40:24                                    22:8 23:4          conditions
   42:24            commercial
                     48:16                  24:3                 7:15 14:21
   43:20                                                         43:22
                                          compounds
 cleaned     10:5   common 26:17
                     33:7 34:6              13:9 17:12         confined
 cleanup 5:15                               18:6,15,19           18:14
   8:15 10:11       commonly                24:2,7,12,


www.huseby.com               Huseby Global Litigation                    800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 135 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                       Public Meeting on 08/16/2022         ·Index: confusing..day
 confusing         27:14              control                40:8
   49:3            28:24                33:12               council
 conjunction       32:7,10            controls               54:6,7
   7:11 14:22      38:8 51:20           33:10
                   52:4                                     county       14:20
   24:18                                36:19,20             15:15
 conservative     contaminants          42:19                27:21
   31:5,7          17:23 20:2         convey        22:10
                   21:9 22:3,                               couple 10:6,
 consideration     7 23:17            conveyed               15 13:14
   39:19           24:17                24:14                24:21
 considerations    35:20 38:5         coordinator            28:17
   11:1            49:13                3:9 4:2              44:12
                   53:14                                    court     15:21
 considered                           copy     46:24
   18:22 24:3     contaminated                              cracks       18:10
                                      Corps     4:10
   37:1            21:5
                                      correct       5:8,    Creek     27:8
                   31:12,16
 considers                              10                   28:7
                   35:4
   38:16                                                    criteria      7:8
                  contamination       Cosden  3:5
 constrained                            5:15,20              36:7,14
                   6:24 7:4
   51:10                                6:16 9:5,            38:3,14
                   14:13 16:8
 constructed                            9,17                 39:20
                   19:2,11,15
   9:2,6 16:7                           11:14,17             40:21
                   22:19 23:8
   17:10,11                             14:15                41:12 45:2
                   32:21
 construction      33:15                15:20,22            current
   8:22 12:23      38:12                25:10,14             19:1,4
   38:20           41:18                30:23                30:23
                   42:17                32:13 33:4          cutting      9:11
 contact 30:8                           48:20
                   43:11 44:4
   31:2 46:24                           51:5,7              CVOC     49:13
                  contaminations
 contained                              54:4
                   25:13                                             D
   17:22                              cost  39:19
                  context
 containers                             40:17,19            dashed       22:11
                   53:24
   16:9                                 44:14
                  continue                                  data 25:10
 contaminant                          cost-effective         43:9 48:21
                   20:19 23:6
   23:18 24:4                           40:6                 50:9
   26:17          continues
                                      costs     39:21       day     52:23
                   28:21

www.huseby.com           Huseby Global Litigation                    800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 136 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                         Public Meeting on 08/16/2022            ·Index: deal..e-mail
 deal  10:8         delved     11:15        48:15              discovery
   14:4             demolition              49:6,15             5:23
 deals     43:21     12:22                determined           discussion
 debris     16:16    16:14                  7:4                 28:24

 decades     51:4   DEP   28:18           determining          disposal
                    department              32:11               12:22
 decision                                                       13:2,9
   8:3,4,7,          14:20                developed
                     15:5,11                26:18               16:15
   14,19 9:1
   10:2,4            24:8                 developing           document      8:3
   11:22            departments             6:10                46:7
   12:4,19,20        15:9                 development          documented
   13:12            depending               51:12               17:1
   16:11 17:8        22:14                                     documents
   44:22                                  develops       7:7
                    depiction                                   8:7 29:6
   45:14 46:7                             difference            42:4 44:22
                     22:6                   37:16
 decisions                                                     drinking
   10:21            dermal     30:8         38:2,13
                                                                31:2,12
 deed     42:21     design 8:16,          differences           49:17
                     17,18,21,              13:6
 define     23:18    23 12:23                                  drives       20:7
                                          differential
 definition          24:18 44:5             40:17              drum     16:1
   20:4 21:11       designed                                   drums 12:14
                                          digression
 degrading           8:20 26:2              18:3                15:18 16:9
   20:17            details     25:4                           dual     52:17
                                          dioxane 24:2
 degree     37:24   detected                28:14 29:1         due 22:19
   39:5              18:19                                      26:15
                                          direct        31:2
 Delaware            21:10 24:8                                dumped       48:20
   26:10 28:7        29:7                 direction
                                            48:18              duration
 delete     9:24    determination                               34:21
                     31:20                directly
 delineate                                  38:10
   33:14            determine               45:23                       E
 delineated          6:23 20:15
                     21:14                discovered           e-mail 45:22
   33:18                                    15:1
                     29:17                                      46:4,14



www.huseby.com               Huseby Global Litigation                   800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 137 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                         Public Meeting on 08/16/2022 ·Index: earlier..evaluations
 earlier            element     34:7      environmental         32:4,6,15,
   12:17            elements                5:18 6:11,          23 33:13
   17:20 34:8        33:8                   22,24 8:15          43:3
   37:22 47:1                               9:22 12:1          establishes
                    elevated                17:7 19:4
 early     12:13     31:17,20                                   32:18
   50:9                                     24:9 30:2
                                            36:10 37:8         estimate
                    eluvial     28:9
 easy     39:24                             38:20               39:20
                    emergency
 ecological                                 40:24              estimated
                     16:1,6
   7:14 23:23                               51:3,14             34:22 35:3
   29:22            emerging                                    41:18
                                          envisioned
   31:19,21          23:17,18
                                            10:12              estimating
                     24:4 27:14
 economic            28:23                EPA  4:7              37:21
   51:12                                    10:24 16:5         Ethylbenzene
                    Emily     4:9
 effect     22:19                           19:3 32:7           21:24
   25:24            end 30:15               46:11
                                                               evaluate
                     48:19
 effective                                EPA's  6:15           29:20 34:1
   20:17            ends 45:3               8:7 45:1,           36:4,5
   43:23 50:5        54:21                  13 46:20            41:4
   51:20            energy     11:10        47:8
                                                               evaluated
 effectively        engage     10:20      EPA-SCREENING         20:22
   44:4                                     18:20               30:9,23
                    engineering
 effectiveness                            Epa.gov/              33:5
                     8:17 36:19
   37:13                                  superfund/           evaluates
                    Engineers             cosden.
   38:15                                                        7:6 34:1
                     4:10                   46:22
 effects                                                        37:13
                    ensure     10:11      equally       37:1
   30:12,14,                                                   evaluating
                     50:2
   16 31:18                               equipment             19:14 33:2
                    enter     23:21         14:17
 effort     4:8                                                evaluation
   39:15            environment             35:10               7:8 18:17
                     23:21,22             establish             36:7 37:6
 efforts
                     30:4 32:5              25:9 32:1           39:20
   10:19
                     36:16,18               47:24 49:5          40:21
 elaborate           37:15                  50:7                41:11 45:2
   25:3,18           38:19,24
                                          established          evaluations



www.huseby.com               Huseby Global Litigation                 800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 138 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                         Public Meeting on 08/16/2022            ·Index: evening..form
   10:3             expose       18:21    fairly        31:5     27:11
 evening     52:8   exposed      30:7     fall  28:20           final 21:1
 exam     22:5       31:16                  41:14 42:1           30:17
                    exposure              falls  24:5            43:16
 excavation                                                      45:13
   13:8              30:6,13,19             40:23
                                                                finally
 exceedances        extent 6:23           familiar  5:2
                     7:3,13                 8:5 14:15            10:23
   43:6                                                          40:20
                     19:2,14                18:4,12
 Excellent           29:18                  20:5 23:24           42:18
   17:6                                     27:4 33:20           52:24
                    extraction
 exception           12:24                familiarity           find 18:8
   33:11 34:3        13:15                  5:19 29:16           28:24
   42:20             17:9,21                                    finding     27:9
                                          family        27:5
 excuse     44:7     20:20                                      fire     14:22
                     23:13                feasibility
 exfiltrate                                 7:5,21              five-year
                     34:14,18
   28:8                                     12:16                10:7 34:7
                     35:1 36:22
 exist     32:24     37:23 38:7           features              flexibility
 existing            39:10,13               4:16 9:18,           44:6
   14:9 32:3,        40:2,10,15             19                  floor     3:18
   14 33:3           43:24
                                          federal 6:3            47:9
   34:16 35:1        44:11,15
                                            15:3 16:5           flow     26:9
   40:10             51:18
                                            37:8
 exists     20:11   eye    22:5                                 focus     22:1
                                          feel     50:4          23:7
   32:18
   49:7,16                   F            feet     19:9         folks     15:6
 expect     37:10                         fence  9:10           follow     39:24
                    facilities              16:7 26:7,
   44:18             48:16                                      footprint
                                            13
 explain     18:3   facility      9:8                            21:7 22:18
   19:19                                  field     4:11
                     34:17                  20:6                forced     18:7
 explained
                    fact 10:5             fields        11:5,   forever
   4:23              26:15 54:3                                  27:17
                                            6
 explanation
                    factors               figure  7:13          form 33:11
   13:5 17:19        35:14 39:2                                  42:19
                                            22:6,21


www.huseby.com               Huseby Global Litigation                    800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 139 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                           Public Meeting on 08/16/2022           ·Index: formal..housing
 formal  6:9          goals     10:14         38:7,11             hazardous
   13:3 47:7           32:4                   39:9,13               5:24 6:5
 formally             good     29:4           40:2,10,15          head     53:15
   46:6                                       41:17
                      government              42:17               health  7:14
 found  15:17          15:3 16:5              43:6,24               15:5,8
   26:7 53:17         gradient                44:10,15              23:22
 foundational          25:13                  51:18                 29:21
   18:10                                                            30:12,14,
                      grass 9:11            groundwater's           16 31:18
 four-step             14:22                  33:16                 32:5
   29:20              grayer     39:11      Grove     28:3          36:16,18
 frankly                                    guess  5:12             37:15
                      great     52:2
   51:17                                      15:15               hear     45:5
                      greater8:1
 frequency                                  guessing       8:4    heard     11:2
                       39:16 40:9
   30:3                                       14:15
                      ground     17:23                            heavy     52:4
 full     20:12        19:10                guys     52:3         high  49:10,
 functioning                                                        21 50:1
                      groundwater
   9:13                6:12 7:2                       H
                                                                  higher      23:7
 future       30:24    9:5 11:24                                    25:12
                                            half     51:9
 future-use            12:24
                                            hand     11:19        highest
   31:11,14            14:3,10,12
                       16:12                                        48:14,23,
                                            happen  10:5
                       17:4,7,9,                                    24
          G                                   39:17 50:8
                       17,24 18:7                                 highlighted
                                            happened
 gallons      35:4     19:6 20:19                                   44:21
                                              15:13
                       21:5,7,13                                  highly      49:19
 gauge     41:8        23:9,13              happy     52:2
 generated             24:9 29:3              53:2                historic       6:2
   11:10               31:16                                        48:21
                                            hard     46:24
 gentlemen             32:8,10,21                                 history
                       33:14,24             harmful       20:2
   29:15                                                            12:12
                       34:5,14,             hat     5:16
 geographically                                                   hit     53:13
                       19,20                haul     28:2,
   51:10               35:1,5,18,                                 housed      46:23
                                              10
 give     45:9         19 36:22                                   housing      53:4
                       37:23                hazard        29:23


www.huseby.com                 Huseby Global Litigation                    800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 140 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                           Public Meeting on 08/16/2022 ·Index: human..introduction
 human  7:14          in-situ               industrial            41:19 42:9
   29:20,21            19:17                  14:17               44:8 47:21
   32:4 36:16          20:13                information          input 7:24
   37:15               22:20                  13:17 42:8          10:21 41:6
                       23:2,11                45:10
                       35:11,15                                  inspection
          I                                   46:19,23
                       36:24                                      6:7
                                              47:2,5,6
 idea     18:13        37:18 38:9                                inspections
                                              49:4,12
 identification        39:12,17               52:21               15:17
   29:24               40:4,7,12
                                            informs       36:9   installation
                       41:1,16
 identified                                                       33:17
                       43:19                ingestion
   5:24 6:6                                                       48:10
                       44:3,9                 30:8 31:2
   14:11,24                                                      installed
   19:9               include               inhalation            17:21
                       38:14                  30:9
 identify                                                         19:13
   30:1,5             included              initial 5:23         institutional
                       12:21 13:1             6:9 12:19
 identifying                                                      33:10
                       16:14                  54:4
   15:9                                                           36:19
                       34:13
                                            initially             42:19
 impact       18:12   includes                15:20              intact     9:13
 impacts               6:20 19:6
                                            initiated
   23:23                                                         intended
                      including               15:22 16:5          17:11
 implement             30:24
                                            injected
   8:21 38:17                                                    interacted
                      inclusion               19:23               15:20
 implementabili        6:14
                                            injection
 ty 39:1,11                                                      interest
                      incorporate             21:21
 implementable
                                                                  5:14 52:11
                       10:24                  22:9,16
   39:9                33:21                  41:22 42:2         interested
 implementation        42:14                                      51:2
                                            injections
   39:6               incorporated            20:15,21           interfaced
 implemented           13:13                  21:8 22:20          15:15
   42:22              individual              23:1,2,3,6         intimate
                       4:13                   24:23               5:12
 important
                                              35:18,22
   11:13              indoor     18:12                           introduction
                                              36:1 40:13
   51:13                                                          3:13


www.huseby.com                 Huseby Global Litigation                   800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 141 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                    COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                        Public Meeting on 08/16/2022          ·Index: intrusion..Loney
 intrusion         issues       51:3     key     21:2         levels   15:3
   18:1,4,23        54:16                kind  45:9              18:20 23:8
 investigation                             48:10                 27:9 28:6,
   6:21 7:21                J              49:3,7,15             15 29:1,8,
   12:16 19:7                                                    9 42:1,8
                   Jeff 4:6              knew     27:15          43:1 48:23
   24:11
                    14:8 25:2,                                   49:1,2,8
   25:15
                    17 26:19                       L
 investigations                                               likes      28:8
                    47:13
   6:22                                  land  11:7           limit      29:6
                   Jersey       11:3       30:24 51:6
 investigative      15:16                                     limits       28:20
   23:15            28:16 32:8           landfill                42:2
                    33:13                  9:12 11:4
 involve     9:4                                              List   6:15,
   41:18           Jersey's              landfills               18 10:1
                    24:8 29:2              11:7,9                12:10 16:4
 involved
   17:14            43:6                 largely              listed       12:9
   39:5,16         join     52:8           17:14                 21:24
 involvement                             late  14:18             32:16 33:9
                   joining      3:5
   3:9 4:2                                 15:8                  46:21
                    54:5
   10:17                                 layer     6:13       listening
                   Josephson
 involves                                                        45:7
                    4:6 25:20            layers        28:9
   35:18            47:23 48:7                                literally
                                         lead  13:18,            8:21 11:18
 ISCO  22:24        50:16,19
                                           19 16:17
   23:2 24:22       52:9                                      literature
   25:21 26:1                            leaders       54:8      42:6
   27:15 43:9               K            led     19:3         live   27:20
   47:20                                 left     10:9           28:3
   51:18           Kandil       4:7
                   Katz 3:14             legislation          living       18:11
 issuance                                  36:6
   15:21            4:3 5:7,11                                loads      52:4
                    17:6 26:19           level  5:20          local      6:2
 issue  7:18        27:6,20                13:18,20
   18:23                                                         15:2
                    28:22                  29:7 32:7
 issued     7:18    29:11                  39:15 41:9         location
   12:20            52:11,14               50:3                  44:7
   16:11                                                      Loney      3:3,8


www.huseby.com              Huseby Global Litigation                    800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 142 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                           Public Meeting on 08/16/2022           ·Index: long..monitoring
   5:4,10             maintenance           media  6:12           migrated
   45:8 54:10          9:4,7,8                7:1 30:2               21:15
 long  11:19           39:21 44:9           media-specific        migration
   13:24              make 10:22              32:3                   42:16
   28:2,10             13:4 42:15           meet  10:13           mile      51:9
   48:7                43:14 53:7             37:7
                       54:18                                      milestone
 long-term                                  meeting 3:8,             10:21
   17:16              making     8:3          13,19 4:22
   33:24               9:11                                       million
                                              7:19 41:6,             13:20,21
   37:12              manager4:3,             15 45:10,
   42:14               5 45:24                12 47:2             mind      25:17
 longer       51:20    46:13                  51:1                misheard
 looked  31:10        manufactured            54:14,22,              27:23
   33:4 37:12          14:16                  24
                                                                  mitigate
                                            members                  51:23
 loop     28:23       mass     38:8
                                              54:12
 lost     52:15       material                                    mixed      19:23
                       16:1 48:19           mention       43:5
 lot     54:3                                                     mobile       35:21
                       49:19                mentioned
 low     50:3                                                     mobility
                      materials               16:3,10,14
                                                                     38:4
 LOWDEN       17:5     16:24                  32:13 34:8
   52:18                                      37:22 43:4          modification
                       25:21 26:2
                                              44:12                  3:7 19:4
 lower    44:14        39:3
                                                                     50:14,17
                      math     38:1         met  6:16
                                              10:3                modified
          M
                      matter     48:4                                13:19
                                            metal     52:4
 made     8:14        maximum     32:7                            moment       27:1
                                            metals        17:14
 magnitude            mayor     54:2,3                            monitor
                                              43:7
   30:13                                                             26:16 34:4
                      meaning               methodology
 mail     45:23        30:11                                         35:24
                                              27:19
                                                                     41:21
 mailed       45:22   mechanically          mid  11:18
                       19:23                                      monitored
 maintaining                                  14:18
                                                                     20:23
   9:10 40:15         mechanism               15:22
                                                                     23:20
   50:3                13:4                 migrate
                                                                  monitoring
                                              51:22


www.huseby.com                 Huseby Global Litigation                     800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 143 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                           Public Meeting on 08/16/2022           ·Index: move..oxidant
   9:12 21:12         net 22:21               32:2,14,24         operating
   33:24               40:5                   34:24 44:7          35:3 40:14
   34:15              news     41:15        obtained             operation
   42:15                                      8:10                9:4,7
   48:21              night     54:20
                                            obvious       12:2    17:17
   49:24              no-brainer                                  34:23 35:9
 move  9:21            51:17                occurred              39:21
   30:4 34:9          noncancer               14:22
                                              16:18              option     17:16
   35:14               30:16                                      23:12
 moved     21:18       31:18                occurrence            28:18
                      nondetectable           30:3                39:10
 movement
   18:5                29:8                 occurring             44:23
                      north     26:9          23:19              options     25:7
 moving       10:13
                                            off-site             orally     8:13
                      note 11:14
                       38:6                   13:8 16:15
          N                                                      order     15:21
                                              25:12
                      noteworthy              43:8,10            organic
 Natalie 3:8
                       38:2                   48:1,3              17:12
   5:7 10:17
   45:7 47:13         notice       42:21    officially            18:6,15,19
                                              54:21               19:12
 Natalie's            notifications
                                                                  20:17 22:8
   45:4                6:3                  older     15:6        23:4 35:7
 National             number 40:3           on-site              original
   6:15,17             44:6 47:3              13:2,12             13:7 21:6
   10:1 12:9          numbers      21:3       38:18               34:12
   16:4                40:1                 ongoing       5:15   originally
 naturally            nutshell                9:7                 13:11
   23:19               40:18                online        4:14    14:16
 nature  6:23
                                            open  3:18           overview
   7:3,13                      O
                                              47:9                3:11,15
   19:1,18
                      objective                                   5:17 9:20
   29:18                                    operate
                       32:19                                      11:12 12:8
                                              20:19
 necessarily                                                      45:9
                       37:19 43:3
   48:24                                    operated
                       44:13,17                                  oxidant
                                              14:17
 Neshaminy                                                        19:21
                      objectives
   27:8 28:6

www.huseby.com                 Huseby Global Litigation                   800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 144 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                           Public Meeting on 08/16/2022           ·Index: oxidation..post
 oxidation            pathways                20:16,24            plan 6:11
   19:18               18:9 30:7            PFAS  24:1,7           7:18 13:7
   20:14              people     30:7         25:23                24:15,16
   23:3,11             54:1                   26:2,7               45:14
   35:11                                      27:4,5,10            49:24 52:2
                      per-     23:24
 oxidize                                      47:16,22            plant 9:6
   27:16              perceive                48:23 52:3           17:10,17
                       22:14                                       28:16
 oxygen       19:22                         phase     5:23
                      percent                 6:20                plants     31:21
                       21:19,22
          P                                 phases        16:18   platform
                      perform23:6                                  4:16,22
 P-R-O-C-E-E-D-                             phenomenal
                       30:20 36:8                                  5:1
 I-N-G-S 3:1                                  47:14
                      performance                                 played     15:9
 p.m.     54:24        20:8,23              Phillies
 paint     14:16       35:24                  52:16               plume 21:7,
                       41:22                phone     15:7         13,15
 paraphrase
   23:1               performed             physical              point 9:24
                       23:16                  8:22                 15:5 18:24
 parks     53:4                                                    43:11
 part  9:16           period     8:11       pick     26:23
                       13:24                                      points     30:15
   10:7 17:18                               picked        28:15
   29:13 33:5          37:20                                      polychlorinate
                       39:15 41:5           piece  14:3           d 13:10
   36:3 42:22                                 31:23
                       45:17,18,                                   16:17
   46:6 47:8
                       19 54:15             pilot  19:18           17:15
   48:9 49:6
                      permitting              20:4,10,            polyfluoroalky
 partially                                    11,14               l 24:1
   26:15               39:5
                                              22:24               portion      45:3
 participating
                      Perry 3:14              23:5,10
   54:21               4:2 5:6                35:12               portions
                       26:6 45:8              43:9,21              25:14
 parts     13:20,      47:13 48:6
   21                                       place  33:3           posed 7:14
                      person     54:6         44:16                41:8 51:4
 past     10:24
                      perspective             51:21               post 21:20
 pathway               51:8                                        22:9,16
                                            plaintiffs
   18:21
                      persulfate              54:5


www.huseby.com                 Huseby Global Litigation                    800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 145 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                         Public Meeting on 08/16/2022 ·Index: post-construction..quality
 post-               17:13                  30:22 36:3           protective
 construction        19:11                  50:6 51:19              37:1
   9:3               39:22 40:7           processes              protectiveness
 postmarked         presentation            8:5                     36:15
   46:11             3:16 5:5             profile                proven        43:20
 potential           26:22 47:8             46:20                provide  41:7
   5:23 6:5         presented             progress                  45:11 47:5
   20:11             8:12 49:12             9:21 34:4            provided
   23:11,21
                    presenting
   29:21 30:1                             progressing               41:7
                     5:1 50:1               10:12
   31:11,17                                                      public   3:8,
   38:18            pretty 4:21           project 4:3,              19 7:17,19
                     27:4 28:10             5 11:16                 8:1,11
 pounds     35:6
                     53:8 54:19             45:24                   14:20
 pre-  21:20
                    preventing              46:13                   15:11
   22:9
                     33:16                promotes                  36:17
 predicted                                                          41:5,6
                    previous                20:1
   21:15                                                            54:22,24
                     11:22 14:2           properly
 prefer     41:16                                                published
                    previously              9:14
 preference          13:16                                          45:15
                                          property
   35:15                                                         purple        22:13
                    primary     22:7        25:14 43:8
 preferred                                  51:2,11              purpose  6:13
                    Priorities
   7:22 8:8                                 53:6,20                 7:12 20:13
                     6:15,18
   24:19
                     10:1 12:10           propose 7:9            push     28:8
   35:13 41:2
                     16:4                   19:3 32:24           put   11:9
   42:13
   43:17            problem               proposed                  50:23 53:3
   44:22             25:20                  3:6,16               putting
                    process 3:15            7:18 24:15              53:11,18
 preinjection
                     4:12 5:18,             40:23
   22:12
                     21 8:2                 41:10
                                                                           Q
 preliminary                                45:14
                     9:19 10:7,
   6:7,8                                                         Q&a   3:18
                     16,19                protect       32:4
 prepared            11:12 12:6             37:14                   47:9
   32:15             28:21                                       quality
                                          Protection's
 present     7:22    29:13,20               24:9                    24:10


www.huseby.com               Huseby Global Litigation                      800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 146 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                    COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                        Public Meeting on 08/16/2022 ·Index: quantifies..remedial
   29:3,9           48:11,17             recently             reference
   43:7            raised     24:13        11:7                42:5
 quantifies         28:13                receptor             regard 12:6
   21:19            41:23                  21:14               14:5 17:3,
 quantitative       42:12                receptors             7 19:1
   30:20            45:12                  31:21               24:7 45:14
                    46:3,5                                    regular
 question           54:1                 recommendation
   3:22,23                                 23:5                45:22
   4:17,19         ramp     20:11                             regulations
                                         recommendation
   24:14 27:1      ramp-up               s 22:23               37:9
   41:23 45:6       39:14                                     related
   46:15                                 record  3:23
                   rate     44:14          8:3,7,19            24:2,22
   47:19                                                       42:16
   50:22           raw     48:21           9:1 10:2
                                           11:21               43:11
 questions         re-emphasize
                                           12:19,20           relationship
   4:11 8:9         13:23
                                           13:12               30:12
   24:22           re-equilibrate          16:11
   26:20 41:8                                                 relevant
                    42:9                   45:16 46:6
   42:11                                                       37:5
                   reach 34:23           recorded
   43:14                                                      relook     49:14
                    43:2 47:4              3:20
   45:12
                   read     11:3                              remain     44:16
   46:2,4                                records       6:2,
   47:10                                   3,9                remaining
                   ready     4:17
   54:11,13,        7:16                                       14:11 16:9
                                         recreational
   16                                                          32:20
                   reaffirm                11:5
                                                               34:20
 quick  3:11        5:21                 red    22:10          38:11,14
   18:3 45:9
                   real     50:2,        redevelopment         40:21
 quickly            22                     11:2 31:1           41:17
   20:18                                   51:12
                   realistic                                  remedial
   51:23
                    31:9                 reduced               4:3,5 6:21
                                           21:6,8              7:20 12:16
          R        reason     48:19
                                           22:18 23:3          14:7 17:16
                    51:1
                                                               32:1,14,
 radon     18:13   recall     14:24      reduction
                                                               19,23
 railroad                                  22:7 38:4           34:23
                   recent     10:24
   26:8                                    43:1


www.huseby.com              Huseby Global Litigation                   800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 147 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                         Public Meeting on 08/16/2022           ·Index: remediated..scale
   37:19 43:2       repurposed            results       21:3     risks      38:18,
   44:13,17          11:5                   24:15                   22
 remediated         require                 35:11                river   26:10
   51:16 52:5        34:22                retain        44:13       27:9 28:7
 remedy  3:6,       required7:8           reuse     11:1         Robert   5:8
   17 8:16           40:9 41:11           review        6:9         16:21 47:4
   10:11            requirements                                    52:17
   13:15                                  reviews       10:8
                     10:2 34:2              34:7                 ROD   13:24
   24:19             37:6,11                                        14:4 16:13
   45:18                                  revisit                   32:15,17
   50:14,17         residential             47:15                   33:6 36:10
                     31:1
 remedy's     9:2                         Rich  4:13,            role      15:9
                    respond
 remember                                   24 5:2,8
                     26:23                  16:21                roles      53:22
   46:15,16
                    responding              24:13                Rossi   4:4
 remote     4:21     46:5                   26:19                   46:1,13
 removal     16:1   responses               27:2,3,7,            roughly
   17:13             8:10 41:7              20 28:5                 15:24 19:9
 remove     12:14    45:11                  29:5 41:23              22:13
                                            43:13
 removed            responsiveness          47:1,3,12            rounds        20:21
   16:24 35:6        46:8                   50:13,18,               35:22
 removing           rest     26:22          21 52:12,               41:19
   16:8                                     13,21                RPM     4:5
                    restarting
                                            53:1,24
 repairs             44:2                                        rush      47:10
   34:16                                  ridiculously
                    restoration
   36:23                                    28:1                           S
                     11:24 14:3
 report     17:1                          risk  7:12,
                    restriction                                  Safety        14:21
   21:1                                     14,21
                     33:12 34:3                                     15:11
                                            29:18,22
 reported            42:21
                                            30:18,21             sampling
   14:21            restrictions            31:6,17,                6:11 19:7
 represent           33:15                  20,23                   23:16
   22:11 40:1       result     31:17        49:7,11,                35:23
 represents          42:24                  14,15,20                41:20
   22:15             50:19                  50:2,20              scale      20:11,


www.huseby.com               Huseby Global Litigation                      800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 148 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                         Public Meeting on 08/16/2022      ·Index: scenario..spaces
   12                30:14                  14 14:19,      slides      45:4
 scenario           sewer     53:12         21,23,24         47:14
   31:11,15                                 15:12          slow     9:22
                    Shereen     4:6         16:3,10,24
 scientific                                 17:13          smaller-scale
                    short 25:6
   42:5              31:22 42:3             21:18            20:6
 scope     12:12     44:14                  25:10,23       soccer      11:5
                                            26:12
 scratch     12:4   short-term                             soil  6:12
                                            27:13
   53:15             38:15,22                                7:1 13:2,
                                            28:13
 secure     12:14   shorter                                  11,14,19
                                            31:3,13,16
                     37:20                                   14:6 16:8,
 security                                   34:10
                                                             12,14
   9:10             shows 22:6              42:16
                                                             17:13,20
                     48:22                  43:12
 sediment     7:1                                            18:8 19:24
                                            45:24
 select     7:9     shut     35:9                          soils      16:16
                                            46:20,21
   36:10            side 26:13              48:1,20        solar      11:8,
   44:24             31:19                  49:8 51:4        11
 selection           48:16                  52:6
                                                           solid      22:11
   8:8              significances         site-related
                                                           solvents
 send  45:23         17:19                  26:5
                                                             14:19
   46:12            significant             46:19,23
   54:18             13:5 38:1,                            sooner      52:6
                                          site-specific
 sentinel            13,22 53:8             43:22          sounds      29:15
   21:10,12,        significantly                            36:17
                                          sites  5:24
   17                21:6 37:20                              52:24
                                            10:9 15:1,
 separate           similar     50:6        10 33:23       source      14:12
   50:15                                                     25:12
                    similarly             sits     51:20
                                                             32:20
 sequentially        15:11                size     53:8      34:21
   50:11            simply    6:21                           41:17,20
                                          slide  16:20
 serve     5:21                             19:8 21:2,       48:1,2,4
                    site 3:10
 services            4:4,6 6:5,             4 22:23        sources       6:4
   39:4              7,14 7:15,             40:20            38:11
                     23 9:24                41:13
 setting     5:12                                          space      18:11
                     10:4,22                43:16
 severity            11:1 12:9,                            spaces      18:7


www.huseby.com               Huseby Global Litigation                800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 149 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                         Public Meeting on 08/16/2022            ·Index: speaking..talk
 speaking            33:21 37:8             46:9,17             support      10:4
   19:12             40:22 41:1           submitted             supporting
 specifically        49:9                   46:3,10              4:7
   25:22            statement             substance             surface6:12
 spills     15:18    50:23                  19:21                7:1 15:18
   16:2             statutes              substances             16:2 17:23
 spoke     17:19     37:8                   24:1                 19:10
                    stay     51:21                               28:16
 square     36:13                         substantially
                                                                surfaced
   51:9             stenographer            21:8 40:6
                     3:20                                        15:12
 stable     35:21                         successful
   50:3             step 7:5                20:10 35:8          suspect      22:5

 stages     9:15     30:6,10,17           suggest               synthetic
                     45:10                  43:10                23:19
 standard
   4:21 29:20       steps 6:6             suggesting            system 13:1
   36:3 49:9         7:11,20                27:22                17:10,21
                     29:23                                       20:20
 standards           31:14                sum     43:17          23:13
   24:10                                  summarizes             34:14 35:2
   26:18 29:3       stored     14:18
                                            7:20 8:9             36:23
   32:9 43:7        stories     11:3                             37:24 38:7
                                          summary 19:3
 stands     5:9     stringent                                    39:10
                                            21:2 31:22
                     13:20                                       40:2,11,16
 start     5:17                             46:8
                                                                 44:1,11,16
   53:2             study 7:5,21          summed        43:18
                     12:17                                      systems
 start-up                                 sumps     18:10
                     19:16,18                                    39:14
   39:15
                     20:4,6,10,           Superfund
 started     3:4     12,14                  3:15 4:12                    T
   26:16             22:24                  6:15 9:19
   52:16             23:5,10                36:6 46:21          table 17:24
 starting            35:12                                       21:19
                                          supplement
   12:3              43:9,21                                    takes 29:11
                                            33:1 34:16
 state  3:22        stumble     25:4                             38:16
                                          supplements
   6:2 7:24         subject     7:24        11:22 14:2          taking       25:17
   15:2,16,23                               32:17
                    submit     45:21                            talk 10:18
   26:18 32:8
                                                                 12:7 14:8

www.huseby.com               Huseby Global Litigation                    800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 150 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                         Public Meeting on 08/16/2022       ·Index: talked..treatment
   24:19 33:6       technology              15:5 16:2           30:3,11,19
   35:12 45:5        19:20 20:7             17:1 20:22          38:4
   47:16             43:20                  24:17 35:8       track      48:11
 talked     15:1    Terjimanian             37:15,20
                                            38:16            tracks       26:8
   35:17             4:9                                        48:17
                                            44:14
 talking            term     18:5,          47:18            tradeoffs
   11:20 14:1        13                     50:10               45:1
 Tamara     45:24   terms 4:21            times     44:12    transcript
   46:13             11:21                                      45:13
                     18:16 39:1           today  32:1
 Tami     4:4                               47:1 49:12       transform
                     44:1
 tanks     12:15                          Toluene               35:19
                    test     20:7
 target  19:14                              21:24            treat      26:2,4
   34:19 44:3       tested     25:22                            38:8
                                          tonight  4:1
 targeted           thing 11:11,            7:17 8:13        treating
   34:18             13 25:18               11:20               35:3
                     28:14 48:3             12:5,7
 targeting                                                   treatment
                    things 7:16             14:1 15:7
   38:10                                                        9:6 12:24
                     9:10 10:6,             46:5,16
   41:19                                                        13:13
                     15 12:12               52:21
 targets                                                        17:9,17
                     13:6,14              tonight's             19:24
   32:20             20:9 42:7              3:12 47:2           20:20
 task     52:17      44:18                                      22:20
                     52:22                tool  10:8
 tax     53:21                              33:19,20            23:12,13
                     53:14                                      25:7,19,
 taxes     53:6                           top     52:3
                    thinking                                    21,22
 team     54:12      53:2                 total     22:1        28:16,18
 Teams  5:3,13      threats                 35:6                34:14,17,
   50:24             36:17                touch     41:24       19,20
                                                                35:2,16
 technical          three-quarters        touched               36:18,23,
   4:11 10:3         52:15                  43:14               24 37:18,
   39:2 42:4
                    threshold             town     48:12        23 38:5,7,
   45:3
                     6:17                                       9 39:10,
                                          toxic     35:20
 technologies                                                   12,14,18
                    time 11:20            toxicity
   7:6                                                          40:2,4,7,
                     13:1,18,24


www.huseby.com               Huseby Global Litigation                  800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 151 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                      COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                          Public Meeting on 08/16/2022 ·Index: trichloropropane..written
   11,12,16          understand            vis-à-vis                15:1 26:4
   41:2,16            48:8 50:21             18:13                wells  9:12
   43:19             understanding         visit     47:22          19:13
   44:1,3,9,          47:17                                         21:10 26:6
   11,16 50:4                              VOCS  32:21
                     understands             43:7 49:2              33:17
 trichloropropa       51:1                                          34:18 43:8
 ne 24:5                                   volatile                 48:10,22
   29:2              upgrades                17:12
                      36:24                  18:6,14,18           wheels     9:21
 truthed
                     upgrading               19:12                Willow     28:3
   43:20
                      44:1                   20:17 22:8           word     28:1
 turn  5:5                                   23:3 35:7
   33:1              upwards                 49:19                work  11:17,
                      40:13                                         23 13:23
 turning                                   volume        21:4
                     utilized                                       14:2,6
   27:24                                     38:5
                      33:13 42:6                                    17:2 19:3
 turns     26:5                            volumes                  23:14,15
 type    49:13                               16:23                  25:8 40:7
                              V
                                                                    53:11
 types  20:9
                     vacant       51:6               W            worked     15:2,
   30:11
                     vapor 13:14                                    4
 typically                                 wanted        5:16
   5:22 30:15         17:20                                       workers
                      18:1,4,23            War     28:16
   39:13                                                            38:19
                                           warrants
                     vapors 17:22                                 working
                      18:6,8                 6:14
          U                                                         28:17
                     variety      6:1      waste  5:24
 U.S.    45:22                                                    worry     4:15
                                             6:5 10:9
                     versus 13:11            16:23                worth     39:22
 ultimately
                      37:21 38:9
   9:20,23                                 watching               wrap     9:20
                      40:18
   16:3                                      52:18                wrapped
                      44:10
 un-mute      4:18    51:18                water  6:12              25:15
 un-secure           virtual3:7              7:1 26:9             writing
   15:18              4:22 5:13              31:2,12                46:10
                      7:19 41:5              49:18
 uncertainty                                                      written      8:12
                                             53:17
   25:1              virtue       5:20                              45:21
                      44:2                 ways     6:1


www.huseby.com                Huseby Global Litigation                     800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 152 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                      COSDEN VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING
                          Public Meeting on 08/16/2022   ·Index: xylene..zip


          X

 xylene       22:9,
   12,15
 xylenes
   22:1,2
   32:22

          Y

 Yardley      28:4
 years  10:10
   28:17
   34:22
   37:21,22
   40:14 43:2
   47:22
   53:22
   54:3,9

          Z

 zip     29:14




www.huseby.com              Huseby Global Litigation          800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 153 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  ATTACHMENT D


WRITTEN COMMENTS

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 154 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Rossi, Tamara

From:                           Rich Wolbert <rwolbert@thecityofbeverly.com>
Sent:                           Friday, August 05, 2022 9:26 AM
To:                             Rossi, Tamara
Cc:                             Loney, Natalie
Subject:                        RE: COSDEN PROPOSED CLEANUP PLAN - NOTIFICATION



Tamara,

After reviewing the information Natalie sent out for the upcoming public meeting, “we”, the City, have a few
questions.

           1. Will chromium levels fall within allowable limits after ISCO injections cease or will this heavy
              metal contaminant require other treatment alternatives to obtain levels below NJDEP GWQS?


           2. Since the PFNA, PFOS, PFOA, PFAS are not being addressed in this Remedy Plan Modification,
              is there a plan to address these contaminants at a later date and/or is it necessary to address them?

           3. Will ISCO injections have any effect on PFNA, PFOS, PFOA, PFAS levels or will these
              contaminants require alternative treatment methods?

           4. Are the PFNA, PFOS, PFOA, PFAS, and 1,4 Dioxane contaminants from this site or are they
              migrating from an off-site location; if determinable?


           5. Are there any related “off-site” monitoring wells in the community with any contaminant levels
              over NJDEP GWQS?


Thanks,
Rich Wolbert
City Administrator
Public Safety Director

City of Beverly
446 Broad Street
Beverly, NJ 08010
Tel: (609) 747-4090
Fax: (609) 387-3558
Cell: (609) 680-3638
Email: rwolbert@thecityofbeverly.com
www.thecityofbeverly.com

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 155 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        APPENDIX IV


ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 156 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                           FINAL
                                                                                        08/24/2022                                             REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORP.
          CERCLIS ID: NJD000565531
               OUID: 01
                SSID: 02P8
              Action:


                                                                             Image
DocID:    Doc Date: Title:                                                   Count:     Doc Type:              Addressee Name/Organization:          Author Name/Organization:
336553   08/24/2022 COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX                    9 Administrative Record                                       (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                    FOR OU1 FOR THE COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS                              Index                                                AGENCY)
                    CORPORATION SITE

38842     Undated     INDEX, DOCUMENT NUMBER ORDER, COSDEN                       9       List/Index                                            (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                      CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE                                                                                       AGENCY)
                      DOCUMENTS.

101293    Undated     COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION,                      1       List/Index                                            (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                      OPERABLE UNIT ONE, EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT                                                                            AGENCY)
                      DIFFERENCES, ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD FILE
                      UPDATE, INDEX OF DOCUMENTS.

109345    Undated     (Maps, graphic drawings, and a geological                  8 Figure/Map/ Drawing
                      description pertaining to the Cosden Coatings
                      Corporation site)


109346    Undated     (Newspaper article entitled:) 2 Agencies investigate       2       Publication                                           LERNER,GAIL,C (BURLINGTON COUNTY
                      paint dump                                                                                                               TIMES)



109351    Undated     (Map of the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation           1 Figure/Map/ Drawing
                      site area)



109347   07/18/1984 (Newspaper article entitled:) Agencies probe paint           1       Publication                                           LERNER,GAIL,C (BURLINGTON COUNTY
                    dump in Beverly                                                                                                            TIMES)


109348   08/14/1984 (Memo detailing a July, 1984, NJDEP inspection of            1     Memorandum          (NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF LAW AND   BONANNI,DANIEL,J (NEW JERSEY
                    the Moleta - Cosden Chemical Coatings Drum site)                                       PUBLIC SAFETY)                      DEPARTMENT OF LAW AND PUBLIC
                                                                                                                                               SAFETY)




                                                                                         Page 1 of 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 157 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                      FINAL
                                                                                   08/24/2022                                        REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORP.
          CERCLIS ID: NJD000565531
               OUID: 01
                SSID: 02P8
              Action:


                                                                          Image
DocID:    Doc Date: Title:                                                Count:    Doc Type:        Addressee Name/Organization:          Author Name/Organization:
109349   08/14/1984 (Memo detailing an August 10, 1984, NJDEP                 1    Memorandum    (NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF LAW AND   BONANNI,DANIEL,J (NEW JERSEY
                    inspection of the Moleta - Cosden Chemical Coatings                          PUBLIC SAFETY)                      DEPARTMENT OF LAW AND PUBLIC
                    site)                                                                                                            SAFETY)


109350   08/14/1984 (Memo discussing an August 13, 1984, surveillance         1    Memorandum    (NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF LAW AND   BONANNI,DANIEL,J (NEW JERSEY
                    at Cosden Industrial Coatings site)                                          PUBLIC SAFETY)                      DEPARTMENT OF LAW AND PUBLIC
                                                                                                                                     SAFETY)


109344   06/07/1985 Potential Hazardous Waste Site, Site Inspection          14      Report                                          MAZUR,DEBORAH (NEW JERSEY
                    Report, Part 1, Site Location and Inspection                                                                     DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
                    Information (for the Cosden Chemical Coatings                                                                    PROTECTION)
                    Corporation site)


109368   12/17/1987 (Special Notice Letter)                                  10      Letter      OLLER,LOUIS (COSDEN CHEMICAL        LUFTIG,STEPHEN (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                 COATINGS CORPORATION)               PROTECTION AGENCY)




109369   02/25/1988 (104 (e) Request for Information Letter)                  2      Letter      OLLER,LOUIS (COSDEN CHEMICAL        UZZO,THOMAS (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                 COATINGS CORPORATION)               PROTECTION AGENCY)




109354   09/01/1988 (Letter forwarding the enclosed Final Field               2      Letter      ALVI,M SHAHEER (US ENVIRONMENTAL   SACHDEV,DEV,R (EBASCO SERVICES
                    Operations Plan for the Cosden Chemical Coatings                             PROTECTION AGENCY)|BREVILLE,MAGGIE INCORPORATED)
                    Corporation site)                                                            (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                                                                                 AGENCY)




                                                                                   Page 2 of 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 158 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                         FINAL
                                                                                      08/24/2022                                        REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORP.
          CERCLIS ID: NJD000565531
               OUID: 01
                SSID: 02P8
              Action:


                                                                             Image
DocID:    Doc Date: Title:                                                   Count:    Doc Type:        Addressee Name/Organization:          Author Name/Organization:
109355   09/01/1988 Final Field Operations Plan (FOP), Remedial                117     Work Plan                                        WEISS,JONATHAN (EBASCO SERVICES
                    Investigation Phase I, Cosden Chemical Coatings                                                                     INCORPORATED)
                    Corporation Site, Beverly, New Jersey



109360   09/01/1988 Final Work Plan, Remedial Investigation - Phase I,          81     Work Plan    (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION        WEISS,JONATHAN (EBASCO SERVICES
                    Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Site, Beverly,                             AGENCY)                             INCORPORATED)
                    New Jersey



109359   09/21/1988 (Letter forwarding the enclosed Final Work Plan for          2      Letter      ALVI,M SHAHEER (US ENVIRONMENTAL   SACHDEV,DEV,R (EBASCO SERVICES
                    the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation site)                                  PROTECTION AGENCY)|BREVILLE,MAGGIE INCORPORATED)
                                                                                                    (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                                                                                    AGENCY)



109352   10/01/1988 Site Analysis, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corp.,               7      Report      GAROFALO,DONALD (ENVIRONMENTAL     WARNER,ERIC,D (BIONETICS
                    Beverly, New Jersey                                                             PHOTOGRAPHIC INTERPRETATION CENTER CORPORATION)
                                                                                                    (EPIC))

109356   10/01/1988 Final Field Operations Plan (FOP) Remedial                  99      Report      (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION        (EBASCO SERVICES INCORPORATED)
                    Investigation Phase I, Cosden Chemical Coatings                                 AGENCY)
                    Corporation Site, Beverly, New Jersey

109373   11/01/1988 Final Community Relations Plan, Cosden Chemical             20     Work Plan    (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION        RUMPP,JAMES,H (EBASCO SERVICES
                    Coatings Corporation Site, City of Beverly, Burlington                          AGENCY)                             INCORPORATED)
                    County, New Jersey




                                                                                      Page 3 of 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 159 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                             COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                         FINAL
                                                                                      08/24/2022                                           REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORP.
          CERCLIS ID: NJD000565531
               OUID: 01
                SSID: 02P8
              Action:


                                                                           Image
DocID:    Doc Date: Title:                                                 Count:      Doc Type:           Addressee Name/Organization:          Author Name/Organization:
109372   11/30/1988 (Letter forwarding the enclosed Final Community            4        Letter         PETERSON,LISA (US ENVIRONMENTAL     SACHDEV,DEV,R (EBASCO SERVICES
                    Relations Plan for the Cosden Chemical Coatings                                    PROTECTION AGENCY)                  INCORPORATED)
                    Corporation site)


109353   02/01/1989 Site Analysis, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation,      20         Report        GAROFALO,DONALD (ENVIRONMENTAL     WARNER,ERIC,D (BIONETICS
                    Beverly, New Jersey                                                                PHOTOGRAPHIC INTERPRETATION CENTER CORPORATION)
                                                                                                       (EPIC))

109361   10/01/1989 Final Interim RI Report, Cosden Chemical Coatings        256         Report        (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION        (EBASCO SERVICES INCORPORATED)
                    Corp. Site, Beverly, New Jersey                                                    AGENCY)




109375   01/01/1990 Draft Public Information Meeting Summary, Cosden          21    Meeting Document   (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION        ZANZALARI,GERRY (EBASCO SERVICES
                    Chemical Coatings Corporation Site, City of Beverly,                               AGENCY)                             INCORPORATED)
                    New Jersey



109374   01/12/1990 (Letter forwarding the enclosed Draft Public               3         Letter        JOHNSON,LILLIAN (US ENVIRONMENTAL   SACHDEV,DEV,R (EBASCO SERVICES
                    Information Meeting Summary for the Cosden                                         PROTECTION AGENCY)                  INCORPORATED)
                    Chemical Coatings Corporation site)


109358   09/01/1990 Final Field Operations Plan, Remedial Investigation      196         Report        (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION        (EBASCO SERVICES INCORPORATED)
                    Phase II, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Site,                               AGENCY)
                    Beverly, New Jersey




                                                                                       Page 4 of 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 160 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                       FINAL
                                                                                    08/24/2022                                        REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORP.
          CERCLIS ID: NJD000565531
               OUID: 01
                SSID: 02P8
              Action:


                                                                           Image
DocID:    Doc Date: Title:                                                 Count:    Doc Type:         Addressee Name/Organization:         Author Name/Organization:
109357   09/28/1990 (Letter forwarding the enclosed Final Phase II Field       2      Letter      ALVI,M SHAHEER (US ENVIRONMENTAL    SACHDEV,DEV,R (EBASCO SERVICES
                    Operations Plan for the Cosden Chemical Coatings                              PROTECTION                          INCORPORATED)
                    Corporation site)                                                             AGENCY)|MARSENISON,PAUL (US
                                                                                                  ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)



109363   06/01/1992 Final Contaminant Fate and Transport Study/Risk          333      Report      (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION        SIELSKI,MARK (EBASCO SERVICES
                    Assessment - Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation                             AGENCY)                             INCORPORATED)
                    Site, Beverly, New Jersey


109365   06/01/1992 Final Phase II Results Report - Cosden Chemical          340      Report      (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION        SIELSKI,MARK (EBASCO SERVICES
                    Coatings Corporation Site, Beverly, New Jersey                                AGENCY)                             INCORPORATED)




109362   06/30/1992 (Letter forwarding the Final Contaminant Fate and          2      Letter      HACKER,JILL (US ENVIRONMENTAL       SACHDEV,DEV,R (EBASCO SERVICES
                    Transport Study/Risk Assessment Report for the                                PROTECTION                          INCORPORATED)
                    Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation site)                                    AGENCY)|MARSENISON,PAUL (US
                                                                                                  ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)



109364   06/30/1992 (Letter forwarding the Final Phase II Results Report       2      Letter      HACKER,JILL (US ENVIRONMENTAL       SACHDEV,DEV,R (EBASCO SERVICES
                    for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation site)                            PROTECTION                          INCORPORATED)
                                                                                                  AGENCY)|MARSENISON,PAUL (US
                                                                                                  ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)


109367   07/01/1992 Draft Final Feasibility Study Report - Cosden            421      Report      (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION        SIELSKI,MARK (EBASCO SERVICES
                    Chemical Coatings Corporation Site, Beverly, New                              AGENCY)                             INCORPORATED)
                    Jersey




                                                                                    Page 5 of 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 161 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                           FINAL
                                                                                        08/24/2022                                           REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORP.
          CERCLIS ID: NJD000565531
               OUID: 01
                SSID: 02P8
              Action:


                                                                             Image
DocID:    Doc Date: Title:                                                   Count:      Doc Type:           Addressee Name/Organization:          Author Name/Organization:
109378   07/01/1992 Superfund Proposed Plan - Cosden Chemical                   13       Work Plan                                           (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                    Coatings Site, City of Beverly, Burlington County,                                                                       AGENCY)
                    New Jersey


109366   07/15/1992 (Letter forwarding the revised Draft Final Feasibility       3         Letter        HACKER,JILL (US ENVIRONMENTAL       SACHDEV,DEV,R (EBASCO SERVICES
                    Study Report for the Cosden Chemical Coatings                                        PROTECTION                          INCORPORATED)
                    Corporation site)                                                                    AGENCY)|MARSENISON,PAUL (US
                                                                                                         ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)



109370   07/29/1992 (Notice Letter for the Cosden Chemical Coatings              5         Letter        OLLER,LOUIS (COSDEN CHEMICAL        CALLAHAN,KATHLEEN (US
                    Corporation site)                                                                    COATINGS CORPORATION)               ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)




109371   07/29/1992 (Notice Letter for the Cosden Chemical Coatings              5         Letter        OLLER,LOUIS (COSDEN CHEMICAL        CALLAHAN,KATHLEEN (US
                    Corporation site)                                                                    COATINGS CORPORATION)               ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)



109376   08/06/1992 (Public Meeting Transcript for a hearing on the             88    Meeting Document                                       JOHNSON CAHILL,MARY (DEGNAN &
                    Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation Proposed                                                                            BATEMAN COURT REPORTERS)
                    Plan)


109377   08/10/1992 (Letter providing comments on the proposed plan              4         Letter        MARSENISON,PAUL (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                    for the Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation site)                                   PROTECTION AGENCY)




                                                                                         Page 6 of 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 162 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                             COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                  FINAL
                                                                               08/24/2022                                       REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORP.
          CERCLIS ID: NJD000565531
               OUID: 01
                SSID: 02P8
              Action:


                                                                      Image
DocID:    Doc Date: Title:                                            Count:    Doc Type:        Addressee Name/Organization:         Author Name/Organization:
109379   09/28/1992 (Letter forwarding the enclosed State Letter of       1      Letter      SIDAMON-ERISTOFF,CONSTANTINE (US   CALLAHAN,KATHLEEN (US
                    Concurrence and the Record of Decision for the                           ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)
                    Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation site)



109380   09/29/1992 State Letter of Concurrence with the selected         2      Letter      SIDAMON-ERISTOFF,CONSTANTINE (US   WEINER,SCOTT (NEW JERSEY
                    remedy for the Cosden Chemical Company                                   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)   DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
                    Superfund site                                                                                              PROTECTION)



109381   09/30/1992 Declaration for the Record of Decision (for the      90      Report                                         SIDAMON-ERISTOFF,CONSTANTINE (US
                    Cosden Chemical Coatings Corporation site)                                                                  ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)




109382   09/24/1998 EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES,               6      Report                                         (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                    COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION                                                                        AGENCY)



114852   07/12/1999 REMOVAL ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX AND              87     List/Index                                      (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                    DOCUMENTS FOR THE COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS                                                                  AGENCY)
                    CORPORATION SITE


496518   09/18/2003 FINAL REMEDIAL ACTION REPORT (SOIL) FOR THE         127      Report
                    COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE




                                                                               Page 7 of 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 163 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                FINAL
                                                                             08/24/2022                                           REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORP.
          CERCLIS ID: NJD000565531
               OUID: 01
                SSID: 02P8
              Action:


                                                                   Image
DocID:    Doc Date: Title:                                         Count:      Doc Type:           Addressee Name/Organization:         Author Name/Organization:
548595   11/16/2005 FINAL GROUNDWATER REMEDIAL DESIGN FOR THE         45 Figure/Map/ Drawing
                    COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE



533772   08/01/2009 FINAL INTERIM REMEDIAL ACTION REPORT FOR THE    3645        Report         (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (US ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS)
                    COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE                                  AGENCY)



622004   10/21/2015 DATA ASSESSMENT - VALIDATED ANALYTICAL DATA       64        Report
                    PACKAGE FOR PROJECT NO. P-1509035 FOR THE
                    COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE


622005   04/14/2016 DATA ASSESSMENT - VALIDATED ANALYTICAL DATA       66        Report
                    PACKAGE FOR PROJECT NO. P-1603004 FOR THE
                    COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE


622006   10/18/2016 DATA ASSESSMENT - VALIDATED ANALYTICAL DATA       64        Report
                    PACKAGE FOR PROJECT NO. P-1609019 FOR THE
                    COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE


622007   05/19/2017 DATA ASSESSMENT - VALIDATED ANALYTICAL DATA       65        Report
                    PACKAGE FOR PROJECT NO. P-1703012 FOR THE
                    COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE


622008   10/26/2017 DATA ASSESSMENT - VALIDATED ANALYTICAL DATA       66        Report
                    PACKAGE FOR PROJECT NO. P-1709026 FOR THE
                    COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE




                                                                              Page 8 of 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 164 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                          COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                FINAL
                                                                             08/24/2022                                       REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORP.
          CERCLIS ID: NJD000565531
               OUID: 01
                SSID: 02P8
              Action:


                                                                    Image
DocID:    Doc Date: Title:                                          Count:    Doc Type:        Addressee Name/Organization:         Author Name/Organization:
622094   04/19/2018 DATA ASSESSMENT - VALIDATED ANALYTICAL DATA        39      Report
                    PACKAGE FOR PROJECT NO. P-1803014 FOR THE
                    COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS CORPORATION SITE


645020   10/01/2021 SUMMARY REPORT FOR THE IN-SITU CHEMICAL           134      Report      (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (US ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS)
                    OXIDATION PILOT STUDY FOR OU1 FOR THE COSDEN                           AGENCY)
                    CHEMICAL COATINGS SITE


645031   10/01/2021 SUMMARY REPORT FOR THE IN-SITU CHEMICAL           547      Report      (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (US ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS)
                    OXIDATION PILOT STUDY - APPENDICES A - L FOR                           AGENCY)
                    OU1 FOR THE COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS SITE


609939   05/31/2022 THIRD FIVE-YEAR REVIEW REPORT FOR THE COSDEN       40      Report                                         EVANGELISTA,PAT (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                    CHEMICAL COATINGS SITE                                                                                    PROTECTION AGENCY)



645019   07/22/2022 FOCUSED FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT FOR OU1 FOR       75      Report      (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (US ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS)
                    THE COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS SITE                                      AGENCY)



645021   07/28/2022 PROPOSED PLAN FOR OU1 FOR THE COSDEN               17    Publication                                      (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                    CHEMICAL COATINGS SITE                                                                                    AGENCY)



645272   07/08/2021 FINAL SAMPLING TRIP REPORT FOR PROJECT NO. P-    1453      Report                                         (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                    2104002 - SAMPLING DATES 04/12/2021 -                                                                     AGENCY)
                    04/15/2021 FOR THE COSDEN CHEMICAL COATINGS
                    CORPORATION SITE




                                                                             Page 9 of 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 165 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        APPENDIX V


STATE LETTER OF CONCURRENCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 166 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                ,fttf:e nf , :efu m:ers:eu
                                   DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                          CONTAMINATED SITE REMEDIATION & REDEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
                                                         40 I East State Street
PHILIP D. MURPHY                                   P.O. Box 420, Mail Code 401-06                                   SHAWN M. LATOURETTE
    Govemor                                        Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0420                                        Co111111issio11er
                                                   Tel. (609) 292-1250 • Fax (609) 777-1914
                                                              www.nj.gov/dep
SHEILA Y. OLIVER                                             www.nj.gov/dep/srp/
   Lt. Govemor


                                                                                                 September 28, 2022
      Mr. Pat Evangelista, Director
      Emergency and Remedial Response Division
      U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
      Region II
      290 Broadway
      New York, NY 10007-1866

      Re:        Cosden Chemical Coatings Corp. Superfund Site
                 Operable Unit 1 Record of Decision Amendment Concurrence

      Dear Mr. Evangelista,

      The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (Department) has completed its review
      of the "Record of Decision Amendment, Cosden Chemical Coatings Corp. Superfund Site, OUl,
      City of Beverly, Burlington County, New Jersey" prepared by the U.S. Environmental Protection
      Agency (EPA) Region II. The Department concurs with the selected remedy to address
      contaminated groundwater.

      The major components of the amended OUl selected remedy include in-situ groundwater
      treatment targeting remaining groundwater source area contamination, long-term groundwater
      monitoring, and establishing a Classification Exception Area and a Well Restriction Area.

      EPA selected the remedy amendment in accordance with the Comprehensive Environmental
      Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA), as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601-
      9675, and to the extent practicable, the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution
      Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 C.F.R. Part 300.

      The Department supports keeping the on-site groundwater plant idle while the remammg
      groundwater source areas are addressed through continued in-situ treatment and emerging
      contaminants are evaluated.

      In addition, EPA prepared a Superfund State Contract amendment for the Cosden site for this
      project using Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act of 2021 funding that will not require a 10
      percent cost share. The Department appreciates that EPA designated this site to receive funding
      under this Act.




                         New Jersey is an Equal Opportunity Employer. Printed 0 11 Recycled Paper and Recyclable.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 167 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

September 28, 2022
Page 2 of2



The Department appreciates the opportunity to participate in the decision-making process for the
Cosden Superfund Site. Should you wish to discuss this matter further, please contact Gwen Zervas
at (609) 292-1251, or email at Gwen.Zervas@dep.nj.gov.


                                                    Sincerely,



                                                   David E. Haymes
                                                   Acting Assistant Commissioner


c: Gwen Zervas, Director, Division of Remediation Management,.NJDEP
   Frederick A. Mumford, Bureau Chief, Bureau of Site Management, NJDEP
   Paul Signore, Bureau of Site Management, NJDEP
   Jeff Josephson, Acting Chief, New Jersey Remediation Branch, EPA Region II
   Peny Katz, Remedial Project Manager, New Jersey Remediation Branch, EPA Region II




                                                                                             (
