LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT FOR THE MATLACK INCORPORATED SITE
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/652546
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 2f5f5f2cfad14d0a1ac74d169bbcdf3101eec9c6044cca9742fda4a52dd93b63
Source PDF pages: 159
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT

          Matlack, Inc. Superfund Site
Woolwich Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey




  United States Environmental Protection Agency
                     Region 2
               New York, New York
                   August 2023




                                                   *652546*
                                                     652546

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         DECLARATION STATEMENT
                      RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT


SITE NAME AND LOCATION

Matlack, Inc., Superfund Site
Woolwich Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey

EPA Superfund Site Identification Number NJD043584101

STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) issued a Record of Decision (ROD)
for the Matlack, Inc. Superfund Site (Site) on September 29, 2017, which addressed
contaminated soil, groundwater, seep water, surface water, and sediment at the Site located in
Woolwich Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey. To support the design of the remedy
selected in the 2017 ROD, EPA conducted a Pre-Design Investigation (PDI) from 2019-2022.
During the PDI, an additional area of source contamination was discovered and is now referred
to as the Drum Disposal Area. This decision document amends the 2017 ROD to provide for
remediation of the additional source area contamination in the Drum Disposal Area. The remedy
selected in this amendment to the Record of Decision (ROD Amendment) will work in
conjunction with the components of the original remedy selected in 2017.

EPA selected the remedy amendment in accordance with the requirements of the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601-
9675 (CERCLA), and the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan
(NCP), 40 CFR Part 300. This decision document explains the factual and legal basis for
selecting the remedy amendment. The administrative record index (see Appendix 3) identifies
the items that comprise the administrative record upon which the selected remedy amendment is
based.

The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) was consulted on the proposed
remedy amendment in accordance with CERCLA Section 121(f), 42 U.S.C. § 9621(f), and
concurs with the selected remedy amendment (see Appendix 4).

ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE

The response action selected in this ROD Amendment is necessary to protect the public health,
welfare, or the environment from actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from the
Site into the environment.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY AMENDMENT

The Site cleanup is being addressed as one operable unit. The selected remedy amendment
modifies the remedy selected in the 2017 ROD and addresses source contamination in saturated

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

and vadose (or unsaturated) zone soil in the Drum Disposal Area.

The major components of the amended remedy selected for the Drum Disposal area are the
following:

   •   Installation of thermal heating points and vapor extraction wells
   •   Transportation and disposal of contaminated media generated from thermal heating
       points and vapor extraction well installation; and
   •   Confirmatory soil sampling

The source area soil contamination in the Drum Disposal Area will be addressed through In-Situ
Thermal Treatment (ISTT). ISTT involves the installation of thermal heating points into the
subsurface such that contaminants can be vaporized, extracted by vapor extraction wells, and
treated above ground. The source of contamination in the Drum Disposal Area was delineated
during the PDI for the remedy selected in the 2017 ROD; however, additional evaluation is
necessary to fully design the amended remedy. The design of the thermal system, including the
vapor extraction system and specific method of thermal treatment utilized, electrical resistance
heating (ERH), thermal conductive heating (TCH), steam enhanced extraction (SEE), or a
combination, would be determined during the RD. Confirmation soil samples will be collected to
ensure the effectiveness of the treatment.

This amendment will work in conjunction with the Site remedy selected in the 2017 ROD. The
components of the remedy described in the 2017 ROD are not being modified by this ROD
Amendment, including excavation of contaminated soil acting as a source of groundwater
contamination in the Former Lagoon Area portion of the Site, installation of two permeable
reactive barriers to address groundwater contamination, excavation of impacted sediment in
Grand Sprute Run, and institutional controls (ICs), as necessary until remedial action objectives
are met. Since the amended remedy will permanently remove the newly identified source area of
contamination, no additional ICs beyond those required by the 2017 ROD are needed.

In addition, by treating soil contamination in the Drum Disposal Area that is acting as an
ongoing source of contamination to groundwater, consistent with the 2017 ROD the amended
remedy will also address contamination resulting from the discharge of groundwater to seeps,
which has impacted seep water, surface water, and sediment.

The Drum Disposal Area remedy is considered the final remedy for this portion of the Site.
The estimated present-worth cost of the selected remedy amendment is $29,469,000.

The environmental benefits of the selected remedy amendment may be improved by
consideration, during remedy design or implementation, of technologies and practices that are
sustainable in accordance with EPA Region 2’s Clean and Green Energy Policy.

DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

Part 1: Statutory Requirements


                                                ii

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The remedy amendment is protective of human health and the environment and complies with
federal and state requirements that are applicable or relevant and appropriate to the remedial action.
EPA has determined that the amended remedy represents the maximum extent to which permanent
solutions and treatment technologies can be utilized in a practicable manner at the Site.

Part 2: Statutory Preference for Treatment

The remedy amendment satisfies the statutory preference for treatment as a principal element of
 he remedy (i.e., reduces the toxicity, mobility, or volume of hazardous substances, pollutants, or
contaminants as a principal element through treatment).

Part 3: Five-Year Review Requirements

Remedial components selected in the 2017 ROD will not result in hazardous substances,
pollutants, or contaminants remaining onsite above levels that allow for unlimited use and
unrestricted exposure but are anticipated to take more than five years to attain remedial action
objectives and cleanup levels. However, the selected remedy in this ROD amendment for the
Drum Disposal Area will attain cleanup levels in the Drum Disposal Area in approximately one
year. Although five-year reviews will not be required for the remedial component selected in this
ROD Amendment, sitewide policy five-year reviews will still be conducted until the sitewide
remedial goals are met to ensure that the remedy is, or will be, protective of human health and
the environment, per the 2017 ROD.

ROD DATA CERTIFICATION CHECKLIST

The following information is included in the Decision Summary section of this ROD
Amendment. Additional information can be found in the administrative record file for this Site.

   •   Chemicals of concern and their respective concentrations may be found in the “Summary
       of Site Characterization” section.

   •   Current and reasonably anticipated future land use assumptions and current and potential
       future beneficial uses of groundwater are discussed in the “Current and Potential Future
       Land and Resource Uses” section.

   •   Baseline risks represented by the chemicals of concern may be found in the “Summary of
       Site Risks” section.

   •   Cleanup levels established for chemicals of concern and the basis for these levels may be
       found in the “Remedial Action Objectives” section.

   •   Estimated capital, annual operation and maintenance, and total present-worth costs are
       discussed in the “Description of Remedial Alternatives” section.

   •   A discussion of principal threat waste may be found in the “Principal Threat Waste”
       section.

                                                 iii

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   x   Key factors that led to selecting the remedy amendment may be found in the
       “Comparative Analysis of Alternatives” and “Statutory Determinations” sections.


AUTHORIZING SIGNATURE
                  Digitally signed by Pat
 Pat              Evangelista
                  Date: 2023.08.07 09:44:54
 Evangelista
___________________________________
                  -04'00'                                           __August 7, 2023__
Pat Evangelista, Director                                           Date
Superfund and Emergency Management Division




                                              iv

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

            DECISION SUMMARY
          Matlack, Inc. Superfund Site
Woolwich Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey




  United States Environmental Protection Agency
                     Region 2
               New York, New York
                   August 2023

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                     TABLE OF CONTENTS



 SECTION                                                                                       PAGE


SITE NAME AND LOCATION ..........................................................................1
SITE DESCRIPTION AND HISTORY ................................................................1
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION........................................................................2
SCOPE AND ROLE OF RESPONSE ACTION ..................................................2
PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS AND EARLY RESPONSE ACTIONS 3
SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERIZATION .................................................4
CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE LAND AND RESOURCE USES ...8
SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS.................................................................................8
REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES ................................................................15
SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES ..............................................17
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES ......................................21
PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE ..........................................................................29
SELECTED REMEDY AMENDMENT .............................................................29
STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS ..................................................................31
DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES .....................................32




 APPENDICES

     1       FIGURES
     2       TABLES
     3       ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX
     4       STATE LETTER
     5       RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

LIST OF FIGURES:
Figure 1        Site Location Map
Figure 2        Site Features
Figure 3        Soil Sampling and Groundwater Screening Locations in the Drum Disposal
                Area
Figure 4        Sitewide Contamination in Groundwater


LIST OF TABLES:
Table 1         Chemicals of Concern in the Drum Disposal Area
Table 2         Summary of Chemicals of Concern from the 2017 Human Health Risk
                Assessment and Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
Table 3         Selection of Exposure Pathways
Table 4         Noncancer Toxicity Data Summary
Table 5         Cancer Toxicity Data Summary
Table 6         Risk Characterization Summary - Noncarcinogens
Table 7         Risk Characterization Summary - Carcinogens
Table 8         Remediation Goals - Drum Disposal Area
Table 9         Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements (ARARs)


APPENDIX 5 ATTACHMENTS:
Attachment A – Proposed Plan
Attachment B – Public Notice – Sentinel
Attachment C – April 12, 2023, Public Meeting Transcript
Attachment D – Comments Submitted During Public Comment Period

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE NAME AND LOCATION

The Matlack, Inc. Site (the Site), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Superfund Site
Identification Number NJD043584101, is located along Route 322 East in Woolwich Township,
Gloucester County, New Jersey (see Appendix 1, Figure 1). The selected remedy amendment
described herein addresses additional source area contamination found in the vadose (or
unsaturated) and saturated zone of the Drum Disposal Area.

SITE DESCRIPTION AND HISTORY

The Site is bounded by Route 322 to the north, an open field to the south and east, and by Grand
Sprute run to the west. Grand Sprute Run is an approximate 1.25-mile-long stream that drains
into Racoon Creek, which is south of the Site. The Site includes Matlack, Inc.’s (Matlack)
former Swedesboro Terminal that occupied the northern portion of a 79-acre parcel, as well as a
portion of a parcel located immediately west and down-gradient of the former terminal. The
western portion of the property, owned by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection (NJDEP), is a part of the Raccoon Creek Wildlife Management Area.

Matlack began operations at the Site as a truck terminal and chemical tank clearing facility in
approximately 1962, transporting chemicals, petrochemicals, and food-grade liquid in bulk using
tank trailers (tankers) until 2001. On March 29, 2001, Matlack sought to reorganize under
Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code. The case was converted to a Chapter 7 liquidation in
October 2002 and was closed on December 21, 2021.

A one-story building (formerly known as the terminal building) with an attached tank-cleaning
facility is located in the northeast quadrant of the Site, and is surrounded on the north, east, and
west by a paved parking lot and driveway. A former wastewater lagoon was located south of the
former terminal building in what is presently a field with various shrubs. The Site is located
within a portion of Woolwich Township zoned as Woolwich Regional Center and Kings Landing
Redevelopment Area. Under this redevelopment plan, the Site will remain partially zoned as
corridor commercial (CC) and partially zoned for conservation. The Drum Disposal Area is
located in the portion of the property zoned as CC. The land use surrounding the Site is mixed
use consisting of agricultural, commercial, and residential. The surrounding area is rural. Land
use at and surrounding the Site is expected to stay unchanged for the foreseeable future.

The primary source of waste generation at the Site was the cleaning of tankers that had
previously held a variety of substances including petroleum products, xylenes, benzene, toluene,
phenol, glycol, styrene, wax, alum, resins, acids, naphthalene, various organic solvents,
flammable substances, coal tar, and other hazardous substances. Drums were also disposed at the
Site, in the area south of the Former Lagoon Area. From approximately 1962 until 1997,
Matlack washed/cleaned approximately 16 to 20 truck tanks per day at the Site using a variety of
solvents, generating an estimated 5,000 to 15,000 gallons of wastewater on a daily basis. Until
1976, Matlack discharged the wastewater containing cleaning solvents and materials from the
tanks into an unlined surface impoundment (lagoon) located southwest of the terminal building.
Matlack used various solvents, including tetrachloroethene (PCE), methylene chloride, toluene,

                                                 1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

trichloroethylene (TCE), acetone, methanol, and ethanol, to clean the tankers. The Former
Lagoon Area, Drum Disposal Area and Site layout are shown on Figure 2.

After discontinuing the use of the unlined lagoon in 1976, Matlack began collecting its
wastewater in multiple open-top, in-ground concrete tanks for temporary storage, after which it
would transport the wastewater away from the Site for disposal.

Matlack discontinued tanker cleaning operations at the Site in November 1997 but continued to
service and store its vehicles at the Swedesboro Terminal. The northeast portion of the Site is
currently operated by Liberty Kenworth as a medium and heavy-duty truck sales and service
center.

EPA conducted an Environmental Justice Screen for the Site using EJScreen 2.1. The EJ index
percentiles for nearly all of the environmental and demographic indicators for the area
immediately adjacent to the Site are below state and national averages; therefore, the results did
not suggest that there would be communities with environmental justice concerns immediately
adjacent to the area being remediated.

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

EPA has worked closely with local residents, public officials, and other interested members of
the community since it became involved with the Site in 2012. The Proposed Plan for the
Amendment was released for public comment on March 29, 2023. The Proposed Plan and other
Site-related documents were made available to the public in the administrative record file
maintained by the Director for Community Affairs for the Township of Woolwich, 120 Village
Green Drive, Woolwich Township, New Jersey, and at the EPA Region 2 Superfund Records
Center located at 290 Broadway, New York, New York (see Appendix 3). The administrative
record file is also available online at http://www.epa.gov/superfund/matlack.

The notice of availability of these documents was published in the Sentinel newspaper on March
30, 2023. The public comment period lasted 30 days and closed on April 28, 2023.

EPA held a virtual public meeting on April 12, 2023. The purpose of the public meeting was to
present the Proposed Plan to the community and provide an opportunity for the public to ask
questions and provide comments on all the remedial alternatives evaluated, including EPA’s
preferred alternative. Comments that were received by EPA at the public meeting and in writing
during the public comment period are addressed in the Responsiveness Summary (see Appendix
5).

SCOPE AND ROLE OF RESPONSE ACTION

The comprehensive cleanup of the Site is being managed as one operable unit. As with many
Superfund sites, the contamination at this Site is complex. The 2017 ROD addresses
contamination in the soil, groundwater, seep water, surface water, and sediment at the Site, and
all components of the 2017 ROD remain in place. The major components of the previously
selected remedy, as described in the 2017 ROD, include the following:

                                                 2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   •   Installation of two permeable reactive barriers (PRBs) to provide passive treatment of
       aromatic and chlorinated volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and the semi-volatile
       organic compound (SVOC) 4-chloroaniline in groundwater;

   •   Excavation and off-site disposal of contaminated soil and sediment which acts as a source
       of further contamination to groundwater, seep water, surface water, and sediment;

   •   Long-term monitoring to assure the effectiveness of the remedy over time; and

   •   Institutional controls until remedial action objectives (RAOs) are met, which may include
       establishment of a New Jersey Ground Water Classification Exception Area that restricts
       the use of the contaminated aquifer, along with deed notices that restrict development of
       the affected areas until the RAOs are met.

The 2017 ROD goes on to say that by remediating the groundwater and removing ongoing
sources of contamination, the remedy also addresses contamination resulting from the discharge
of groundwater to seeps, which has impacted seep water, surface water and sediment. In
addition, by remediating the groundwater, potential future risks associated with inhalation of
indoor air through subsurface vapor intrusion if a building or structure were to be built over the
contaminated plumes will be addressed.

Note that while excavation and off-site disposal of contaminated soil is included as part of the
remedy selected in the 2017 ROD, the focus of that decision was on contaminated soil in the
Former Lagoon Area associated with the northern portion of the Site. At that time, the Former
Lagoon Area was thought to be the sole source of contamination to both groundwater plumes.
The selected remedy in this ROD Amendment will address an additional component of the Site
discovered after EPA issued the 2017 ROD. Specifically, this plan addresses vadose and
saturated zone soil sources of contamination within the Drum Disposal Area associated with the
southern portion of the Site.

The active portion of the remedy selected in this ROD Amendment focuses solely on the
remediation of contamination sources at the Drum Disposal Area. However, by taking these
actions, the remedy will also work in conjunction with the components of the remedy selected in
the 2017 ROD to address contamination resulting from the discharge of contaminated
groundwater to seeps, sediment, and surface water in Grand Sprute Run.

This ROD Amendment identifies the final action for the Drum Disposal Area at the Site.

PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS AND EARLY RESPONSE ACTIONS

NJDEP began investigating potential groundwater contamination at the Site in December 1982 in
response to potable water well contamination in the area surrounding the facility. Investigations
included sampling of groundwater, soil, surface water, and sediment associated with identified
areas of concern.

In May 1987, NJDEP and Matlack entered into an Administrative Consent Order (ACO). Under
the ACO, between 1990 and 2001 Matlack conducted a two-phased investigation and

                                                 3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

remedial/removal actions to address source areas identified from previous investigations. One
such action included installation of a groundwater treatment system that consisted of extraction
wells, an infiltration trench and an aeration system to address groundwater contamination. This
system was operated by NJDEP from November 1995 to May 1997, and then again from June
2006 through 2011. Additional actions included the removal of above ground and underground
storage tanks (ASTs and USTs) used for waste and petroleum, and the excavation and off-site
disposal of contaminated soil.

NJDEP conducted additional investigation and sampling activities between 2002 and 2009. In
September 2011, at the request of EPA, NJDEP completed a Site Reassessment (NJDEP 2011) to
determine whether additional actions were necessary under CERCLA. The reassessment
concluded that sources requiring further action under CERCLA were still present at the Site.
EPA became the lead agency for the Site and began Site assessment activities in 2012. The Site
was placed on the National Priorities List in 2013.

SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERIZATION

Geology and Hydrogeology

According to the 2017 ROD and various reports prepared for the Site, e.g., Final Remedial
Investigation (RI) Report (HDR 2017b), Surficial Geology of the Bridgeport and Marcus Hook
Quadrangles (Stanford 2006a), and Bedrock Geology of the Bridgeport and Marcus Hook
Quadrangles (Stanford and Sugarman 2006b), the geological units within the vicinity of the Site,
from youngest to oldest, are the Cape May Formation, the Pennsauken Formation, the
Englishtown Formation, the Woodbury Formation, the Merchantville Formation, and the
undifferentiated Magothy-Raritan Formations.

The Cape May Formation, found in the area between Grand Sprute Run and the source areas,
consists of fine to medium sand. The Pennsauken Formation, which contains the shallow
unconfined aquifer found in the Former Lagoon Area and Drum Disposal Area, consists of
medium- to coarse- grained quartzose sand with a thickness of approximately 33 feet.

The Woodbury Formation, underlying the Pennsauken Formation, consists mostly of a dark blue
to black blocky clay with a thickness of approximately 50 feet. The Merchantville Formation,
underlying the Woodbury Formation, consists of mostly silt and clay with a thickness of
approximately 50-60 feet. The Magothy-Raritan Formation, underlying the Merchantville
Formation, consists of quartzose sand, clay, and some gravel with a combined thickness of
approximately 500 feet.

Investigations have determined that there are two separate hydrogeologic systems at the Site: a
shallow unconfined aquifer in the Pennsauken Formation and the deep confined aquifer in the
Magothy-Raritan Formation. Water level measurements indicate that the water table occurs from
approximately 4 feet below the surface at the southeast corner of the Site to approximately 28
feet below the surface at the northwest corner of the Site.

The clay trough and clay highs of the Woodbury Formation identified by the 1990 geophysical
investigation were anticipated to exert some control on the direction of groundwater movement
                                                4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

in the shallow aquifer. Groundwater elevations from 2016, 2019, and 2020 indicated that
groundwater in the shallow/unconfined aquifer generally flows to the west-northwest toward
Grand Sprute Run. There are localized variations in shallow groundwater flow closer to Grand
Sprute Run, most notably near MW-27 where there are groundwater flow components to the
north and west towards a topographically low wetland adjacent to Grand Sprute Run.

The deep aquifer in the Magothy-Raritan Formations has been found to be separated from the
upper unconfined aquifer by the Woodbury Formation clay confining unit, which is over 50 feet
thick. Significant head differences (about 30 feet) between the aquifers imply considerable
hydraulic separation. Groundwater in this aquifer flows towards the southeast.

Results of the Remedial Investigation

Sitewide RI activities were conducted by EPA in three phases: Phase 1 was conducted during
July 2015, Phase 2 was conducted during March, April, and May 2016, and Phase 3 was
conducted during July and August 2016. RI activities involved sampling surface water, seeps,
sediment, soil, and existing and newly installed groundwater monitoring wells to further
characterize the nature and extent of contamination.

Soil

In surface soil samples collected from a depth of 0 to 2 feet below the ground surface, there were
no VOCs detected at concentrations above 2016 New Jersey Residential Direct Contact Soil
Remediation Standards (NJRDCSRS). SVOCs and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) were
identified at concentrations slightly above the NJRDCSRS at isolated locations within the
Former Lagoon Area.

In subsurface soil samples collected from depths greater than 2 feet, the SVOCs benzyl butyl
phthalate, bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate, and naphthalene were found to be present at
concentrations above New Jersey Impact to Groundwater Soil Screening Levels (NJIGWSSL).

The VOCs benzene, PCE, TCE, and total xylenes were identified during 2016 sampling at
numerous locations at concentrations above the NJIGWSSL. Benzene, PCE, TCE and total
xylenes were also identified during 2014 sampling at two locations at concentrations above
NJIGWSSL.

Groundwater

Groundwater sampling identified two distinct plumes: one plume consisted of petroleum
hydrocarbon-related aromatic VOCs (e.g., benzene) and the SVOC 4-chloroaniline; the other
plume consisted of chlorinated VOCs (CVOCs) (e.g., PCE). The highest detected concentration
of CVOCs was 1,800 micrograms per liter (µg/l) and the highest detected concentration of
aromatic compounds was 1,347 µg/l. The results for surface water and sediment sampling
indicated PCE and TCE were present in seep and sediment samples above New Jersey Surface
Water Quality Criteria and New Jersey Sediment Screening Values, respectively.


                                                5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Surface Water/Sediment

The results of surface water and sediment sampling conducted during the 2016 RI indicate that
CVOCs were identified in seep sampling location SW-03 and sediment sampling location SED-
3, which are both located downgradient from monitoring wells MW-24 and MW-26. CVOCs
were also identified in nearby surface water samples SW-09, SW-10, and SW-11, obtained from
within Grand Sprute Run. The highest concentration of CVOCs at the Site was identified in
monitoring well MW-26; the presence of CVOCs in seep, sediment and surface water samples
downgradient from monitoring wells MW-24 and MW-26 is an indication that impacted
groundwater from the Site is discharging to Grand Sprute Run.

SVOCs (mainly polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons or PAHs) and inorganics were also identified
in several sediment samples. However, these contaminants were not considered to be Site-
related.

Contaminants Fate and Transport Summary

Site-related contaminants include VOCs and the SVOC 4-chloroaniline. These contaminants
have been discharged at the ground surface and within the vadose zone soils through direct
discharge, or through releases from underground storage tanks and/or fuel transfer lines, and
from the recently discovered buried drums. Releases to vadose zone soils have migrated to
saturated soils and the shallow, unconfined aquifer beneath the Site, and migrated through
advection with the groundwater to its discharge point within Grand Sprute Run, located
approximately 600 feet to the west of the Site. Groundwater samples collected from wells
completed within the deeper aquifer below the Woodbury Clay did not indicate that
contaminants of potential concern (COPCs) identified within the shallow, unconfined aquifer had
migrated vertically to the deeper aquifer.

Contamination present in soil is providing an ongoing source of groundwater, seep water, surface
water and sediment contamination.

Results of the Pre-Design Investigation

After issuing the 2017 ROD, EPA began the PDI. PDI activities were completed in three phases:
Phase 1 was conducted from August – November 2019, Phase 2 was conducted from August-
December 2020, and Phase 3 was conducted from November 2021-February 2022. Phase 1 PDI
activities involved groundwater sampling of known contaminants of concern (COCs) at the Site
and basic parameters from 37 existing wells, synoptic water level measurements, a well
condition survey, geotechnical investigation using a hollow stem auger drilling method, wetland
delineation, a habitat assessment, a stage 1A cultural resources survey, and screening of
proposed PRB locations using a membrane interface probe and hydraulic profiling tool.

During Phase 2 of the PDI, additional groundwater samples were collected in conjunction with
soil borings using Direct Push Technology (DPT) to better delineate the northern VOC and 4-
chloroaniline plume and the southern CVOC plume. Groundwater samples were collected from
existing and newly installed wells. Contamination in the Drum Disposal Area was discovered

                                               6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

during Phase 2. During soil sampling activities in the Drum Disposal Area, drum fragments were
observed and ground penetrating radar (GPR) was then used to identify any remaining drums or
fragments in the area. Additional activities included a stage 1B cultural resources survey,
sediment sampling, and continued synoptic water level measurements.

Phase 3 of the PDI utilized groundwater screening and soil sampling with DPT to determine the
extent of vadose and saturated zone contamination as well as investigate the potential presence of
dense non-aqueous phase liquid (DNAPL) in the Drum Disposal Area. The investigation
revealed that the vertical extent of the vadose zone sources extends from ground surface to the
top of the water table, which is approximately 7 feet below ground surface (bgs). The vertical
extent of the saturated zone sources extends from the water table (approximately 7 feet bgs) to
approximately 22 feet bgs. Summaries of the nature and extent of contamination specific to the
Drum Disposal Area are presented in Section 3.2.4 of the Final PDI Report (CDM Smith 2022).
During Phase 2 and Phase 3 of the PDI, DNAPL was not observed visually or using the field test
kit. However, the high soil and groundwater concentrations were indicative of the potential
presence of PCE and 1,1,1-trichloroethane (1,1,1-TCA) DNAPL at select locations in the Drum
Disposal Area.

The following compounds were most frequently detected at concentrations exceeding soil
remediation and groundwater standards in the Drum Disposal Area and have been identified as
COCs for the Drum Disposal Area: PCE, TCE, 1,1,1-TCA, 1,1-dichloroethene (1,1-DCE), 1,1-
dichloroethane (1,1-DCA), cis-1,2-dichloroethene (cis-1,2-DCE), and benzene (Appendix 2,
Table 1). The highest PCE, TCE, and 1,1,1-TCA concentrations in soil were found in the soil
sample RDB-72-S at 26.5 feet bgs, where PCE, TCE, and 1,1,1-TCA were 38,800 milligrams per
kilogram (mg/kg), 410 mg/kg, and 1,200 mg/kg, respectively. The highest concentrations of
benzene and cis-1,2-DCE in soil were detected in soil sample RDB-39 at a concentration of 12
mg/kg and 64 mg/kg, respectively. Additionally, high VOC concentrations were detected in
groundwater screening borings around the Drum Disposal Area (such as RDB-32 and RDB-29)
and in the former pumping well PW-04, with PCE, TCE, 1,1,1-TCA, 1,1-DCA, and cis-1,2-DCE
at estimated concentrations of 12,000 micrograms per liter (μg/L), 930 μg/L, 8,100 μg/L, 450
μg/L, and 210 μg/L, respectively. Benzene was observed at concentrations marginally exceeding
groundwater standards at RDB-31 (1.5 μg/L) and RDB-39 (7 μg/L). Specific soil sampling and
groundwater screening locations in the Drum Disposal Area are shown on Figure 3.

While the 2017 ROD identified the presence of two distinct plumes of groundwater
contamination, EPA’s understanding at the time was that they both originated from the same
source, the Former Lagoon Area. However, based on the PDI, EPA concluded that the Site has
two distinct source areas and resultant plumes (see Figure 4). The source of the aromatic VOCs
and 4-chloroaniline northern groundwater plume is the Former Lagoon Area, and the source of
the southern CVOC plume is related to the disposal of drums containing chlorinated solvents in
the Drum Disposal Area upgradient/side-gradient of monitoring well PW-04, separate from the
Former Lagoon Area.




                                                7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE LAND AND RESOURCE USES

Land Uses

The former Matlack property is situated in a semi-rural area of Woolwich Township, New
Jersey, with farmland located on the neighboring properties and residential and commercial uses
on Route 322, approximately 800 feet from contaminated areas. The Liberty Kenworth facility
occupies the majority of the former Matlack property, though it is separated from the Former
Lagoon Area by a fence. Farming and agriculture are a significant land use within the general
vicinity. EPA expects that the land-use pattern at and surrounding the Site will not change.

Groundwater and Surface Water Use

Aquifers beneath the Site serve as sources of drinking water for the area. Residential drinking
water wells are in use within a quarter mile of the Site; however, as discussed below, the
groundwater contamination identified at the Site only affects the shallowest groundwater unit
and not deeper units used for potable water. There are no known existing private wells known to
be impacted by the groundwater contamination. The direction of groundwater flow in the area
generally is to the west‐northwest toward Grand Sprute Run. Given its location, Grand Sprute
Run is accessible for recreational uses.

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS

As part of the RI for the Site, a baseline risk assessment was conducted to estimate the current
and future effects of contaminants on human health and the environment. A baseline risk
assessment is an analysis of the potential adverse human health and ecological effects of releases
of hazardous substances from a site if no actions or controls to mitigate such releases are taken,
under current and future land and groundwater uses. The baseline risk assessment includes a
human health risk assessment (HHRA) and a screening-level ecological risk assessment. It
provides the basis for taking action and identifies the contaminants and exposure pathways to be
addressed by the remedial action. This section summarizes the results of the baseline risk
assessment for the Site.

Human Health Risk Assessment
As mentioned above, a comprehensive HHRA was conducted for the Site in 2017. This section
and relevant tables (Appendix 2, Tables 2 through 7) summarizes the results of that HHRA.

A four-step process is utilized for assessing site-related human health risks for a reasonable
maximum exposure scenario:

       Hazard Identification – uses the analytical data collected to identify the COPCs at the site
       for each medium, with consideration of a number of factors explained below;
       Exposure Assessment - estimates the magnitude of actual and/or potential human
       exposures, the frequency and duration of these exposures, and the pathways (e.g.,
       ingesting contaminated well-water) by which humans are potentially exposed;
                                                 8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       Toxicity Assessment - determines the types of adverse health effects associated with
       chemical exposures, and the relationship between magnitude of exposure (dose) and
       severity of adverse effects (response); and
       Risk Characterization - summarizes and combines outputs of the exposure and toxicity
       assessments to provide a quantitative assessment of site-related risks. The risk
       characterization also identifies contamination with concentrations which exceed
       benchmark levels, defined by the NCP as an excess lifetime cancer risk greater than 1 x
       10-6 to 1 x 10-4 (also commonly expressed as: 1E-06 to 1E-04) or a noncancer Hazard
       Index (HI) greater than 1; contaminants at these concentrations are considered chemicals
       of concern (COCs) and are typically those that will require remediation at the Site. Also
       included in this section is a discussion of the uncertainties associated with these risks.
Hazard Identification
In this step, the COPCs in each medium were identified based on such factors as toxicity,
frequency of detection, fate and transport of the contaminants in the environment, concentration,
mobility, persistence and bioaccumulation.

The HHRA characterized the risk to human health from exposure to groundwater, soil, seep
water, sediment and surface water at the Site. The COPCs were determined for each medium by
comparing the available Site analytical data to appropriate risked-based screening criteria. As a
result, 47 chemicals, including VOCs, SVOCs, pesticides, PCBs and inorganics, were retained as
COPCs to be carried through to the remainder of the HHRA.

Only the COCs, or those chemicals identified in the 2017 HHRA as requiring a response, are
listed in Appendix 2, Table 2. However, a full list of all COPCs identified in the HHRA (which
can be found in the Final RI Appendix M: Human Health Risk Assessment Report, dated July 20,
2017), is available in the administrative record for the Site.

Exposure Assessment

Consistent with Superfund guidance and policy, the HHRA is a baseline human health risk
assessment and therefore assumes no remediation or institutional nor engineering controls to
mitigate or remove hazardous substance releases are in place. Cancer risks and noncancer hazard
indices were calculated based on an estimate of the reasonable maximum exposure (RME)
expected to occur under current and future land use conditions at the Site. The RME is defined as
the greatest exposure that is reasonably expected to occur at a Site.

The identification and selection of potential receptor populations was based on both current and
potential future land uses of the Site. The Site is located within a portion of Woolwich Township
zoned as RC-1 (Regional Center) and is currently being used as a medium and heavy truck sales
and service facility operated by Liberty Kenworth. The land use surrounding the Site is mixed,
consisting of agricultural, commercial, and residential uses. As such, the following receptor
populations were evaluated in the HHRA: future on-site worker, future on-site construction
worker, future on-site resident (child and adult), current/future off-site resident (adult and child)
and a current/future off-site recreator (adult and child).
                                                  9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The potential exposure pathways considered in the HHRA included inhalation of soil particulates
and vapors; incidental ingestion of and dermal contact with soil particulates; groundwater
ingestion, dermal contact and inhalation of groundwater; and incidental ingestion and dermal
contact with seep water and sediment, along with surface water. In addition, for overall
completeness, a screening evaluation was conducted to determine if the potential for vapor
intrusion (VI) into indoor air from subsurface vapor sources exists. The VI screening evaluation
consisted of comparing the maximum groundwater concentration of COPCs to both residential
and commercial-based Vapor Intrusion Screening Levels (VISLs) through the use of EPA’s
VISL Calculator.

A summary of all the exposure pathways considered in the HHRA can be found in Appendix 2,
Table 2. Typically, exposures are evaluated using a statistical estimate of the exposure point
concentration (EPC) in each medium of interest, which is usually an upper-bound estimate of the
average concentration for each contaminant, but in some cases may be the maximum detected
concentration. A summary of the exposure point concentrations for each medium can be found
in Appendix 2, Table 2. A comprehensive list of exposure point concentrations for all COPCs
evaluated in the HHRA can be found in the Table 4 series of the HHRA document (HDR, 2017).

Toxicity Assessment

In this step, the types of adverse health effects associated with contaminant exposures and the
relationship between magnitude of exposure and severity of adverse health effects were
determined. Potential health effects are contaminant-specific and may include the risk of
developing cancer over a lifetime or other noncancer health effects, such as changes in the
normal functions of organs within the body (e.g., changes in the effectiveness of the immune
system). Some contaminants are capable of causing both cancer and noncancer health effects.

Under current EPA guidelines, the likelihood of carcinogenic risks and noncancer hazards due to
exposure to Site chemicals are considered separately. In addition, consistent with current EPA
policy, it was assumed that the toxic effects of site-related chemicals would be additive. Thus,
cancer and noncancer risks associated with exposures to individual COPCs were summed to
indicate the potential risks and hazards associated with mixtures of potential carcinogens and
noncarcinogens, respectively.


Toxicity data for the HHRA were provided by the Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS)
database, the Provisional Peer Reviewed Toxicity Database (PPRTV), or another source that is
identified as an appropriate reference for toxicity values consistent with EPA guidance
(https://www.epa.gov/risk/tier-3-toxicity-value-white-paper).

This information is presented in Appendix 2, Table 4 (“Noncancer Toxicity Data Summary”) and
Table 5 (“Cancer Toxicity Data Summary”). Additional toxicity information for all COPCs is
presented in the HHRA for the Site.




                                               10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Risk Characterization

This step summarized and combined outputs of the exposure and toxicity assessments to provide
a quantitative assessment of Site risks. Exposures were evaluated based on the potential risk of
developing cancer and the potential for noncancer health hazards.

Noncarcinogenic risks were assessed using a hazard index (HI) approach, based on a comparison
of expected contaminant intakes and benchmark comparison levels of intake (reference doses,
reference concentrations). Reference doses (RfDs) and reference concentrations (RfCs) are
estimates of daily exposure levels for humans (including sensitive individuals) which are thought
to be safe over a lifetime of exposure. The key concept for a noncancer HI is that a “threshold
level” (measured as an HI of less than or equal to 1) exists at which noncancer health effects are
not expected to occur. The estimated intake of chemicals identified in environmental media
(e.g., the amount of a chemical ingested from contaminated soil) is compared to the RfD or the
RfC to derive the hazard quotient (HQ) for the contaminant in the particular medium. The HI is
obtained by adding the hazard quotients for all compounds within a particular medium that
impacts a particular receptor population.

The HQ for oral and dermal exposures is calculated as below. The HQ for inhalation exposures
is calculated using a similar model that incorporates the RfC, rather than the RfD.


HQ = Intake/RfD
Where:         HQ = hazard quotient
               Intake = estimated intake for a chemical (mg/kg-day)
               RfD = reference dose (mg/kg-day)
The intake and the RfD will represent the same exposure period (i.e., chronic, subchronic, or
acute).

As previously stated, the HI is calculated by summing the HQs for all chemicals for likely
exposure scenarios for a specific population. An HI greater than 1 indicates that the potential
exists for noncarcinogenic health effects to occur as a result of site-related exposures, with the
potential for health effects increasing as the HI increases. When the HI calculated for all
chemicals for a specific population exceeds 1, separate HI values are then calculated for those
chemicals which are known to act on the same target organ or effect. These discrete HI values
are then compared to the threshold limit of 1 to evaluate the potential for noncancer health
effects on a specific target organ or effect. The HI provides a useful reference point for gauging
the potential significance of multiple contaminant exposures within a single medium or across
media. A summary of the noncarcinogenic risks associated with these chemicals for each
exposure pathway is contained in Appendix 2, Table 6.

As summarized in Appendix 2, Table 6, the noncancer hazard estimates exceeded EPA’s
threshold value of 1 for the future on-site construction worker, future on-site child resident,
future on-site adult resident and a current/future off-site child recreator. The total HI for the

                                                  11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

construction worker of 25, was primarily attributable to PCE, TCE, biphenyl and naphthalene in
groundwater. The HI for an on-site child and adult resident were 59 and 46 respectively;
exposure to PCE, TCE and 4-chloroaniline in groundwater drove the majority of the hazard
exceedances. As for the child recreator, exposure to tetrachloroethylene, trichloroethylene and
manganese in seeps was associated with a HI of 2. However, since manganese, a metal, is not
considered to be Site-related, it was not retained as a COC.

For carcinogens, risks are generally expressed as the incremental probability of an individual
developing cancer over a lifetime as a result of exposure to a carcinogen under the conditions
described in the Exposure Assessment, using the cancer slope factor (SF) for oral and dermal
exposures and the inhalation unit risk (IUR) for inhalation exposures. Excess lifetime cancer
risk for oral and dermal exposures is calculated from the following equation, while the equation
for inhalation exposures uses the IUR, rather than the SF:

Risk = LADD x SF
Where:         Risk = a unit-less probability (1 x 10-6) of an individual developing cancer
               LADD = lifetime average daily dose averaged over 70 years (mg/kg-day)
               SF = cancer slope factor, expressed as [1/(mg/kg-day)]
These risks are probabilities that are usually expressed in scientific notation (such as 1 x 10-4).
An excess lifetime cancer risk of 1 x 10-4 indicates that one additional incidence of cancer may
occur in a population of 10,000 people who are exposed under the conditions identified in the
Exposure Assessment. The NCP and current Superfund guidance identify acceptable exposure
levels as representing an individual’s upper-bound lifetime excess cancer risk of 10-4 to 10-6
(corresponding to a one-in-ten-thousand to a one-in-a-million excess cancer risk), with 10-6 being
the point of departure for determining remediation goals for alternatives when applicable or
relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs) are not available or are not sufficiently
protective because of the presence of multiple contaminants at a site or multiple pathways of
exposure.

As summarized in Appendix 2, Table 7, results of the baseline HHRA indicated the total cancer
risk estimate of 4.4 x 10-3 for the future on-site resident (child and adult) exceeded EPA’s
threshold criteria. Ethylbenzene, vinyl chloride and 4-chloroaniline in groundwater were the
primary COCs.

The potential for subsurface vapor intrusion (VI) into indoor air is evaluated when Site soils
and/or groundwater are known or suspected to contain chemicals that are considered to be
volatile. A comparison of maximum detected concentrations of volatile chemicals found in Site-
wide groundwater to EPA’s chemical-specific, risk-based groundwater VISLs was conducted as
part of the HHRA. The VISLs provide groundwater levels associated with an indoor air
concentration that represents a cancer risk ranging from 1 x 10-4 and 1 x 10-6 or a noncancer
hazard quotient of 1. Concentrations exceeding these screening values indicate the potential for
vapor intrusion exists. Results of the screening evaluation identified the following 9 chemicals
at concentrations greater than residential and commercial VISLs: 1,2-dichloroethane, 1,4-
dichlorobenzene, benzene, ethylbenzene, PCE, TCE, vinyl chloride, naphthalene, and cyanide.

                                                12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Based on the results of the screening evaluation, the potential for vapor intrusion exists in the
future timeframe if buildings were to be constructed overlying the plume.

In summary, results of the HHRA for the Site found that exposure to VOCs and SVOCs in
groundwater beneath the Site were associated with cancer and noncancer risk estimates that
exceeded EPA’s threshold criteria. The presence of volatile COCs were also found at levels that
could be of concern for the future subsurface to indoor air VI pathway. Furthermore, exposure to
PCE, TCE and manganese present in seep water samples collected from Grand Sprute Run was
associated with a noncancer hazard that slightly exceeded EPA’s hazard index of 1 for the child
recreator. However, as is noted above, manganese is not considered to be Site-related, and is
therefore not retained as a COC.

In addition to those COCs identified in the original ROD, four additional COCs were identified
for the Drum Disposal Area based on their presence in groundwater above state and federal
drinking water standards and also their presence in soil above concentrations that could impact
groundwater as shown in the flowchart below. These are 1,1,1-TCA, 1,1-DCA, 1,1-DCE and cis-
1,2-DCE.




Uncertainties

The procedures and inputs used to assess risks in this evaluation, as in all such assessments, are
subject to a wide variety of uncertainties. In general, the main sources of uncertainty include:

   •   environmental chemistry sampling and analysis
   •   environmental parameter measurement
   •   fate and transport modeling
   •   exposure parameter estimation
   •   toxicological data.

Uncertainty in environmental sampling arises in part from the potentially uneven distribution of
chemicals in the media sampled. Consequently, there is significant uncertainty as to the actual
levels present. Environmental chemistry-analysis error can stem from several sources including
the errors inherent in the analytical methods and characteristics of the matrix being sampled.


                                                 13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Uncertainties in the exposure assessment are related to estimates of how often an individual
would actually come in contact with the chemicals of concern, the period of time over which
such exposure would occur, and in the models used to estimate the concentrations of the
chemicals of concern at the point of exposure.

Uncertainties in toxicological data occur in extrapolating both from animals to humans and from
high to low doses of exposure, as well as from the difficulties in assessing the toxicity of a
mixture of chemicals. These uncertainties are addressed by making conservative assumptions
concerning risk and exposure parameters throughout the assessment. As a result, the risk
assessment provides upper-bound estimates of the risks to populations near the Site and is highly
unlikely to underestimate actual risks related to the Site.

A noteworthy source of uncertainty in the HHRA conducted for the Site is that speciation data of
total chromium into hexavalent and trivalent forms was not conducted as part of the RI sampling.
Total chromium was identified as a COPC for soils, groundwater, sediment and surface water at
the Site. To provide a conservative (i.e., health-protective) assessment of potential risk, the more
conservative hexavalent toxicity values were used for evaluation of risk and hazard stemming
from exposure to total chromium in this HHRA. The risk characterization indicated that total
chromium concentrations detected at the Site, while varying by media, result in cancer risks that
are within EPA’s acceptable risk range of 10-6 to 10-4. Use of the hexavalent chromium cancer
toxicity values for total chromium may not accurately reflect the dominant form of chromium
species in the environment and therefore likely results in the overestimation of the cancer risks in
Site media.

More detailed information concerning public health risks, including a quantitative evaluation of
the degree of risk associated with various exposure pathways, is presented in the comprehensive
human health risk assessment report for the Site.

Ecological Risk Assessment Summary

A Screening Level Ecological Risk Assessment (SLERA) was conducted that focused on
evaluating the potential for impacts to sensitive ecological receptors to Site-related constituents
of concern through exposure to surface soil, surface water, sediment, and seep surface water and
sediment. Compounds detected in these media were compared to ecological screening values to
determine the potential for adverse effects to ecological receptors. A complete summary of the
evaluated exposure scenarios can be found in the Screening Level Ecological Risk
Assessment in the administrative record.

The SLERA evaluated risk to ecological receptors using two different analyses, a standard
SLERA evaluation and a refined SLERA evaluation that included less stringent assumptions and
parameters. The initial evaluation used the maximum concentration of all detected compounds
and the evaluation indicated that there is a potential ecological risk in surface soil, seep water,
sediment and surface water of Grand Sprute Run due to exposure to VOCs, SVOCs and metals.
Fifty-nine compounds were identified as COPCs in the initial SLERA evaluation. The SVOCs
and metals were detected throughout the Site, while VOCs were associated with groundwater
discharges originating from groundwater under the former lagoon that migrated to seeps and

                                                14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

surface water through sediment. The historical description of activities that occurred at the Site
indicates the discharge of VOCs into the former lagoon and soil resulted in contaminated
groundwater, which then flowed towards Grand Sprute Run.

The second evaluation, identified as Step 3A, evaluated risks to ecological receptors exposed to
the 95% upper-confidence limit (UCL) concentrations of COPCs as well as other refinements,
such as compounds being associated with former Site activities (i.e., Site-related compounds).
The refined evaluation reduced the COPC list from 59 COPCs to 30. This analysis also resulted
in a finding of unacceptable risk for ecological receptors exposed to VOCs in surface soil, seep
water, sediment and surface water, as well as from SVOCs in soil and sediment. This indicates
that a remedial action is warranted to address the presence of contamination in soil, groundwater,
seep water, sediment and surface water to prevent or eliminate exposure to ecological receptors.

Although SLERAs that identify unacceptable risk usually proceed to a baseline ecological risk
assessment, where additional data and revised toxicity values are used to further evaluate the
potential for ecological impacts, it is evident from the results of this SLERA, combined with the
fate and transport of the groundwater, that the primary ecological risks are from groundwater
contamination discharging to the seeps and creek. The SLERA evaluations also identified
impacts from surface soils, mainly from inorganic compounds which are not believed to be Site
related. Given that the remedy selected in the 2017 ROD, as amended by the remedial alternative
proposed in this ROD Amendment, will address the soil in the source areas, as well as the
contaminated groundwater discharge to the seep water and creek, no additional ecological
investigations were needed since the completed ecological exposure pathways will be eliminated
with the implementation of the remedial actions.

Basis for Remedy Modification

Based on the results of the quantitative human health and ecological risk assessments and the
additional investigation during the PDI, EPA has determined that actual or threatened releases of
hazardous substances at and from the Site, if not addressed by the response action selected in this
ROD amendment, may present a current or potential threat to human health and the environment.
The vadose and saturated zone soil contamination in the Drum Disposal Area is acting as a
contamination source to the southern CVOC groundwater plume, and therefore source
contamination in the Drum Disposal Area should be addressed to control the southern
groundwater plume migration to seeps, surface water, and sediments.

REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES

RAOs are specific goals to protect human health and the environment. These objectives are
based on available information and standards, such as ARARs, to-be-considered (TBC)
advisories, criteria and guidance, and site-specific risk-based levels and background (i.e.,
reference area) concentrations.

The following RAOs were established for the Site in the 2017 ROD:




                                                 15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   •   Control or remove source areas to prevent or minimize further impacts to groundwater,
       seep water, surface water, and sediment.

   •   Prevent current and potential future unacceptable risks to human receptors through
       ingestion, dermal contact with and inhalation of contaminated groundwater.

   •   Prevent potential future unacceptable inhalation risks to human receptors through
       subsurface vapor intrusion into indoor air.

   • Restore groundwater to its expected beneficial use to the extent practicable by reducing
       contaminant concentrations below the more stringent of federal maximum contaminant
       levels (MCLs), state MCLs, and NJ Groundwater Quality Standards (GWQS).

   •   Prevent or minimize current and potential future unacceptable risks to ecological
       receptors through direct contact with or ingestion of contaminated soil, sediment, and
       surface water.

Achievement of the first RAO is relevant for this ROD Amendment and will be referred to
herein as the “Source Control RAO.”

Remediation Goals

To achieve the Site-wide RAOs, the 2017 ROD selected remediation goals (RGs) for COCs in
soil, sediment, and groundwater. The RGs for groundwater, sediment, and soil remain those
selected in the 2017 ROD. EPA has adopted the preliminary RGs identified in the 2023 Proposed
Plan as the final RGs for the Drum Disposal Area.

The soil RGs selected in the 2017 ROD were based on the NJDEP Default Impact to
Groundwater Soil Screening Levels (NJIGWSSLs). In May 2021, these were superseded by
NJDEP’s Migration to Groundwater Soil Remediation Standards (NJMGWSRS). As mentioned
above in the discussion of the Human Health Risk Assessment, four additional COCs have been
identified in the Drum Disposal Area (1,1,1-TCA, 1,1-DCA, 1,1-DCE, and cis-1,2,-DCE). The
RGs selected for the newly identified COCs in the Drum Disposal Area have been established
using the 2021 NJMGWSRS (Appendix 2, Table 8).

To ensure the Source Control RAO is achieved (i.e., to ensure that further impacts to
groundwater, seep water, surface water, and sediment are prevented or minimized), a
concentration-based performance criterion was developed for soil in the saturated zone that
complements the groundwater remedy identified in the 2017 ROD. Based on an evaluation of
the Site data using Remediation Evaluation Model for Chlorinated Solvents (REMChlor), EPA
determined that a performance criterion of 1 mg/kg for PCE will provide adequate source
remediation to enhance the original permeable reactive barrier groundwater remedy, such that
existing groundwater RGs can be achieved within a reasonable timeframe in the downgradient
groundwater of the southern plume. PCE is the COC found most frequently and at the highest
concentrations in the Drum Disposal Area, so the use of the 1 mg/kg performance criterion for
PCE is expected to reduce the soil COC mass by more than 90% and remove concentrations

                                               16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

indicative of DNAPL.

A summary of all RGs for the Drum Disposal Area is presented in Appendix 2, Table 8.

SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

CERCLA Section 121(b)(1), 42 U.S.C. § 9621(b)(1), mandates that remedial actions be protective
of human health and the environment, be cost effective, and use permanent solutions, alternative
treatment technologies, and resource recovery alternatives to the maximum extent practicable.
Section 121(b)(1) also establishes a preference for remedial actions which employ, as a principal
element, treatment to reduce the volume, toxicity, or mobility of the hazardous substances,
pollutants, and contaminants at a site permanently and significantly. CERCLA Section 121(d), 42
U.S.C. § 9621(d), further specifies that a remedial action must attain a level or standard of control
of the hazardous substances, pollutants, and contaminants that at least attains ARARs under
federal and state laws, unless a waiver can be justified under Section 121(d)(4) of CERCLA, 42
U.S.C. § 9621(d)(4).

Remedial alternatives evaluated for the Drum Disposal Area portion of the Site are summarized
below. Capital costs are those expenditures that are required to construct a remedial alternative.
Operation and maintenance (O&M) costs are those post-construction costs necessary to ensure or
verify the continued effectiveness of a remedial alternative and are estimated on an annual basis.
Present worth is the amount of money which, if invested in the current year, would be sufficient
to cover all the costs over time associated with a project, calculated using a discount rate of
seven percent and up to a 30-year time interval. Construction time is the time required to
construct and implement the alternative and does not include the time required to design the
remedy, negotiate performance of the remedy with responsible parties, or procure contracts for
design and construction. Detailed information regarding the alternatives can be found in the 2023
Focused Feasibility Study Report (FFS Report).

EPA is modifying the remedy selected in the 2017 ROD to include a component for addressing
the source contamination in the Drum Disposal Area discovered during the design of the remedy
selected in the 2017 ROD. Since this is a newly discovered area, it was not addressed in the
original ROD and, as such, comparison to the original ROD is not relevant here. Please note that
while the remedy selected in the 2017 ROD, including placement of a PRB for the southern
CVOC plume, will address groundwater contamination, it would not directly address the source
of the groundwater contamination in the Drum Disposal Area soil. Therefore, potential
technologies applicable to soil remediation in the Drum Disposal Area were identified and
screened in the FFS by effectiveness, implementability, and cost criteria. The technologies that
passed the initial screening were then assembled into remedial alternatives.

The time frames below for construction do not include the time for designing a remedy, reaching
remedy agreement with responsible parties if they are identified, or the time to procure necessary
contracts. All of the following alternatives apply specifically to vadose and saturated zone soil in
the Drum Disposal Area.




                                                 17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The 2017 ROD established that institutional controls (ICs) will be needed until the RAOs are
met, which may include establishment of a New Jersey Groundwater Classification Exception
Area/Well Restriction Area (CEA/WRA) that restricts the use of the contaminated aquifer, along
with deed notices that restrict development of the affected areas. Along with the 2017 ROD ICs,
additional ICs may be necessary for the remedial alternatives for the Drum Disposal Area and
are described in the alternatives below.

Alternative 1 - No Action

Alternative 1 is required by the NCP to provide an environmental baseline against which impacts
of the other remedial alternatives can be compared. This alternative would leave the vadose zone
and saturated zone sources of contamination at the Drum Disposal Area in their current state. No
action would be initiated to remediate contaminated media or otherwise mitigate the migration of
contamination from the vadose zone and saturated zone sources to the southern CVOC
groundwater plume that poses unacceptable risks to human health and the environment.

Total Capital Cost:            $0
Total O&M:                     $0
Total Periodic Cost:           $0
Total Present Net Worth:       $0
Timeframe:                     0 years

Alternative 2 – Containment of Vadose and Saturated Zone Sources; Institutional Controls

Alternative 2 includes installation of surface and subsurface containment components for the
vadose zone and saturated zone soils to minimize migration of contaminants from the source
zone. In this alternative, a barrier wall would be installed as the subsurface containment
component to minimize further subsurface migration of contamination from the vadose and
saturated zone sources to downgradient groundwater. The barrier wall would be installed around
the full perimeter of the remediation zones to fully encompass the vadose zone sources
exceeding the RGs and surround the extent of environmental media exceeding the performance
criterion in the saturated zone. It is assumed that the barrier wall will extend 3 feet below the
depth of the saturated zone sources to address the potential migration of COCs through back
diffusion from the Woodbury Formation clay.

The barrier wall could be constructed of a rigid structural material such as steel sheet pile, or
flowable low-permeability material such as soil/cement bentonite slurry or cement bentonite
slurry. Geotechnical sampling may be required to support the design of the barrier wall.

A low-permeability cover would be installed as the surface containment component across the
horizontal extent of the vadose zone and saturated zone sources to minimize infiltration of
precipitation and stormwater runoff into the subsurface which could result in additional leaching
of contamination from these sources (particularly vadose zone sources) to groundwater. The low
permeability cover would extend to the alignment of the subsurface barrier wall to shed
precipitation and stormwater beyond the area of subsurface containment. The low-permeability
cover could be constructed of a hardened low-permeability material such as asphalt or concrete,

                                                 18

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

low-permeability earthen material such as clay, or multilayer geosynthetic material such as
geomembrane. The exact materials used to construct the barrier wall and low permeability cover
would be determined during the remedial design.

Long-term monitoring of the low permeability cover and barrier wall would be required for this
alternative, including periodic inspections and repairs of the cover.

ICs would be required as part of this alternative, consisting of a CEA and deed notices consistent
with the 2017 ROD as described above, or other administrative and legal measures (i.e., legal
controls) intended to control activities within the Drum Disposal Area that could disturb the
cover and/or barrier wall and to prevent direct contact with contaminated media. Site-wide five-
year reviews (FYR) would be conducted along with the other response actions selected in the
2017 ROD until the RAOs are met. Monitoring in the Drum Disposal Area (consisting primarily
of nonintrusive visual inspections) would be performed, as necessary, to complete the five-year
Site reviews.

Total Capital Cost:           $5,651,000
Total O&M:                    $1,560,000
Total Periodic Cost:          $0
Total Present Net Worth:      $6,296,000
Timeframe:                    1 year construction, O&M In Perpetuity (O&M cost estimate
                              based on 30 years)

Alternative 3 – Removal of Vadose Zone Sources and In-Situ Chemical/Biological
Treatment of Saturated Zone Sources

Alternative 3 would consist of removing vadose zone sources, conventional excavation and
removal of drums and drum remnants, and performing in-situ chemical/biological treatment of
saturated zone sources to reduce leaching of contaminants to the southern CVOC groundwater
plume. It is assumed that excavation of vadose zone soil would be conducted first and in-situ
chemical/biological treatment (using in-situ soil mixing as the representative technology) of the
saturated zone soil would be completed after to reduce complexities related to excavation in
areas that had recently undergone implementation of in situ treatment. However, in-situ
chemical/biological treatment may be performed first, followed by excavation of vadose zone
soil. The specific sequencing of the remedial action would be determined during the RD.

Vadose zone soil would be excavated to the water table at approximately 7 feet bgs, and it is
assumed that no dewatering or shoring would be necessary. Confirmation soil samples would be
collected from the excavation sidewalls to confirm that the soil RGs for the vadose zone are met
and from the bottom of the excavation if in-situ chemical/biological treatment is not required
below the excavation bottom. After excavation and collection of confirmation soil samples, the
excavated area would be backfilled with imported fill to approximately 2 to 3 feet bgs to prepare
for subsequent in-situ treatment, assuming the use of soil mixing delivery method.

The saturated zone soil would be treated through in-situ chemical reduction (ISCR) and in-situ
bioremediation (ISB) or in-situ bioremediation with pH adjustment. A chemical reductant

                                                19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

coupled with an organic amendment would be used to stimulate both biotic and abiotic
degradation of the COCs present in source material. The method of amendment delivery would
likely be through large diameter augers; however, the exact delivery method would be
determined as part of the RD. Performance monitoring would be necessary to evaluate
appropriate distribution of the amendments.

Total Capital Cost:           $17,685,000
Total O&M:                    $0
Total Periodic Cost:          $0
Total Present Net Worth:      $17,663,000
Timeframe:                    1 year construction, 2 years Performance monitoring

Alternative 4 – Removal of Vadose Zone and Saturated Zone Sources

Alternative 4 would consist of removing vadose zone and saturated zone sources to prevent
leaching of contaminants to the southern CVOC groundwater plume. Under this alternative, the
excavation of vadose zone sources would be performed similarly to Alternative 3. This portion
of the excavation would extend to the water table at approximately 7 feet bgs, and it is assumed
that no dewatering, sloping, or shoring would be necessary. The vertical extent of saturated zone
sources reaches an average depth of 22 feet bgs, but in some areas may extend to depths greater
than 30 feet bgs. Removal of saturated zone soil would require deep excavation and would likely
need a robust dewatering system and an excavation support system. It is estimated that a
temporary water treatment system with a capacity of up to 200 gallons per minute could be
required to treat water generated by dewatering activities. Subsurface drums and drum remnants
would also be removed in this alternative.

Since this alternative includes excavation of vadose zone soils with COC concentrations that are
lower than RGs (Appendix 2, Table 8) for the Drum Disposal Area in order to access saturated
soil, excavated material would be segregated to separate soils that could potentially be used as
backfill from those that would require off-site disposal. Soil samples would be collected from
the bottom and sidewalls of the excavated areas to confirm that RGs have been achieved. After
collection of confirmation soil samples, the excavated area would be backfilled with a
combination of the stockpiled soils that are below RGs and imported fill. Excavated soil with
concentrations of COCs greater than the RGs or performance criteria would be loaded and
transported for disposal to an off-site permitted facility. Following backfill of the excavated
areas, the ground surface would be restored to match existing conditions.

Total Capital Cost:           $36,509,000
Total O&M:                    $0
Total Periodic Cost:          $0
Total Present Net Worth:      $36,509,000
Timeframe:                    1 year




                                               20

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 5: In-Situ Thermal Treatment of Vadose Zone and Saturated Zone Sources.

Alternative 5 would eliminate vadose zone and saturated zone sources by vaporizing, extracting,
and treating COCs through in-situ thermal treatment (ISTT). Thermal treatment directly heats the
subsurface soil, increasing the contaminant’s vapor pressure and diffusivity, and decreasing its
viscosity. As a result, the evaporation rate and mobility of the contaminant is increased, which
ultimately decreases the removal time associated with soil vapor extraction and/or vacuum
enhanced extraction. ISTT is a well-established technology for the treatment of CVOCs and is
therefore expected to address contaminants in the Drum Disposal Area.

In this alternative, a substantial number of thermal heating points and vapor extraction wells
would be required in order to remediate the lateral and vertical extent of the source
contamination. Additionally, the system would demand significant amounts of energy to meet
heating requirements. Extracted vapors would be treated through a vapor treatment system
consisting of granular activated carbon. Groundwater extraction may be used in conjunction with
in-situ thermal remediation to provide hydraulic control within the remediation area and prevent
migration of contaminated groundwater outside of the remediation zone. Any liquids generated
from the vapor treatment system (condensate) or groundwater extraction, if necessary for
hydraulic control, would be treated through a liquid treatment system potentially consisting of
granular activated carbon (GAC) prior to being discharged. In addition to the thermal heating
points, vapor extraction wells, and groundwater extraction system, temperature monitoring
points would also be installed throughout the remediation zone to confirm the design
temperatures are maintained throughout the duration of heating.

The design of the thermal system, including the vapor extraction system and specific method of
thermal treatment utilized, electrical resistance heating (ERH), thermal conductive heating
(TCH), steam enhanced extraction (SEE), or a combination, would be determined during the RD.

Subsurface drums and drum remnants would be removed prior to implementation of ISTT.

Confirmation soil samples would be collected prior to cooldown while the soil remains “hot” to
confirm the treatment effectiveness and ensure that concentrations of COCs remaining in soil
following treatment meet RGs and the performance criteria. Following completion of the thermal
treatment, the ground surface would be restored to be reasonably consistent with existing
conditions.

Total Capital Cost:          $29,469,000
Total O&M:                   $0
Total Periodic Cost:         $0
Total Present Net Worth:     $29,469,000
Timeframe:                   1 year

COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES

In selecting a remedy, EPA considered the factors set out in CERCLA Section 121, 42 U.S.C.
§ 9621, by conducting a detailed analysis of the viable remedial response measures pursuant to
the NCP, 40 CFR § 300.430(e)(9), and EPA’s Guidance for Conducting Remedial Investigations
                                              21

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

and Feasibility Studies under CERCLA (OSWER Directive 9355.3-01). In evaluating the
remedial alternatives, each alternative is assessed against nine evaluation criteria set forth in the
NCP: overall protection of human health and the environment, compliance with ARARs, long-
term effectiveness and permanence, reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment,
short-term effectiveness, implementability, cost, and state and community acceptance. Refer to
the table below for a more detailed description of the evaluation criteria.

This section of the ROD Amendment summarizes the evaluation of the relative performance of
each alternative against the nine criteria, noting how each compare to the others under
consideration. A detailed analysis of alternatives can be found in the FFS.


Threshold Criteria – The first two criteria are known as “threshold criteria” because they are
the minimum requirements that each response measure must meet in order to be eligible for
selection as a remedy.

1. Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment
Overall protection of human health and the environment addresses whether each alternative
provides adequate protection of human health and the environment and describes how risks
posed through each exposure pathway are eliminated, reduced, or controlled, through treatment,
engineering controls, and/or institutional controls.

Alternative 1, the no action alternative, is not protective of human health and the environment
because it does not control or remove source areas in the Drum Disposal Area to prevent or
minimize further impacts to groundwater, seep water, surface water, and sediment. Under
Alternative 1, the vadose zone and saturated zone soils would be a continuing source of
contamination to the southern CVOC groundwater plume and associated seeps that contribute to
sitewide unacceptable human health and ecological risks.

The “no action” alternative was eliminated from further consideration under the remaining eight
criteria because it is not protective of human health and the environment.

Alternative 2 would be protective of the human health and the environment by containing vadose
zone and saturated zone sources through the installation of a low-permeability cover and
subsurface barrier wall, thus preventing leaching to the southern CVOC groundwater plume and
associated seeps that contribute to sitewide unacceptable human health and ecological risks.

Alternative 3 would protect human health and the environment through removal of the vadose
zone sources and the use of chemical/biological in situ treatment for the saturated zone sources
to minimize the leaching to the southern CVOC groundwater plume and associated seeps that
contribute to sitewide unacceptable human health and ecological risks.

Alternative 4 would remove the vadose zone and saturated zone sources to minimize leaching to
the southern CVOC groundwater plume and associated seeps that contribute to sitewide
unacceptable human health and ecological risks. By removing sources of contamination in the
Drum Disposal Area, Alternative 4 would be protective of human health and the environment.

                                                 22

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 5 would be protective of human health and the environment by using in-situ thermal
treatment for the vadose and saturated zone sources to minimize leaching to the southern CVOC
groundwater plume and associated seeps that contribute to sitewide unacceptable human health
and ecological risks.

2. Compliance with applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs)

Section 121(d) of CERCLA and section 300.430(f)(1)(ii)(B) of the NCP require that remedial
actions at CERCLA sites at least attain legally applicable or relevant and appropriate federal and
state requirements, standards, criteria, and limitations which are collectively referred to as
"ARARs," unless such ARARs are waived under CERCLA Section 121(d)(4).

Applicable requirements are those cleanup standards, standards of control, and other substantive
requirements, criteria, or limitations promulgated under federal environmental or state
environmental or facility siting laws that specifically address a hazardous substance, pollutant,
contaminant, remedial action, location, or other circumstance found at a CERCLA site. Relevant
and appropriate requirements are those cleanup standards, standards of control, and other
substantive requirements, criteria, or limitations promulgated under federal environmental or
state environmental or facility siting laws that, while not “applicable” to a hazardous substance,
pollutant, contaminant, remedial action, location, or other circumstance at a CERCLA site,
address problems or situations sufficiently similar to those encountered at the CERCLA site that
their use is well-suited to the particular site. Only those state standards that are identified in a
timely manner and are more stringent than federal requirements may be ARARs.

Compliance with ARARs addresses whether a remedy will meet all the applicable or relevant
and appropriate requirements of federal and state environmental statutes or provides a basis for
invoking a waiver. ARARs are divided into three broad categories. These categories are
chemical-specific, location-specific and action-specific.

The RGs were developed based on the NJIGWSSLs (in effect in 2017), or the NJMGWSRS now
in effect. By meeting the RGs, Alternatives 2 through 5 will achieve the residential New Jersey
Soil Remediation Standards (NJRSRS) through treatment, containment or removal of the
contamination. Alternatives 2 through 5 will also enhance the compliance of the 2017 remedy
with chemical-specific ARARs associated with achievement of groundwater RGs, through
treatment, containment or removal of the contamination.

Location-specific ARARs for Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 include the Endangered Species Act,
Migratory Bird Treaty Act, New Jersey Endangered and Nongame Species Conservation Act,
and New Jersey Endangered Plant Species List Act. Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 would all include
disturbance of the surface and subsurface of the drum disposal area to some degree, so remedial
activities would need to be performed to mitigate impacts and/or confirm remedial activities do
not affect federal- or state-listed endangered species and migratory birds.

Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 would all comply with action-specific ARARs including relevant
portions of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act or analogous New Jersey regulations

                                                 23

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

for the management of hazardous and nonhazardous waste. Action-specific ARARs relating to
air emissions and soil erosion and sedimentation control would need to be met by Alternatives 2,
3, 4, and 5 because they all involve subsurface disturbance that may generate emissions and/or
soil materials that could be eroded by stormwater.

Because Alternative 4 involves a significant amount of excavation (compared to Alternatives 2,
3, and 5), the mechanisms used to comply with the action-specific ARARs relating to emissions
and soil erosion and sediment control are likely to be more complex. Additionally, Alternative 5
may involve air emissions associated with the in-situ treatment process that would need to be
adequately controlled to comply with action-specific ARARs. Alternative 3 would need to
comply with the rules established under the Underground Injection Control Program because of
the delivery of amendments with large-diameter augers. Alternative 2 would require deed notices
be established and maintained for the foreseeable future (assumed to be perpetual) to prevent
direct contact with contaminated media is the Drum Disposal Area.

Primary Balancing Criteria – The next five criteria, criteria 3 through 7, are known as
“primary balancing criteria”. These criteria are factors by which tradeoffs between response
measures are assessed so that the best options will be chosen, given site-specific data and
conditions.


3. Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence
 A similar degree of long-term effectiveness and permanence refers to expected residual risk and
the ability of a remedy to maintain reliable protection of human health and the environment over
time, once cleanup levels have been met. This criterion includes the consideration of residual
risk that will remain on-site following remediation and the adequacy and reliability of controls.

Alternative 2 is expected to successfully contain the COCs in the Drum Disposal Area and would
provide moderate long-term effectiveness and permanence. However, since vadose zone and
saturated zone sources would be contained and left in place under this alternative, there is
residual risk, so maintenance and monitoring would be required. Routine inspection, operation,
and maintenance would be needed in perpetuity to maintain the integrity of the low-permeability
cover and the inward hydraulic gradient across the barrier wall. Since the subsurface barrier and
low permeability cover would remain in place in perpetuity, this alternative would be susceptible
to the impacts of climate change or flooding and climate resiliency measures might be necessary.
Additionally, Alternative 2 would rely on ICs for protectiveness by preventing direct contact
with the remedial components and the contaminated media.

Alternative 3 would provide moderate to high long-term effectiveness and permanence. The
vadose zone sources would be removed under this alternative and the saturated zone sources
would be chemically treated. However, due to the nature of in-situ chemical treatment, there may
be residual risk in the saturated zone soil associated with incomplete degradation of the COCs or
inadequate amendment distribution. Performance monitoring and confirmation sampling would
be needed to confirm appropriate distribution of the amendments and that the performance
criterion has been met.


                                               24

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 4 would provide high long-term effectiveness and permanence, as there would be no
contamination remaining on-Site after remediation. Similar to Alternative 3, Alternative 4
completely removes the vadose zone sources of contamination. However, Alternative 4 also
permanently removes saturated zone contaminant sources, thereby eliminating the possibility
that any source area contaminants could remain above RGs or performance criteria in the
targeted area.

Alternative 5 would provide high long-term effectiveness and permanence, as it is more than
99% effective at treating the COCs for the Drum Disposal Area (i.e., PCE and its daughter
products). Due to the nature of in-situ thermal treatment technology, there is significantly less
risk of incomplete treatment of COCs when compared to Alternative 3. Alternative 5 is expected
to permanently remove COCs from the source area. There are potential risks associated with
uneven subsurface heating resulting in untreated areas, but this issue can be addressed through
proper design and performance monitoring. In addition, groundwater flux through the
remediation zone can decrease heating efficiency significantly. If necessary, groundwater flux
can be managed with upgradient hydraulic control based on observed groundwater velocity
through the remediation zone.

Alternatives 4 and 5 are likely to have higher long-term effectiveness and permanence than
Alternatives 2 and 3 because they are more technologically reliable and have the potential to
more completely remove contamination.

4. Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume through Treatment
Reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment refers to the anticipated
performance of the treatment technologies that may be included as part of a remedy.

Alternative 2 employs containment of the vadose and saturated zone sources rather than
treatment and reduces the mobility but does not reduce the toxicity or volume. Therefore,
Alternative 2 does not meet this criterion.

Alternative 3 provides moderate-to-high reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume through
treatment because it uses ISCR and ISB in the saturated zone. These in-situ chemical treatment
methods are well-established technologies and are expected to treat COCs through an irreversible
process. However, there is the possibility of residual leaching of daughter products due to the
potential of incomplete degradation. Vadose zone sources would be reduced through excavation
and off-site disposal. The excavated soil may undergo treatment, as needed, to comply with the
requirements of the disposal facility.

Alternative 4 provides low reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment because
it calls for the removal of vadose and saturated zone sources which in itself does not involve
treatment. However, excavated soil may undergo treatment, as needed, to comply with ARARs,
and/or the requirements of the disposal facility. Additionally, excavation in the saturated zone
will require dewatering and treatment of the wastewater prior to disposal.

Alternative 5 would provide a high reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment
because it includes complete destruction of contamination in both the saturated and vadose zone

                                                25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

sources. Unlike the other alternatives, Alternative 5 relies solely on treatment to achieve
remedial goals. Furthermore, thermal treatment is a well-established technology for the treatment
of CVOCs and presents comparatively little possibility of incomplete degradation of CVOCs
when compared to Alternative 3. Alternative 5 would also require subsequent treatment of
vapors and liquids (condensate and extracted groundwater) after volatilization from the thermal
treatment process.

5. Short-Term Effectiveness
 Short-term effectiveness addresses the period of time needed to implement the remedy and any
adverse impacts that may be posed to workers, the community and the environment during
construction and operation of the remedy until cleanup levels are achieved.

Alternative 2 would provide moderate to high short-term effectiveness in that there would be
minimally disruptive short-term impacts to the community during construction and the Source
Control RAO for the Drum Disposal Area would be achieved in a year or less. Alternative 2
involves the least amount of disturbance to contaminated soil and therefore has the
lowest short-term risks to the community and workers.

Alternative 3 has moderate short-term effectiveness because it is likely to have moderate short-
term impacts to the surrounding community and workers, and it would achieve the Source
Control RAO for the Drum Disposal Area in approximately three years. Impacts to the
community and workers would be a result of the hauling of contaminated soil and fill material
and mobilization of a large diameter auger drill rig using public roadways.

Alternative 4 is expected to have low short-term effectiveness because it requires the most
excavation and transportation of contaminated soil. The deep excavation in this alternative poses
significantly higher risks to site workers and is expected to have high short-term impacts on the
community due to the extensive hauling of contaminated soil and uncontaminated fill. It is
expected that the Source Control RAO for the Drum Disposal Area would be achieved in 1 year
or less.

Alternative 5 is expected to have high short-term effectiveness and will involve significantly less
disturbance to soils than Alternatives 3 and 4. In-situ thermal treatment poses safety risks to
workers and the community associated with the high temperatures and the power required to
complete thermal treatment. These risks could be managed through the use of specialized
operators, adherence to safety requirements, establishment of work zones, and use of personal
protective equipment. With the use of these risk management practices, minimal risk to workers
and the community is associated with the high temperatures and electricity required to operate
the thermal system. Thermal treatment is expected to effectively achieve the Source Control
RAO for the Drum Disposal Area in 1 year or less.



6. Implementability




                                                26

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Implementability addresses the technical and administrative feasibility of a remedy from design
through construction and operation. Factors such as availability of services and materials,
administrative feasibility, and coordination with other governmental entities are also considered.

Alternative 2 is considered moderately implementable because installing the barrier wall and low
permeability cover could be relatively easily implemented. However, Alternative 2 would require
ICs and in-place containment; there could be administrative feasibility challenges with
implementing a containment alternative that would require maintenance and monitoring in
perpetuity.

Alternative 3 is considered moderately implementable due to the need for specialized equipment
and services for in-situ soil mixing with large diameter augers. The success of this alternative
relies heavily on the ability of the augers to induce proper mixing of the soil and amendments in
the saturated zone. Alternative 3 is expected to be more implementable than Alternative 2
because Alternative 3 will be less administratively challenging to implement as there is no need
for perpetual maintenance and monitoring.

The implementability of Alternative 4 is considered low-to-moderate due to the need for
specialized equipment and services for the removal of saturated soils. The excavation of
saturated zone sources would require the use of sheet piling and a robust dewatering system.
Dewatering could pose a challenge as significant pumping would be required to maintain an
appropriate water level in the shallow aquifer during excavation. Additionally, extracted
groundwater would need to be treated. The difficulties associated with transport and disposal of
significant quantities of contaminated soil must also be considered with this alternative.
Alternative 4 is expected to be less implementable than Alternative 3 due to the challenges
expected with deep excavation and the transport of significant quantities of contaminated soil for
off-site disposal and clean fill material for backfill.

Alternative 5 is expected to be moderately implementable due to the need for specialized
equipment and services. A large number of heating points, temperature monitoring points, and
vapor extraction wells would need to be installed, hydraulic controls may need to be
implemented, and significant amounts of energy would be required to operate the system. It is
possible that coordination with the local power company could delay the remedial action due to
the significant energy demand or that seasonal conditions such as significant rainfall could delay
the remedial action. Alternative 2 is expected to be more easily implementable than Alternative
5, however Alternative 5 would not require ICs in addition to those outlined in the 2017 ROD
while Alternative 2 would require additional ICs in perpetuity. Alternative 4 would be less
implementable than Alternative 5 because the challenges associated with deep excavation into
the saturated zone and transportation and disposal of significant amounts of soil is expected to be
greater than the challenges associated with in-situ thermal treatment. Alternatives 3 and 5 are
both considered moderately implementable, as both involve in-situ treatment of saturated zone
sources and require specialized equipment and services. Although Alternative 3 poses technical
challenges associated with amendment delivery, a similar amount of technical challenge is
associated with the energy demands, hydraulic controls, and other installation requirements of
the thermal treatment system as outlined in Alternative 5. For this reason, the implementability
of Alternatives 3 and 5 is considered to be about the same.

                                                27

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

7. Cost
 Includes estimated capital and O&M costs, and net present worth value of capital and O&M
costs.

The estimated capital cost, O&M, and present worth costs for each alternative are discussed in
detail in the FFS. The cost estimates are based on the best available information. The present-
worth cost for Alternative 2 assumes a 30-year O&M timeframe after the base year and is
calculated using a discount rate of seven percent. The present value cost for Alternative 3 was
evaluated over a 2-year period after the base year to account for remedy implementation and
performance monitoring. The present value cost for Alternatives 4 and 5 were evaluated over a
1-year period, which is the expected time it would take to implement either of those alternatives.

The estimated total capital cost, O&M cost, and total present-worth costs for each of the
alternatives are as follows:

           Alternative        Capital Cost             O&M            Present Worth
                                                                           Cost
                 2              $5,651,000           $1,560,000         $6,296,000
                 3             $17,685,000               $0            $17,663,000
                 4             $36,509,000               $0            $36,509,000
                 5             $29,469,000               $0            $29,469,000


Modifying Criteria – The final two evaluation criteria, criteria 8 and 9, are called “modifying
criteria” because new information or comments from the state or the community on the
Proposed Plan may modify the preferred response measure or cause another response measure
to be considered.


8. State Acceptance
 Indicates whether based on its review of the FFS report and the Proposed Plan, the state
supports, opposes, and/or has identified any reservations with the selected response measure.

NJDEP concurs with the selected remedy amendment. A letter of concurrence is attached in
Appendix IV.

9. Community Acceptance

Summarizes the public’s general response to the response measures described in the Proposed
Plan and the FFS report. This assessment includes determining which of the response measures
the community supports, opposes, and/or has reservations about.

On April 12, 2023, EPA held a formal public meeting on the Proposed Plan for this ROD
Amendment. All written and oral comments received are addressed in detail in Appendix V,
which is the Responsiveness Summary for this ROD. No comments received during the

                                                28

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

comment period for the Proposed Plan expressed disagreement with EPA’s preferred alternative
for the Site.

PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE

Principal threat wastes are those source materials considered to be highly toxic or highly mobile
that generally cannot be reliably contained or would present a significant risk to human health or
the environment should exposure occur. They include liquids and other highly mobile materials
(e.g., solvents) or materials having high concentrations of toxic compounds.

The presence of DNAPL that acts as a source to groundwater has been inferred at the Drum
Disposal Area portion of the Site. As such, this would be considered a principal threat waste at
the Site if identified during future intrusive activities.

SELECTED REMEDY AMENDMENT

Based upon consideration of the requirements of CERCLA, the results of Site investigations
including the Pre-Design Investigation, the detailed analysis of the alternatives and the public
comments, EPA’s selected remedy amendment to address the source contamination at the Drum
Disposal Area is Alternative 5, In-Situ Thermal Treatment. The selected remedy addresses the
Drum Disposal Area and is an amendment to the remedy selected in the 2017 ROD.

The major components of the remedy amendment include:

   •   Installation of thermal heating points and vapor extraction wells
   •   Transportation and disposal of contaminated media generated from thermal heating
       points and vapor extraction well installation
   •   Confirmatory soil sampling

The source area soil contamination in the Drum Disposal Area will be addressed through ISTT.
ISTT involves the installation of thermal heating points into the subsurface such that
contaminants can be vaporized, extracted by vapor extraction wells, and treated above ground.
The source of contamination in the Drum Disposal Area was delineated during the PDI for the
remedy selected in the 2017 ROD; however, additional evaluation is necessary to fully design
the amended remedy. The design of the thermal system, including the vapor extraction system
and specific method of thermal treatment utilized, ERH, TCH, SEE, or a combination, would be
determined during the RD. Confirmation soil samples will be collected to ensure the
effectiveness of the treatment.

This amendment will work in conjunction with the Site remedy selected in the 2017 ROD. The
components of the remedy described in the 2017 ROD are not being modified by this ROD
Amendment, including excavation of contaminated soil acting as a source of groundwater
contamination in the Former Lagoon Area portion of the Site, installation of two permeable
reactive barriers to address groundwater contamination, excavation of impacted sediment in
Grand Sprute Run, and ICs as necessary until remedial action objectives are met. Since the
amended remedy will permanently remove the newly identified source area of contamination, no
additional ICs beyond those required by the 2017 ROD are needed.
                                                29

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

In addition, by treating soil contamination in the Drum Disposal Area that is acting as an
ongoing source of contamination to groundwater, consistent with the 2017 ROD the amended
remedy will also address contamination resulting from the discharge of groundwater to seeps,
which has impacted seep water, surface water, and sediment.

The total estimated present-worth cost for the selected remedy amendment is $29,469,000. A
more detailed, itemized list of costs for the selected remedy amendment may be found in the
FFS. The cost estimates, which are based on available information, are order of magnitude
engineering cost estimates that are expected to be within +50 to -30 percent of the actual cost of
the project.

Consistent with EPA Region 2’s Clean and Green Policy, EPA will evaluate the use of
sustainable technologies and practices with respect to implementation of the selected remedy
amendment.

These actions are considered the final remedy for the Drum Disposal Area.

Expected Outcomes of the Selected Remedy Amendment

Implementation of Alternative 5 will eliminate current and potential future exposure to
contaminants in source area soil, groundwater, seep water, surface water and sediment, and
prevent further migration of contamination to groundwater, seep water, surface water, and
sediment.

Summary of the Rationale for the Selected Remedy Amendment

The selection of Alternative 5 provides the best balance of trade-offs among the alternatives with
respect to the nine evaluation criteria. The selected alternative will be protective of human health
and the environment, complies with federal and state requirements that are legally applicable or
relevant and appropriate to the remedial action, is cost-effective, and will utilize permanent
solutions and treatment technologies to the maximum extent practicable.

NJDEP concurs with the selected remedy amendment.

The selected remedy amendment satisfies the two threshold criteria for remedy selection and
achieves the best combination of the five balancing criteria of the comparative analysis. This
alternative is preferred for the following primary reasons:

   •   It meets the threshold criteria of protection of human health and the environment and
       compliance with ARARs;
   •   It would provide the highest reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment;
   •   It is highly effective in the long-term and short-term at removing COCs;
   •   It is expected to achieve Source Control RAO in approximately one year;
   •   It is cost effective;
   •   It utilizes permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies or resource

                                                30

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       recovery technologies to the maximum extent practicable;
   •   It satisfies the preference for treatment as a principal element.


STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

CERCLA Section 121(b)(1) mandates that a remedial action must be protective of human health
and the environment, cost-effective, and utilize permanent solutions and alternative treatment
technologies or resource recovery technologies to the maximum extent practicable. Section
121(b)(1) of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. § 9621(b)(1), also establishes a preference for remedial actions
which employ treatment to permanently and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity, or
mobility of the hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants at a site. CERCLA Section
121(d), 42 U.S.C. § 9621(d), further specifies that a remedial action must attain a degree of
cleanup that satisfies ARARs under federal and state laws unless a waiver can be justified
pursuant to CERCLA Section 121(d)(4), 42 U.S.C. § 9621(d)(4).

EPA has determined that the selected remedy amendment complies with the CERCLA and NCP
provisions for remedy selection, meets the threshold criteria, and provides the best balance of
tradeoffs among the alternatives with respect to the balancing and modifying criteria. The
following sections discuss how the selected remedy amendment meets these statutory
requirements.

Protection of Human Health and the Environment

The selected remedy amendment, Alternative 5, will be protective of human health and the
environment because the in-situ thermal treatment will reduce the source contamination in the
Drum Disposal Area, reducing the contamination pathway to downgradient groundwater, seep
water, surface water, and sediment. Implementation of the selected remedy amendment will not
pose unacceptable short-term risks.

Compliance with ARARs

EPA expects that the selected remedy amendment for the Drum Disposal Area will comply with
chemical-specific, location-specific and action-specific ARARs consistent with the ROD. It will
be implemented in compliance with location-specific and action-specific ARARs. A complete
list of the ARARs and other guidance that concern the selected remedy amendment is presented
in Appendix II, Table 9.

Cost-Effectiveness

EPA has determined that the selected remedy amendment is cost-effective and represents a
reasonable value for the money to be spent. A cost-effective remedy is one whose costs are
proportional to its overall effectiveness (NCP § 300.430(f)(1)(ii)(D)). EPA evaluated the “overall
effectiveness” of those alternatives that satisfied the threshold criteria (i.e., were both protective
of human health and ARAR-compliant). Overall effectiveness is based on the evaluations of
three of the five balancing criteria (long-term effectiveness and permanence; reduction in

                                                 31

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

toxicity, mobility, and volume through treatment; and short-term effectiveness). Overall
effectiveness was then compared to costs to determine cost-effectiveness.

Each of the alternatives was subjected to a detailed cost analysis. In that analysis, capital and
annual O&M costs were estimated and used to develop present-worth costs. The estimated
present worth cost of the selected remedy amendment for the Site is $29,469,000. Based upon
the comparison of overall effectiveness to cost, the selected remedy amendment meets the
statutory requirement for Superfund remedies to be cost-effective. The overall effectiveness of
the selected remedy amendment was determined to be proportional to the costs. Therefore, the
selected remedy amendment represents a reasonable value for the money to be spent.

Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment Technologies (or Resource
Recovery) Technologies to Maximum Extent Practicable

EPA has determined that the selected remedy amendment represents the maximum extent to
which permanent solutions and treatment technologies can be utilized in a practicable manner for
this Site. Of those alternatives that are protective of human health and the environment and
comply with ARARs (or provide a basis for invoking an ARAR waiver), EPA has determined
that the selected remedy amendment provides the best balance of trade-offs in terms of the five
balancing criteria, while also considering the statutory preference for treatment as a principal
element, the bias against off-site disposal without treatment, and State/support agency and
community acceptance. Implementation of the selected remedy amendment will eliminate
current human and ecological receptors’ exposure to contaminated soil, groundwater, seep water,
surface water and sediment, will prevent future exposure to contaminated media and will utilize
treatment as a principal element.

Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element

The selected remedy amendment meets the statutory preference for the use of remedies that
involve treatment as a principal element.

Five-Year Review Requirements

The selected remedy, including actions taken pursuant to the 2017 ROD, as modified by this
ROD Amendment will not result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants remaining
on Site above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure. Although the
action for the Drum Disposal Area is estimated to take less than five years to attain the RGs,
components of the remedy selected in the 2017 ROD will take more than five years to attain
the RGs. EPA will conduct a policy review within five years of construction completion for
the Site to ensure that the remedy is, or will be, protective of human health and the
environment.


DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES




                                                32

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The Proposed Plan for the ROD Amendment was released for public comment on March 29,
2023. The public comment period closed on April 28, 2023. Comments were submitted during
the public comment period. Based on these comments, no changes to the remedy amendment, as
presented in the Proposed Plan, are warranted. The comments are addressed in the
Responsiveness Summary in Appendix III.

Please note that there were a few differences between this final ROD Amendment and the
Proposed Plan for the ROD Amendment, which are as follows:

   (1) the Proposed Plan states that there are no chemical-specific ARARs for the Drum
       Disposal Area. However, the NJDCSRS, and the NJRSRS for the Ingestion-Dermal
       Exposure Pathway are ARARs for this area and were identified as such in the FFS. The
       NJDCSRS are ARARs for benzene, PCE and TCE, which were identified as COCs in the
       2017 ROD, and the NJSRS for Ingestion-Dermal Exposure Pathway are ARARs for
       1,1,1-TCA, 1,1-DCA, 1,1-DCE, and cis-1,2-DCE, the newly identified COCs in the
       Drum Disposal Area. The RGs for the selected remedy amendment are based on the
       NJIGWSSLs (in effect in 2017), or the NJMGWSRS now in effect. By meeting the RGs,
       Alternative 5 will achieve the NJDCSRS (for the 2017 COCs) or the NJSRS for
       Ingestion-Dermal Exposure Pathway (for the new COCs.)

   (2) The Proposed Plan states that any liquids generated as part of Alternative 5, either from
       the vapor treatment system (condensate) or groundwater extraction, would be treated
       through a liquid treatment system consisting of GAC prior to discharge to Grand Sprute
       Run. While the treated wastewater could potentially be discharged to Grand Sprute Run,
       its exact disposition will be determined during remedial design and/or remedial action.

   (3) In some sections, the Proposed Plan indicates that additional ICs are needed for the
       remedial alternatives evaluated in the FFS. However, for Alternatives 3, 4, and 5, the
       sitewide selected remedy ICs from the 2017 ROD would protect the ongoing remedy
       until PRGs and the performance criterion are achieved in the Drum Disposal Area.
       Therefore, for these alternatives, no additional ICs would be needed to maintain
       protectiveness during remedy implementation.

   (4) The selected remedy amendment will remove sources within approximately a year of
       implementation. Therefore, no additional five-year review requirements are necessary for
       the Drum Disposal Area. The Site is to be reviewed at least once every five years until
       cleanup levels and unrestricted use/unlimited exposure are achieved, as mentioned in the
       2017 ROD.

   (5) The Proposed Plan states that deep excavation of saturated zone sources is not included in
       Alternative 4. However, Alternative 4 involves removal of saturated zone sources, and
       would require deep excavation, a robust dewatering system, and an excavation support
       system as indicated by the FFS.




                                               33

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX 1


 FIGURES




    34

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Figure 1 - Site Location Map




                               35

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Figure 2 - Site Features

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Figure 3- Soil Sampling and Groundwater Screening Locations in the Drum Disposal Area

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Figure 4 - Sitewide Contamination in Groundwater

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX 2


 TABLES

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         Table 1
   Chemicals of Concern in the Drum Disposal Area
                                   Maximum
                                   Concentration
                                   Detected in Drum
                                   Disposal Area
Chemical of Concern                (mg/kg)
Benzene                                             12
Tetrachloroethylene (PCE)                       38,800
Trichloroethene (TCE)                              410
1,1,1-Trichloroethane (1,1,1-
                                                 1,200
TCA)
1,1-Dichloroethane (1,1,-DCA)                         27
1,1-Dichloroethene (1,1,-DCE)                         17
Cis-1,2-dichloroethene (cis-1,2-
                                                      64
DCE)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            Table 2
                                              Summary of Chemicals of Concern and
                                          Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations
                                           from the 2017 Human Health Risk Assessment
Scenario Timeframe: Future
Medium: Groundwater
Exposure Medium: Groundwater

               Exposure                     Chemical of    Concentration Detected Concentration Frequency Exposure      Exposure Statistical
                 Point                       Concern            (Qualifier)           Units         of       Point        Point     Measure
                                                                                                Detection Concentratio Concentratio
                                                              Min         Max                              n1 (EPC)      n Units

                                                                                                                                   97.5% KM
Tapwater                             Ethylbenzene            0.39 (J)     920         µg/L       11/47       195.8        µg/L    (Chebyshev)
                                                                                                                                      UCL

                                                                                                                                     Gamma
                                     4-Chloroaniline         9.9 (J)     6900         µg/L        5/46       1007         µg/L      Adjusted
                                                                                                                                    KM-UCL

                                                                                                                                   Maximum
                                     Biphenyl (diphenyl)      1 (J)       1.6         µg/L        3/46        1.6         µg/L    Concentratio
                                                                                                                                      n

                                                                                                                                   95% KM (t)
                                     Naphthalene             3.2 (J)      68          µg/L        4/46       8.153        µg/L
                                                                                                                                      UCL

                                                                                                                                   97.5% KM
                                     Tetrachloroethylene     0.25 (J)    3000         µg/L       20/51       545.9        µg/L    (Chebyshev)
                                                                                                                                      UCL

                                                                                                                                    95% KM
                                     Trichloroethylene      0.081 (J)     160         µg/L       12/51       18.49        µg/L    (Chebyshev)
                                                                                                                                      UCL

                                                                                                                                     Gamma
                                     Vinyl Chloride          0.01 (J)     14          µg/L       13/37       2.566        µg/L      Adjusted
                                                                                                                                    KM-UCL

Scenario Timeframe: Current/Future
Medium: Seep Water
Exposure Medium: Seep Water

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     Exposure                                    Chemical of                 Concentration Detected Concentration Frequency Exposure      Exposure Statistical
                       Point                                      Concern                         (Qualifier)           Units         of       Point        Point     Measure
                                                                                                                                  Detection Concentratio Concentratio
                                                                                                Min         Max                              n1 (EPC)      n Units

                                                                                                                                                                                                         Gamma
Seep                                                    Tetrachloroethylene                       0.3 J            1700               µg/L              14/19           591               µg/L          Adjusted
                                                                                                                                                                                                        KM-UCL

                                                                                                                                                                                                         Gamma
                                                        Trichloroethylene                        0.34 J             150               µg/L              11/17            63               µg/L          Adjusted
                                                                                                                                                                                                        KM-UCL

                                                                                                                                                                                                          95%
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Adjusted
                                                        Manganese**                               34.7             7470               µg/L               8/8           7043               µg/L
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Gamma
                                                                                                                                                                                                          UCL

Footnotes:

(1) The UCLs were calculated using EPA's ProUCL software (Version 5.1.00); when available, UCLs were used as EPCs.

** Manganese is not considered to be site related and was not retained as a COC for purposes of remedy selection. It is shown in this table for informational
purposes only.




Definitions:

 EPC = Exposure point concentration

 J = Estimated value (qualifier)

 µg/L = Microgram per liter

 UCL = Upper confidence limit of mean




                                                       Summary of Chemicals of Concern and Medium-Specific Exposure Point Concentrations

This table presents the chemicals of concern (COCs) identified in the 2017 HHRA along with exposure point concentrations (EPCs) for each of the COCs detected in site media (i.e., the concentration used to estimate
the exposure and risk from each COC). The table includes the range of concentrations detected for each COC, as well as the frequency of detection (i.e., the number of times the chemical was detected in the samples
collected at the site), the EPC and how it was derived.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                          Table 3
                                                             Selection of Exposure Pathways
                                                      from the 2017 Human Health Risk Assessment
  Scenario          Source         Receptor Receptor            Medium/         Exposure        Exposure      Type of                  Rationale for Selection or
 Timeframe                        Population  Age               Exposure         Point           Route       Evaluation              Exclusion of Exposure Pathway
                                                                Medium

Future                           On-Site Worker     Adult          Soil        Surface Soil     Ingestion    Quantitative An on-site worker (indoor and outdoor) may come into
                                                                                 (0-2 ft)        Dermal                   contact with surface soil (0-2 ft); therefore, the pathway
                                                                                                                          is evaluated quantitatively
                                                                               Outdoor Air      Inhalation

                                                                Groundwater     Tapwater        Ingestion       None      An on-site potable well is used for certain tasks (e.g.,
                                                                                                                          cleaning the floor with a hose), for hand washing and
                                                                                                 Dermal      Quantitative flushing toilets. Bottled water is currently supplied to
                                                                                                                          employees for drinking; therefore, the dermal pathway is
                                                                              Indoor/Outdoor    Inhalation   Quantitative
                                                                                                                          evaluated quantitatively, and the ingestion pathway is
                                                                                   Air
                                                                                                                          not evaluated. Inhalation via vapor intrusion using
                                                                                                                          groundwater-derived vapor intrusion screening levels
                                                                                                                          (VISLs).
                 Unlined Waste
                  Lagoon &
Future                              On-Site         Adult          Soil                         Ingestion    Quantitative Redevelopment of the site may occur; therefore, a future
                  Wastewater                                                   Soil (0-10 ft)
                                  Construction                                                   Dermal                   on-site construction worker's exposure to soil (0-10 ft)
                     USTs
                                    Worker                                                                                in a trench is evaluated quantitatively.
                                                                               Outdoor Air      Inhalation
                  (Chlorinated
                 VOCs plume &                                   Groundwater    Trench water     Ingestion    Quantitative Redevelopment of the site may occur; therefore, a future
                 BTEX plume)                                                                     Dermal                   on-site construction worker's exposure to groundwater
                                                                                                                          in a trench is evaluated quantitatively. Inhalation via
                                                                                                Inhalation                vapor intrusion is also evaluated using groundwater-
                                                                                                                          derived VISLs.

Current/Future                      Off-Site        Adult       Groundwater     Tapwater        Ingestion    Qualitative   Exposure to groundwater by current off-site residents is
                                    Resident                                                     Dermal                    evaluated qualitatively; analytical results from a private
                                                                                                                           well survey indicate that no COPCs or other constituent
                                                                                Indoor Air      Inhalation                 are present above health-based standards in private
                                                                                                                           wells. Groundwater flow is from the site to Grand
                                                                                                                           Sprute Run and there are no intervening residences in
                                                     Child      Groundwater     Tapwater        Ingestion                  this downgradient direction. The results of the
                                                  (0-6 years)                                    Dermal                    quantitative evaluation of the on-site future resident risk
                                                                                                                           from groundwater consumption are a conservative

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              Indoor Air      Inhalation                 surrogate for this pathway and will be considered in the
                                                                                                         qualitative evaluation for off-site residents.

Future           On-Site       Adult       Groundwater        Tapwater        Ingestion    Quantitative The site could potentially be redeveloped with
                 Resident                                                      Dermal                   residences using private wells as potable water source;
                                                                                                        therefore, a future on-site resident's exposure to
                                                              Indoor Air      Inhalation                groundwater and indoor air contaminants via showering
                                                                                                        and vapor intrusion is evaluated quantitatively.

                                               Soil          Surface Soil     Ingestion    Quantitative The site could potentially be redeveloped with
                                                               (0-2 ft)        Dermal                   residences; therefore, a future on-site resident's exposure
                                                                                                        to surface soil is evaluated quantitatively.
                                                             Outdoor Air      Inhalation

                                Child      Groundwater        Tapwater        Ingestion    Quantitative The site could potentially be redeveloped with
                             (0-6 years)                                       Dermal                   residences using private wells as potable water source;
                                                                                                        therefore, a future on-site resident's exposure to
                                                              Indoor Air      Inhalation                groundwater and indoor air contaminants via showering
                                                                                                        and vapor intrusion is evaluated quantitatively.

                                               Soil          Surface Soil     Ingestion    Quantitative The site could potentially be redeveloped with
                                                               (0-2 ft)        Dermal                   residences; therefore, a future on-site resident's exposure
                                                                                                        to surface soil is evaluated quantitatively.
                                                             Outdoor Air      Inhalation


Current/Future   Off-Site      Adult           Soil          Surface Soil     Ingestion    Qualitative   Recreators may come into contact with surface soil
                 Recreator                                     (0-2 ft)        Dermal                    while visiting Grand Sprute Run; however, an on-site
                                                                                                         worker’s and resident’s exposure to surface soil are
                                                                                                         more conservative scenarios than what could reasonably
                                                             Outdoor Air      Inhalation
                                                                                                         be expected for a recreator at this site.

                                              Seeps        Water & Sediment   Ingestion    Quantitative Recreators may come into contact with seep water and
                                                                               Dermal                   sediment that are present along the banks of Grand
                                                                                                        Sprute Run.

                                           Surface Water    Surface Water     Ingestion    Quantitative Recreators may come into contact with sediment while
                                                                               Dermal                   visiting Grand Sprute Run, portions of which that are
                                                                                                        shallow.

                                                                 Fish         Ingestion    Qualitative   Recreators may ingest fish caught from Grand Sprute
                                                                                                         Run (FW2-NT/SE2). The primary constituents of
                                                                                                         interest are volatile and unlikely to be present in
                                                                                                         significant concentrations in fish; therefore, this
                                                                                                         pathway is evaluated qualitatively.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        Sediment             Sediment           Ingestion      Quantitative Recreators may come into contact with sediment while
                                                                                                                 Dermal                     visiting Grand Sprute Run, portions of which that are
                                                                                                                                            shallow.

                                                          Child            Soil                                 Ingestion       Qualitative    Recreators may come into contact with surface soil
                                                                                           Surface Soil
                                                       (0-6 years)                                               Dermal                        while visiting Grand Sprute Run; however, an on-site
                                                                                             (0-2 ft)
                                                                                                                                               worker’s and resident’s exposure to surface soil are
                                                                                                                                               more conservative scenarios than what could reasonably
                                                                                           Outdoor Air         Inhalation                      be expected for a recreator at this site.

                                                                          Seeps         Water & Sediment        Ingestion      Quantitative Recreators may come into contact with seep water and
                                                                                                                 Dermal                     sediment that are present along the banks Grand Sprute
                                                                                                                                            Run.

                                                                      Surface Water       Surface Water         Ingestion      Quantitative Recreators may come into contact with surface water
                                                                                                                 Dermal                     while visiting Grand Sprute Run.

                                                                                                Fish            Ingestion       Qualitative    Recreators may ingest fish caught from Grand Sprute
                                                                                                                                               Run (FW2-NT/SE2). The primary constituents of
                                                                                                                                               interest are volatile and unlikely to be present in
                                                                                                                                               significant concentrations in fish; therefore, this
                                                                                                                                               pathway is evaluated qualitatively.

                                                                        Sediment             Sediment           Ingestion      Quantitative Recreators may come into contact with sediment while
                                                                                                                 Dermal                     visiting Grand Sprute Run, portions of which that are
                                                                                                                                            shallow.

Definitions: FW2-NT/SE2 = NJDEP's surface water category for Grande Sprute Run



                                                                            Summary of Selection of Exposure Pathways

This table describes the exposure pathways associated with the varying media (soil, sediment, seeps, surface water and groundwater) that were evaluated in the 2017 Human Health Risk Assessment along with
the rationale for the inclusion of each pathway. Exposure media, exposure points, and characteristics of receptor populations are also included.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                     Table 4
                                                         Noncancer Toxicity Data Summary
                                                    from the 2017 Human Health Risk Assessment


Pathway: Ingestion/Dermal

          Chemicals          Chronic/    Oral RfD        Oral RfD     Absorp.     Adjusted     Adj.        Primary          Combined     Source    Dates of
          of Concern        Subchronic    Value           Units      Efficiency   RfD for     Dermal        Target         Uncertainty   of RfD      RfD
                                                                     (Dermal)     Dermal1    RfD Units      Organ          /Modifying    Target     Source
                                                                                                                             Factors     Organ    Publication



Ethylbenzene                  Chronic     1.0E-01        mg/kg-day       1         1.0E-01   mg/kg-day   Hepatic, renal      1000/1       IRIS     1/31/1987

4-Chloroaniline               Chronic     4.0E-03        mg/kg-day       1         4.0E-03   mg/kg-day     Lymphatic         3000/1       IRIS     8/22/1988

Biphenyl (diphenyl)           Chronic     5.0E-01        mg/kg-day       1         5.0E-01   mg/kg-day       Renal            30/10       IRIS     8/27/2013

                                                                                                            Nervous
Manganese2**                  Chronic     2.4E-02        mg/kg-day      0.04       9.6E-04   mg/kg-day                         3.0        IRIS     5/1/1996
                                                                                                            system

Naphthalene                   Chronic     2.0E-02        mg/kg-day       1         2.0E-02   mg/kg-day   Developmental        3000        IRIS     9/17/1998

Tetrachloroethylene           Chronic     6.0E-03        mg/kg-day       1         6.0E-03   mg/kg-day      Nervous           1000        IRIS     2/10/2012
                                                                                                         Developmental,
                                                                                                         Hepatic, Renal,
                                                                                                            Nervous
Trichloroethylene             Chronic     5.0E-04        mg/kg-day       1         5.0E-04   mg/kg-day                     100/1000/10    IRIS     9/28/2011
                                                                                                            System,
                                                                                                           Lymphatic,
                                                                                                          Reproductive

Vinyl Chloride                Chronic     3.0E-03        mg/kg-day       1         3.0E-03   mg/kg-day      Hepatic            30         IRIS     8/7/2000

Pathway: Inhalation

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                      Chemicals                                 Chronic/            Inhalation         Inhalation       Inhalation      Inhalation     Primary          Combined     Source      Dates of
                      of Concern                               Subchronic              RfC             RfC Units           RfD          RfD Units       Target         Uncertainty   of RfC        RfC
                                                                                                                            (If            (If          Organ          /Modifying    Target       Source
                                                                                                                        available)      available)                       Factors     Organ      Publication



Ethylbenzene                                                      Chronic             1.0E+00             mg/m3              NA            NA        Developmental         300         IRIS      3/1/1991

4-Chloroaniline                                                   Chronic                NA               mg/m3              NA            NA             NA               NA          NA           NA

                                                                                                                                                      Respiratory,                   PPRTV-
Biphenyl (diphenyl)                                               Chronic             4.0E-04             mg/m3              NA            NA                             3,000                  4/4/2011
                                                                                                                                                     Hepatic, Renal                  Appendix

Manganese**                                                       Chronic             5.0E-05             mg/m3              NA            NA           Nervous           100/1        IRIS      12/1/1993

                                                                                                                                                       Nervous,
Naphthalene                                                       Chronic             3.0E-03             mg/m3              NA            NA                            3000/1        IRIS      9/17/1998
                                                                                                                                                      Respiratory

Tetrachloroethylene                                               Chronic             4.0E-02             mg/m3              NA            NA           Nervous           1,000        IRIS      2/10/2012

                                                                                                                                                     Developmental,
                                                                                                                                                     Hepatic, Renal,
Trichloroethylene                                                 Chronic             2.0E-03             mg/m3              NA            NA           Nervous,           10          IRIS      9/28/2011
                                                                                                                                                       Lymphatic,
                                                                                                                                                      Reproductive

Vinyl Chloride                                                    Chronic             1.0E-01             mg/m3              NA            NA           Hepatic            30          IRIS      8/7/2000

Footnotes:
(1) Adjusted RfD for Dermal = Oral RfD x Oral Absorption Efficiency for Dermal (Exhibit 4-1,
RAGS E, 2004)
(2) The RfD for manganese was based on non-diet contributions as recommended in the IRIS assessment and User's Guide of the
RSL tables; a modifying factor of 3 was also used.
** Manganese is not considered to be site related and was not retained as a COC for purposes of remedy selection. It is shown in this
table for informational purposes only.


Definitions:

 IRIS = Integrated Risk Information System, U.S. EPA

 NA = Not available

 mg/m3 = Milligrams per cubic meter

 mg/kg-day = Milligrams per kilogram per day
 PPRTV (Appendix) = PPRTV Screening Toxicity Values- available in the appendix of the
PPRTV assessment

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          Table 5
                                               Cancer Toxicity Data Summary
                                        from the 2017 Human Health Risk Assessment

Pathway: Ingestion/ Dermal
              Chemical of Concern   Oral Cancer       Units          Adjusted       Slope          Weight of Evidence/           Source     Date of
                                    Slope Factor                   Cancer Slope     Factor          Cancer Guideline                         Slope
                                                                      Factor        Units                                                   Factor
                                                                   (for Dermal)                                                             Source
                                                                                                                                          Publication
                                                                                  (mg/kg-day)-                                    CAL
Ethylbenzene                          1.1E-02      (mg/kg-day)-1     1.1E-02           1                      D                            1/20/2011
                                                                                                                                  EPA
                                                                                  (mg/kg-day)-   Likely to be carcinogenic to
4-Chloroaniline                       2.0E-01      (mg/kg-day)-1     2.0E-01           1                                         PPRTV     9/30/2008
                                                                                                           humans
                                                                                  (mg/kg-day)-      Suggestive evidence of
Biphenyl (diphenyl)                   8.0E-03      (mg/kg-day)-1     8.0E-03           1                                          IRIS     8/27/2013
                                                                                                    carcinogenic potential
                                                                                  (mg/kg-day)-
Manganese**                             NA         (mg/kg-day)-1       NA              1                     NA                   NA          NA
                                                                                  (mg/kg-day)-   Carcinogenic potential cannot
Naphthalene                             NA         (mg/kg-day)-1       NA              1                                          IRIS     9/17/1998
                                                                                                        be determined
                                                                                  (mg/kg-day)-   Likely to be carcinogenic to
Tetrachloroethylene                   2.1E-03      (mg/kg-day)-1     2.1E-03           1                                          IRIS     2/10/2012
                                                                                                           humans
                                                                                  (mg/kg-day)-
Trichloroethylene                     4.6E-02      (mg/kg-day)-1     4.6E-02           1           Carcinogenic to humans         IRIS     9/28/2011
                                                                                  (mg/kg-day)-       Known/likely human
Vinyl Chloride                        7.2E-01      (mg/kg-day)-1     7.2E-01           1                                          IRIS     8/7/2000
                                                                                                        carcinogen
Pathway: Inhalation
              Chemical of Concern    Unit Risk        Units         Inhalation      Slope          Weight of Evidence/           Source     Date of
                                                                   Cancer Slope     Factor          Cancer Guideline                         Slope
                                                                      Factor        Units                                                   Factor
                                                                                                                                            Source
                                                                                                                                          Publication
                                                                                                                                  CAL
Ethylbenzene                          2.5E-06        (μg/m3)-1         NA             NA                      D                            1/20/2011
                                                                                                                                  EPA
4-Chloroaniline                         NA           (μg/m3)-1         NA             NA                     NA                   NA          NA

Biphenyl (diphenyl)                     NA           (μg/m3)-1         NA             NA                     NA                   NA          NA

Manganese**                             NA           (μg/m3)-1         NA             NA                      D                   NA          NA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                  C; Carcinogenic potential
                                                                                                                                                                                      CAL
Naphthalene                                                      3.4E-05             (μg/m3)-1                NA                   NA             cannot be determined [US                         1/20/2011
                                                                                                                                                                                      EPA
                                                                                                                                                         EPA, 1996]
                                                                                                                                                 Likely to be carcinogenic to
Tetrachloroethylene                                              2.6E-07             (μg/m3)-1                NA                   NA                                                 IRIS         2/10/2012
                                                                                                                                                           humans
Trichloroethylene                                                4.1E-06             (μg/m3)-1                NA                   NA              Carcinogenic to humans             IRIS         9/28/2011
                                                                                                                                                     Known/likely human
Vinyl Chloride                                                   4.4E-06             (μg/m3)-1                NA                   NA                                                 IRIS         8/7/2000
                                                                                                                                                        carcinogen
Footnotes:
** Manganese is not considered to be site related and was not retained as a COC for purposes of remedy selection. It is shown in this table for informational
purposes only.

Definitions:
  CAL EPA = Toxicity Criteria Database; Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment
(OEHHA)
  IRIS = Integrated Risk Information System, U.S. EPA
 NA = Not available
 PPRTV = Provisional Peer Reviewed Toxicity Values, U.S. EPA
 (µg/m3)-1 = Per micrograms per cubic meter
 (mg/kg-day)-1 = Per milligrams per kilogram per day


EPA Weight of Evidence (EPA, 1986):
 A = Human carcinogen
  C = Possible human carcinogen - based on sufficient evidence of carcinogenicity in animals and inadequate or no
evidence in humans
  D = Not classifiable as to human carcinogenicity


                                                                                    Summary of Toxicity Assessment
This table provides carcinogenic risk information from the 2017 Human Health Risk Assessment which is relevant to the contaminants of concern at the Site. Toxicity data are provided for the ingestion, dermal
and inhalation routes of exposure.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                Table 6
                                           Risk Characterization Summary - Noncarcinogens
                                              from 2017 Human Health Risk Assessment
Scenario Timeframe:           Future

Receptor Population:          On-Site Construction Worker

Receptor Age:                 Adult

   Medium        Exposure       Exposure Point        Chemical of          Primary Target Organ                       Noncarcinogenic Hazard Quotient
                 Medium                                Concern
                                                                                                           Ingestion       Dermal      Inhalation      Exposure
                                                                                                                                                      Routes Total

  Groundwater   Groundwater           Tapwater    Tetrachloroethylene           Nervous System               0.016           0.51          9.7             10

                                                                         Developmental, Hepatic, Renal,
                                                  Trichloroethylene                                          0.0063         0.065          7.4            7.4
                                                                        Nervous, Lymphatic, Reproductive

                                                  Biphenyl (diphenyl)                Renal                 0.00000055      0.000045        2.5            2.5

                                                                            Developmental/ Nervous,
                                                  Naphthalene                                               0.00007         0.0027         2.0            2.0
                                                                                  Respiratory

                                                                                                                      COC Total Hazard Index (HI) =       21.9

                                                                                                                Groundwater Hazard Index Total1 =          25

                                                                                                                           Receptor Hazard Index1 =        25

                                                                                                           Total Developmental HI across all media=       7.7

                                                                                                                 Total Hepatic HI across all media=        10

                                                                                                              Total Lymphatic HI across all media=        8.1

                                                                                                                 Total Nervous HI across all media=        21

                                                                                                            Total Renal System HI across all media=        10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                             Total Reproductive HI across all media=          7.5

                                                                                                              Total Respiratory HI across all media=          4.6

Scenario Timeframe:           Future

Receptor Population:          On-Site Resident

Receptor Age:                 Child (0-6 years)

   Medium        Exposure       Exposure Point        Chemical of          Primary Target Organ                       Noncarcinogenic Hazard Quotient
                 Medium                                Concern
                                                                                                            Ingestion        Dermal       Inhalation       Exposure
                                                                                                                                                          Routes Total

  Groundwater     Sitewide          Tapwater      Tetrachloroethylene           Nervous System                 4.5              2.4           10               17
                Groundwater
                                                                         Developmental, Hepatic, Renal,
                                                  Trichloroethylene                                            1.8             0.27           6.9             9.0
                                                                        Nervous, Lymphatic, Reproductive

                                                  4-Chloroaniline                  Lymphatic                    13             0.76           NA               13

                                                                                                                       COC Total Hazard Index (HI) =          39.0

                                                                                                                 Groundwater Hazard Index Total1 =             59

                                                                                                                             Receptor Hazard Index1 =          60

                                                                                                            Total Developmental HI across all media=          9.3

                                                                                                                     Total Hepatic HI across all media=       9.5

                                                                                                               Total Lymphatic HI across all media=            24

                                                                                                           Total Nervous System HI across all media=           38

                                                                                                                      Total Renal HI across all media=        9.5

                                                                                                             Total Reproductive HI across all media=          9.9

Scenario Timeframe:           Future

Receptor Population:          On-Site Resident

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Receptor Age:                 Adult

   Medium        Exposure       Exposure Point         Chemical of          Primary Target Organ                       Noncarcinogenic Hazard Quotient
                 Medium                                 Concern
                                                                                                             Ingestion        Dermal       Inhalation       Exposure
                                                                                                                                                           Routes Total

  Groundwater     Sitewide            Tapwater     Tetrachloroethylene           Nervous System                 2.7              1.6           12               16
                Groundwater
                                                                          Developmental, Hepatic, Renal,
                                                   Trichloroethylene                                            1.1             0.18           8.1             9.4
                                                                         Nervous, Lymphatic, Reproductive

                                                   4-Chloroaniline                  Lymphatic                   7.5             0.51           NA               8

                                                                                                                        COC Total Hazard Index (HI) =          33.4

                                                                                                                  Groundwater Hazard Index Total1 =             46

                                                                                                                              Receptor Hazard Index1 =          46

                                                                                                             Total Developmental HI across all media=          9.3

                                                                                                                      Total Hepatic HI across all media=       9.5

                                                                                                                Total Lymphatic HI across all media=            24

                                                                                                            Total Nervous System HI across all media=           38

                                                                                                                       Total Renal HI across all media=        9.5

                                                                                                              Total Reproductive HI across all media=          9.9

Scenario Timeframe:           Current/Future

Receptor Population:          Off-Site Recreator

Receptor Age:                 Child (0-6 years)

   Medium        Exposure       Exposure Point         Chemical of          Primary Target Organ                       Noncarcinogenic Hazard Quotient
                 Medium                                 Concern
                                                                                                             Ingestion        Dermal       Inhalation       Exposure
                                                                                                                                                           Routes Total

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   Seep Water           Seep Water                  Seep             Tetrachloroethylene                    Nervous System                      0.0090             0.52              NA                0.53

                                                                                                  Developmental, Hepatic, Renal,
                                                                     Trichloroethylene                                                          0.011              0.20              NA                0.21
                                                                                                 Nervous, Lymphatic, Reproductive

                                                                     Manganese**                            Nervous System                      0.027              0.81              NA                0.84

                                                                                                                                                         COC Total Hazard Index (HI) =                  1.6

                                                                                                                                                      Seep Water Hazard Index Total1 =                  1.9

                                                                                                                                                                Receptor Hazard Index1 =                4.2

                                                                                                                                            Total Nervous System HI across all media=                   3.3

Footnotes:
** Manganese is not considered to be site related and was not retained as a COC for purposes of remedy selection. It is shown in this table for informational purposes only.
(1) The HI represents the summed HQs for all chemicals of potential concern at the site as identified in the 2017 Human Health Risk Assessment, not just those requiring remedial action (i.e., the chemicals of
concern [COCs]) which are shown in this table.
Definitions:
 HI = hazard index
 HQ = hazard quotient
 NA = Not available

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                  Table 7
                                                               Risk Characterization Summary - Carcinogens
                                                                 from 2017 Human Health Risk Assessment
Scenario Timeframe:                           Future
Receptor Population:                          On-site Resident
Receptor Age:                                 Adult and child
 Medium       Exposure Medium                     Exposure Point                       Chemical of Concern                                            Carcinogenic Risk
                                                                                                                             Ingestion          Dermal          Inhalation       Exposure Routes
                                                                                                                                                                                      Total
Groundwater            Groundwater                      Tap Water
                                                                                             Ethylbenzene                      3.3E-05          1.7E-05           1.5E-04               2.0E-04

                                                                                            Vinyl Chloride                     1.2E-04          8.4E-06           3.9E-04               5.3E-04

                                                                                            4-Chloroaniline                    3.1E-03          1.8E-04             NA                  3.3E-03

                                                                                                                                                        COC Total Risk =               4.0E-03

                                                                                                                                              Groundwater Risk Total1=                 4.3E-03

                                                                                                                                                   Receptor Risk Total1=               4.4E-03
Footnotes:
(1) Total Risk values represent cumulative estimates from exposure to all chemicals of potential concern (COPCs) as identified in the RAGS D table 2 series of the 2017 Human Health Risk Assessment,
and not only from those identified in this table (i.e., the chemicals of concern [COCs]).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        Table 8
                                                                 Remediation Goals
                                                                Drum Disposal Area


    Chemical of Concern for Drum Disposal
                                                 Remediation Goals (mg/kg)
                    Area

    Benzenei                                                                0.005
    Tetrachloroethylene (PCE)i                                              0.005
    Trichloroethene (TCE)i                                                   0.01
    1,1,1 – Trichloroethane (1,1,1-TCA)ii                                     0.2
    1,1,-dichloroethane (1,1,-DCA)ii                                         0.24
    1,1,-dichloroethene (1,1,-DCE)ii                                       0.0069
    Cis-1,2-dichloroethene (cis-1,2-DCE)ii                                   0.35



i
   - Consistent with RGs selected in the 2017 ROD, the RGs for benzene, PCE, and TCE are based on the New Jersey Impact to Groundwater Soil Screening
Levels (NJIGWSSL).
ii
  - In May 2021, the NJDEP Default Impact to Groundwater Soil Screening Levels were superseded by NJDEP’s New Jersey Migration to Groundwater Soil
Remediation Standards (NJMGWSRS). The RGs selected for the new COCs in the Drum Disposal Area have been established using the NJMGWSRS.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                          Table 9
                                               Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements (ARARs)

                                                                                                                 2023 ROD ARAR
                                                 2017 ROD           2017 ROD ARAR       2023 FFS Additional
   Requirements            Prerequisite                                                                       Determination for Drum             Comments
                                                 Citation(s)         Determination          Citation(s)
                                                                                                               Disposal Area (DDA)
                                                                   State Chemical-Specific ARARs
New Jersey Residential Soils at contaminated                                                                  Relevant and appropriate    Establishes remediation
Direct Contact Soil    sites in New Jersey        N.J.A.C. 7:26-    Applicable to       N.J.A.C. 7:26-4.2
                                                                                                              for DDA COCs that are       standards for direct
Remediation Standards                             4.2               excavation at 0-2                         also COCs for the former
                                                                    feet below ground                                                     contact pathways under
                                                                                                              lagoon (i.e., benzene,
                                                                    level.                                    PCE, and TCE)               New Jersey cleanup
                                                                                                                                          authorities.


                                                                                                                                          The New Jersey Direct
                                                                                                                                          Contact Soil Remediation
                                                                                                                                          Standards were replaced
                                                                                                                                          by the New Jersey Soil
                                                                                                                                          Remediation Standards
                                                                                                                                          for the Ingestion-Dermal
                                                                                                                                          Exposure Pathway and
                                                                                                                                          Inhalation Exposure
                                                                                                                                          Pathway in 2021.

New Jersey Soil       Soils at contaminated                                                                   Relevant and appropriate    Establishes remediation
Remediation           sites in New Jersey   (Promulgated in (Promulgated in             N.J.A.C. 7:26D
                                                                                                              for DDA COCs that were      standards for the
Standards for the                           2021, not         2021, not discussed                             not defined as COCs for
                                            discussed in 2017 in 2017 ROD.)             Appendix 1 –                                      ingestion-dermal and
Ingestion-Dermal                                                                                              the former lagoon for the
                                            ROD.)                                                             ingestion- dermal           inhalation exposure
Exposure Pathway                                                                        Table 1. Soil
                                                                                        Remediation           exposure pathway (1,1,1-    pathways under New
                                                                                        Standards for the     TCA, 1,1-DCA, 1,1-DCE,      Jersey cleanup
                                                                                        Ingestion-Dermal      and cis-1,2-DCE,).          authorities.
                                                                                        Exposure Pathway –
                                                                                        Residential
                                                                                                                                          .

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Requirements   Prerequisite           2017 ROD         2017 ROD ARAR         2023 FFS Additional    2023 ROD ARAR          Comments
                                      Citation(s)      Determination         Citation(s)            Determination for Drum
                                                                                                    Disposal Area
                                                       Federal Location-Specific ARARs
Endangered     Presence of            40 CFR 400       Applicable/relevant   16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq. Applicable (if present,   Standards for the
Species Act    federally-listed       50 CFR 17, 81,   and appropriate       and                    which will be             protection of
               endangered or          223, 224, 226,   determination not     Implementing           determined during         threatened and
               threatened species
                                      402              indicated             Regulations            remedial design)          endangered species
               or critical habitat.
                                                                                                                              (wildlife, marine and
                                                                                                                              anadromous species and
                                                                             50 CFR 17, 81, 223,
                                                                                                                              plants) and establish
                                                                             224, 226, 402
                                                                                                                              cooperation with the
                                                                                                                              Federal and State
                                                                                                                              Governments. Pertinent
                                                                                                                              to remedial activities
                                                                                                                              that may impact
                                                                                                                              threatened or
                                                                                                                              endangered species or
                                                                                                                              their habitat.
                                                                                                                              40 CFR 400 was listed
                                                                                                                              in the 2017 ROD but
                                                                                                                              was removed as this
                                                                                                                              section of the CFR is
                                                                                                                              reserved.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                             2023 ROD ARAR
                                                2017 ROD          2017 ROD ARAR     2023 FFS Additional
   Requirements            Prerequisite                                                                   Determination for Drum            Comments
                                                Citation(s)        Determination        Citation(s)
                                                                                                               Disposal Area
Migratory Bird         Presence of            Not previously     Not previously     16 U.S.C. 703         Applicable (if present,    Makes it unlawful to take
Treaty Act             migratory              identified as an   identified as an                         which will be determined   any migratory bird. Take
                       birds/migratory bird                                         50 CFR 10.12
                                              ARAR in ROD.       ARAR in ROD.                             during remedial design)    is defined as pursuing,
                       areas
                                                                                                                                     hunting, wounding,
                                                                                                                                     killing, capturing,
                                                                                                                                     trapping, and collecting.
                                                                                                                                     Requires use of best
                                                                                                                                     management practices
                                                                                                                                     for observing and
                                                                                                                                     avoiding contact with
                                                                                                                                     such species during
                                                                                                                                     construction of the
                                                                                                                                     remedy.

Bald and Golden        Presence of bald or    Not previously     Not previously     16 U.S.C 668 et seq   Applicable (if present,    Makes it unlawful for
Eagle Protection Act   golden eagles and      identified as an   identified as an                         which will be determined   anyone to take, possess,
                       actions that could     ARAR in ROD        ARAR in ROD                              during remedial design)    import, export, transport,
                       impair the species
                                                                                                                                     sell, purchase, barter or
                       and their habitat
                                                                                                                                     offer for sale, purchase,
                                                                                                                                     or barter, and bald or
                                                                                                                                     golden eagle or the parts,
                                                                                                                                     nests, or eggs of such a
                                                                                                                                     bird except under the
                                                                                                                                     terms of an approval
                                                                                                                                     issued pursuant to federal
                                                                                                                                     regulations.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                            2023 ROD ARAR
                                            2017 ROD          2017 ROD ARAR        2023 FFS Additional
  Requirements         Prerequisite                                                                      Determination for Drum          Comments
                                            Citation(s)        Determination           Citation(s)
                                                                                                          Disposal Area (DDA)
                                                               State Location-Specific ARARs
Endangered and     Presence of state-     N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1   Applicable/relevant   N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1      Applicable               Standards for the
Non-Game Species   listed endangered or                      and appropriate                                                      protection of federal and
                   non-game species or
Conservation Act                                             determination not                                                    New Jersey threatened
                   critical habitat
                                                             indicated                                                            and endangered species.
                                                                                                                                  Pertinent to remedial
                                                                                                                                  activities that may impact
                                                                                                                                  endangered and non-
                                                                                                                                  games species or their
                                                                                                                                  habitat.




Endangered Plant   Presence of state-     N.J.A.C. 7:5C     Applicable/relevant    N.J.A.C. 7:5C         Applicable               Establishes the
Species List Act   listed endangered
                   plant species          N.J.S.A. 13:1B et and appropriate        N.J.S.A. 13:1B et                              requirement to protect
                                          seq.              determination not      seq.                                           threatened and
                                                            indicated                                                             endangered plant species
                                                                                                                                  in New Jersey by
                                                                                                                                  developing and adopting
                                                                                                                                  a list. Pertinent to
                                                                                                                                  capping and excavation
                                                                                                                                  work in the source area.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                 2023 ROD ARAR
                                                 2017 ROD          2017 ROD ARAR        2023 FFS Additional
  Requirements            Prerequisite                                                                        Determination for Drum            Comments
                                                 Citation(s)        Determination           Citation(s)
                                                                                                                   Disposal Area
                                                                    Federal Action-Specific ARARs
Resource              Municipal solid          Not previously     Not previously        42 U.S.C. C §6901‐    Relevant and Appropriate   Establishes operating
Conservation and      waste is generated       identified as an   identified as an                                                       criteria with which
                                                                                        6992k
                      for on-site disposal
Recovery Act (RCRA)                            ARAR in ROD.       ARAR in ROD.                                                           municipal solid waste
                      from activities at the                                            40 CFR 258
                                                                                                                                         landfills must comply to
                      Site.
                                                                                                                                         ensure protection of
                                                                                                                                         human health and the
                                                                                                                                         environment.
                                                                                                                                         Pertinent to on-site
                                                                                                                                         handling of material being
                                                                                                                                         prepared for off-site
                                                                                                                                         disposal.
Resource              Presence of              40 CFR 260-270;    Applicable/relevant   42 U.S.C. C §6901-    Applicable                 Establishes
Conservation and      hazardous waste          42 USC 6901 et     and appropriate                                                        responsibilities and
                      onsite/generation of     seq.                                     6992k
Recovery Act (RCRA)                                               determination not     40 CFR 260-273;                                  standards for the
                      waste for disposal
                                                                  indicated                                                              management of
                                                                                                                                         hazardous waste.
                                                                                                                                         Pertinent to the
                                                                                                                                         generation of
                                                                                                                                         characteristic hazardous
                                                                                                                                         waste, including handling
                                                                                                                                         and disposal. The
                                                                                                                                         identification and listing of
                                                                                                                                         specific hazardous waste
                                                                                                                                         defines those wastes
                                                                                                                                         which are subject to
                                                                                                                                         regulation as hazardous
                                                                                                                                         wastes and lists specific
                                                                                                                                         chemical and industry-
                                                                                                                                         source wastes.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Clean Air Act –      Generation of air   40 CFR 50   Applicable/relevant   40 CFR 50.6, 50.7,       Applicable   Establishes requirements
National Ambient Air emissions                       and appropriate       50.18                                 for particulate and
Quality Standards                                    determination not     Appendix J, K, L, N, O                fugitive dust emission.
                                                     indicated                                                   Requirements pertinent to
                                                                                                                 construction activities
                                                                                                                 including, but not limited
                                                                                                                 to, excavation, grading,
                                                                                                                 and backfill activities.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                               2023 ROD ARAR
                                               2017 ROD          2017 ROD ARAR        2023 FFS Additional
   Requirements            Prerequisite                                                                     Determination for Drum            Comments
                                               Citation(s)        Determination           Citation(s)
                                                                                                                 Disposal Area
Standards of           Generation of air     Not previously     Not previously        40 CFR 60             Relevant and Appropriate   This regulation sets the
Performance for        emissions             identified as an   identified as an                                                       general requirement for
New Stationary                               ARAR in ROD.       ARAR in ROD.                                                           air quality for new
Sources                                                                                                                                stationary sources of air
                                                                                                                                       pollutions such as
                                                                                                                                       treatment systems.


                                                                                                                                       Remedial activities could
                                                                                                                                       include potential air
                                                                                                                                       emissions resulting from
                                                                                                                                       earthwork or other
                                                                                                                                       construction activities
Solid Waste Disposal   Generation of solid   42 U.S.C §6901-    Applicable/relevant   42 U.S.C. C §6901-    Applicable                 Defines those wastes
Act, as amended –      waste                 6992k; 40 C.F.R.   and appropriate       6992k                                            which are subject to
Regulated levels for                         Part 261           determination not     40 CFR 261.11                                    regulation as hazardous
TCLP Constituents                                               indicated                                                              wastes and lists specific
                                                                                                                                       chemical and industry-
                                                                                                                                       source wastes

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Clean Water Act   Discharge of water   33 U.S.C. 1251et Applicable/relevant   40 CFR 125   Relevant and Appropriate   Assumes surface water
(CWA)             to a surface water   seq.             and appropriate                                               discharge of treated
                  body
                                                        determination not                                             water.
                                                        indicated                                                     Procedures to preserve
                                                                                                                      surface water quality by
                                                                                                                      reducing direct pollutant
                                                                                                                      discharges into
                                                                                                                      waterways,
                                                                                                                      finance municipal
                                                                                                                      wastewater treatment
                                                                                                                      facilities and manage
                                                                                                                      polluted runoff. Pertinent
                                                                                                                      to discharge of
                                                                                                                      dewatering effluent from
                                                                                                                      excavation.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                2023 ROD ARAR
                                              2017 ROD          2017 ROD ARAR        2023 FFS Additional
  Requirements          Prerequisite                                                                         Determination for Drum          Comments
                                              Citation(s)        Determination           Citation(s)
                                                                                                                  Disposal Area
                                                                  State Action-Specific ARARs
Well Construction   Installation of wells   N.J.A.C. 7:9D      Applicable/relevant   N.J.A.C. 7:9D           Applicable               Establishes requirements
and Maintenance     on-site                                    and appropriate                                                        for construction and
                                                               determination not                                                      decommission (sealing) of
                                                               indicated                                                              wells and borings, and
                                                                                                                                      well driller/pump installer
                                                                                                                                      licensing.
                                                                                                                                      Pertinent to any well
                                                                                                                                      installation or boring
                                                                                                                                      associated with remedial
                                                                                                                                      activities.

New Jersey Soil     Excavations or          N.J.S.A. 4:24-39   Applicable/relevant   N.J.S.A. 4:24-39        Applicable               To establish soil erosion
Erosion and         other construction      et seq.            and appropriate       et seq.                                          and sediment control
Sediment Control    activities are                             determination not                                                      standards.
                    greater than 5000                                                N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3 and
Act                                                            indicated             1.8                                              Requirements pertinent
                    square feet
                                                                                                                                      to construction activities
                                                                                                                                      including, but not limited
                                                                                                                                      to, clearing or grading of
                                                                                                                                      land.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                    2023 ROD ARAR
                                                 2017 ROD          2017 ROD ARAR        2023 FFS Additional
   Requirements             Prerequisite                                                                         Determination for Drum          Comments
                                                 Citation(s)        Determination           Citation(s)
                                                                                                                      Disposal Area
New Jersey Air          Generation of air      N.J.A.C. 7:27-8,   Applicable/relevant   N.J.A.C. 7:27-8, 13-16   Applicable               Establishes standards for
Pollution Control Act   emissions              16                 and appropriate                                                         discharge of pollutants to
                                                                  determination not                                                       air associated with
                                                                  indicated                                                               construction activities
                                                                                                                                          such as earthwork and
                                                                                                                                          operation of treatment
                                                                                                                                          systems.

Noise Control           Generation of noise    N.J.A.C. 7:29      Applicable/relevant   N.J.A.C. 7:29            Applicable               Establishes allowable
                                                                  and appropriate                                                         noise levels. Pertinent to
                                                                  determination not                                                       construction activities
                                                                  indicated                                                               including, but not limited
                                                                                                                                          to, excavation, grading,
                                                                                                                                          backfill, and dewatering
                                                                                                                                          activities.


New Jersey              Discharge of treated   Not previously     Not previously        N.J.A.C. 7:14A           Applicable               Establishes requirements
Pollutant               dewater                identified as an   identified as an ARAR                                                   for pollutant discharge to
                                               ARAR in ROD.
Discharge                                                         in ROD.                                                                 groundwater and surface
Elimination                                                                                                                               waters of the state.
System

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                          2023 ROD TBC
      Requirements                  Prerequisite             2022 FFS Citation(s)         Determination                       Comments


                                                           To Be Considered Information (TBC)
New Jersey Soil Remediation Vadose zone soils at         N.J.A.C. 7:26D (Last amended    TBC              Establishes default remediation standards for the
Standards for the Migration contaminated sites in New    May 17, 2021)                                    migration to groundwater exposure pathway under
to Groundwater Exposure     Jersey                                                                        New Jersey cleanup authority. Evaluated for
                                                         Appendix 1 – Table 6. Soil                       developing cleanup goals for soils within the vadose
Pathway                                                  Remediation Standards for the                    zone but not the saturated zone. Specifically, this
                                                         gyration to Ground Water                         TBC was considered in the development of RGs
                                                         Exposure Pathway                                 for those DDA COCs that were not defined as COCs
                                                                                                          for the former lagoon area.

Basis and Background for    Vadose zone soils at         Soil and Soil Leachate        TBC                Basis and background document explains the
New Jersey Soil Remediation contaminated sites in New    Remediation Standards for the                    purpose and derivation of the New Jersey Soil
                                                                                                          Remediation Standards for the Migration to
Standards for the Migration Jersey                       Migration to Ground Water
                                                                                                          Groundwater Exposure Pathway
to Groundwater Exposure                                  Exposure Pathway – Basis and
Pathway                                                  Background (May 2021)




                             Vadose zone soils at        NJDEP Guidance                  TBC.             NJDEP Guidance Document for Development of
New Jersey Impact to
                             contaminated sites in New                                                    Impact to Groundwater Soil Remediation Standards,
Groundwater Soil Screening                               Document for Development
                             Jersey                                                                       January 27, 2011
Levels (referred to as New                               of Impact to Groundwater Soil
                                                                                                          Used for development of RGs applicable to
Jersey Impact to                                         Remediation Standards,
                                                                                                          excavation at greater than 2 feet below ground
Groundwater Soil                                         January 27, 2011                                 surface.
Remediation Standards in
Table 8 of the ROD)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        APPENDIX 3


ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                     ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                FINAL
                                                                             08/08/2023                                            REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: MATLACK, INC.
          CERCLIS ID: NJD043584101
               OUID: 01
                SSID: 02P9
              Action: ROD Amendment


                                                                  Image
DocID:    Doc Date: Title:                                        Count:     Doc Type:              Addressee Name/Organization:          Author Name/Organization:
510580   08/08/2023 ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX FOR OU1 FOR THE       4 Administrative Record                                      (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                    MATLACK INCORPORATED SITE                                  Index                                               AGENCY)



149511   09/01/2012 HAZARD RANKING SYSTEM (HRS) PACKAGE FOR THE    2871         Report          (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (WESTON SOLUTIONS, INC.)
                    MATLACK, INC. SITE, VOLUME 1 OF 6                                           AGENCY)


145403   09/01/2012 HAZARD RANKING SYSTEM (HRS) PACKAGE FOR THE    1029         Report          (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (WESTON SOLUTIONS, INC.)
                    MATLACK, INC. SITE, VOLUME 2 OF 6                                           AGENCY)



145404   09/01/2012 HAZARD RANKING SYSTEM (HRS) PACKAGE FOR THE    1576         Report          (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (WESTON SOLUTIONS, INC.)
                    MATLACK, INC. SITE, VOLUME 3 OF 6                                           AGENCY)


145405   09/01/2012 HAZARD RANKING SYSTEM (HRS) PACKAGE FOR THE    2075         Report          (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (WESTON SOLUTIONS, INC.)
                    MATLACK, INC. SITE, VOLUME 4 OF 6                                           AGENCY)



145406   09/01/2012 HAZARD RANKING SYSTEM (HRS) PACKAGE FOR THE    1801         Report          (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (WESTON SOLUTIONS, INC.)
                    MATLACK, INC. SITE, VOLUME 5 OF 6                                           AGENCY)



145407   09/01/2012 HAZARD RANKING SYSTEM (HRS) PACKAGE FOR THE    1115         Report          (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (WESTON SOLUTIONS, INC.)
                    MATLACK, INC. SITE, VOLUME 6 OF 6                                           AGENCY)



503540   07/01/2015 REVISED REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION/FEASIBILITY      114         Report                                             (HDR)
                    STUDY WORK PLAN VOLUME 1 AND 2 FOR THE
                    MATLACK INCORPORATED SITE




                                                                            Page 1 of 4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                     ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                 FINAL
                                                                              08/08/2023                                        REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: MATLACK, INC.
          CERCLIS ID: NJD043584101
               OUID: 01
                SSID: 02P9
              Action: ROD Amendment


                                                                     Image
DocID:    Doc Date: Title:                                           Count:     Doc Type:        Addressee Name/Organization:           Author Name/Organization:
503541   06/14/2017 FINAL REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION REPORT WITH TEXT,     135       Report                                         (HDR)
                    TABLES, AND FIGURES FOR THE MATLACK
                    INCORPORATED SITE


503542   06/14/2017 FINAL REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION REPORT WITH          1626        Report                                        (HDR)
                    APPENDICES A-O FOR THE MATLACK INCORPORATED
                    SITE


473421   07/10/2017 SCREENING LEVEL ECOLOGICAL RISK ASSESSMENT         218        Report     (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (HENNINGSON, DURHAM & RICHARDSON
                    REPORT FOR THE MATLACK INCORPORATED SITE                                 AGENCY)                            ARCHITECTURE AND ENGINEERING PC)




473420   07/20/2017 BASELINE HUMAN HEALTH RISK ASSESSMENT REPORT       349        Report     (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (HENNINGSON, DURHAM & RICHARDSON
                    FOR THE MATLACK INCORPORATED SITE                                        AGENCY)                            ARCHITECTURE AND ENGINEERING PC)




407813   08/18/2017 FINAL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT FOR THE MATLACK     119        Report     (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (HDR ENGINEERING
                    INCORPORATED SITE                                                        AGENCY)                            INCORPORATED)|(HENNINGSON, DURHAM
                                                                                                                                & RICHARDSON ARCHITECTURE AND
                                                                                                                                ENGINEERING PC)


451907   08/23/2017 PROPOSED PLAN FOR THE MATLACK INCORPORATED          17     Publication                                      (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                    SITE                                                                                                        AGENCY)




                                                                              Page 2 of 4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                      ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                   FINAL
                                                                                08/08/2023                                        REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: MATLACK, INC.
          CERCLIS ID: NJD043584101
               OUID: 01
                SSID: 02P9
              Action: ROD Amendment


                                                                       Image
DocID:    Doc Date: Title:                                             Count:     Doc Type:        Addressee Name/Organization:         Author Name/Organization:
528296   09/29/2017 RECORD OF DECISION FOR THE MATLACK                   125       Report                                         CARPENTER,ANGELA (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                    INCORPORATED SITE                                                                                             PROTECTION AGENCY)



586742   02/06/2020 NOTE TO FILE REGARDING A CORRECTION TO A TABLE         2    Memorandum                                        VAUGHN,STEPHANIE (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                    IN THE RECORD OF DECISION FOR THE MATLACK                                                                     PROTECTION AGENCY)
                    INCORPORATED SITE




676153   10/24/2022 FINAL PRE-DESIGN INVESTIGATION REPORT FOR THE       1541        Report     (US ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS)       (CDM SMITH)
                    MATLACK INCORPORATED SITE



676156   03/28/2023 MEMORANDUM TO FILE REGARDING USE OF NJ 2021           14    Memorandum                                        KAUR,SUPINDERJIT (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                    SOIL REMEDIATION STANDARDS VERSUS 2017                                                                        PROTECTION AGENCY)
                    RECORD OF DECISION REMEDIATION GOALS AS SOIL
                    SCREENING CRITERIA - CLARIFICATION FOR THE FINAL
                    PRE-DESIGN INVESTIGATION REPORT FOR THE
                    MATLACK INCORPORATED SITE


676155   03/28/2023 DRAFT FINAL FOCUSED FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT         252        Report     (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION       (CDM SMITH)|(US ARMY CORPS OF
                    FOR THE MATLACK INCORPORATED SITE                                          AGENCY)                            ENGINEERS)



676157   03/29/2023 PROPOSED PLAN FOR THE RECORD OF DECISION              20     Publication                                      (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                    AMENDMENT FOR THE MATLACK INCORPORATED                                                                        AGENCY)
                    SITE




                                                                                Page 3 of 4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                     ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                 FINAL
                                                                              08/08/2023                                        REGION ID: 02
          Site Name: MATLACK, INC.
          CERCLIS ID: NJD043584101
               OUID: 01
                SSID: 02P9
              Action: ROD Amendment


                                                                     Image
DocID:    Doc Date: Title:                                           Count:     Doc Type:        Addressee Name/Organization:         Author Name/Organization:
654919   07/13/2023 FINAL FOCUSED FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT FOR THE     369       Report     (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION        (CDM SMITH INCORPORATED)
                    MATLACK INCORPORATED SITE                                               AGENCY)




                                                                              Page 4 of 4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 APPENDIX 4


STATE LETTER

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                     DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                   CONTAMINATED SITE REMEDIATION & REDEVELOPMENT
                                                           401 East State Street
                                                     P.O. Box 420, Mail Code 401-06                                   SHAWN M. LATOURETTE
PHILIP D. MURPHY
     Governor                                        Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0420                                          Commissioner
                                                    Tel. (609) 292-1250  Fax (609) 777-1914
                                                                 www.nj.gov/dep
SHEILA Y. OLIVER                                               www.nj.gov/dep/srp/
   Lt. Governor



                                                                                                                     July 25, 2023


       Mr. Pat Evangelista, Director
       Emergency and Remedial Response Division
       U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
       Region II
       290 Broadway
       New York, NY 10007-1866

       Re:        Matlack Inc. Superfund Site
                  Woolwich Township, Gloucester County
                  NJDEP PI# 007390
                  May 2023 Record of Decision Amendment


       Dear Mr. Evangelista,

       The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (Department) has completed its review
       of the Record of Decision (ROD) Amendment prepared by the U.S. Environmental Protection
       Agency (EPA) Region II in May 2023 for the entire site and supports the selected remedy to
       address source area contamination at the drum disposal area.

       The major components of the selected remedy, which is estimated to cost $29,469,000, include:

                 Installation of thermal heating points and vapor extraction wells;
                 Transportation and disposal of contaminated media generated from thermal heating
                  points and vapor extraction well installation;
                 Collection and treatment of generated vapor and liquid waste through treatment system
                  consisting of granular activated carbon (GAC) and discharge to surface water;
                 Confirmatory soil sampling; and,
                 Institutional controls.

       In addition, it is anticipated that a Superfund State Contract will be prepared for the Matlack site
       for this project using Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act of 2021 funding that will not require
       a 10-percent cost share. The Department appreciates that EPA designated this site to receive



                            New Jersey is an Equal Opportunity Employer. Printed on Recycled Paper and Recyclable.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

funding under this Act, once again saving State resources at numerous other sites in New Jersey
during 2022.

The Department met with EPA and United States Army Corps of Engineers at the Matlack site in
February 2023 to walk the site and discuss proposed remedies contained in the original ROD and
ROD Amendment. EPA proposed use of in-situ thermal treatment (ISTT) as the remedy to treat
the former drum disposal source area contamination that was discovered during the pre-design
investigation. The Department supports the use of ISTT to remediate contamination in the former
drum disposal area. It is anticipated that this remedy along with the excavation of the lagoon area,
and emplacement of permeable reactive barriers detailed in the original ROD, will help restore the
site and eliminate current ecological risks. Long-term groundwater monitoring to be performed by
EPA will ensure the remedy remains protective.

The Department appreciates the opportunity to participate in the decision-making process to select
an appropriate remedy for the site.

If you have any questions, please contact Gwen Zervas at (609) 292-1251.

                                                                     Sincerely,

                                                                                                       for

                                                                     David E. Haymes
                                                                     Assistant Commissioner


c: Gwen Zervas, Director, Division of Remediation Management, NJDEP
   Frederick Mumford, Bureau Chief, Bureau of Site Management, NJDEP
   Christopher Blake, Section Chief, RI, Design and O&M, NJDEP
   Kevin Langley, Site Manager, Bureau of Site Management, NJDEP
   Angela Carpenter, Chief, Special Projects Branch, EPA Region II

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      APPENDIX 5


RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY
                                         FOR THE
                        RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT
                                     MATLACK, INC.,
                                    SUPERFUND SITE
         WOOLWICH TOWNSHIP, GLOUCESTER COUNTY, NEW JERSEY


INTRODUCTION
This Responsiveness Summary provides a summary of comments and concerns provided
during the public comment period related to the Proposed Plan (Attachment A) for Matlack,
Inc., Superfund site (the Site) remedy modification and provides the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) responses to those comments.
All comments summarized in this document have been considered in EPA’s final decision in
the selection of a remedy amendment to address the contamination at the Site.

SUMMARY OF COMMUNITY RELATIONS ACTIVITIES


The documentation which EPA used to develop the Proposed Plan and select the remedy in this
Record of Decision (ROD) Amendment, including EPA’s Focused Feasibility Study dated
February 2023, is in the Administrative Record for the Site which was made available to the
public beginning March 29, 2023 in the information repositories maintained in the EPA Docket
Room at the EPA Region 2 offices at 290 Broadway, New York, New York, at the Township of
Woolwich Municipal Building, 120 Village Green Drive, Woolwich Township, New Jersey and
on EPA’s website for the Site, www.epa.gov/superfund/matlack.

On March 30, 2023, EPA published a notice in the Sentinel newspaper informing the public of
the commencement of the public comment period for the Proposed Plan, the upcoming virtual
public meeting on April 12, 2023, the preferred remedy amendment for the Site, contact
information for EPA personnel, and the availability of Site-related documents in the
Administrative Record. Copies of the notice can be found in Attachment B of this appendix.
The Proposed Plan is available at each of the repositories listed above, including online. The
public comment period ran from March 29, 2023, to April 28, 2023. EPA held a virtual public
meeting on April 12, 2023, at 6:00 p.m. in the Woolwich Township Municipal Courtroom, 120
Village Green Drive, Woolwich, New Jersey, to present the findings of the Proposed Plan, and
to answer questions from the public about the Proposed Plan, the remedial alternatives
evaluated, and EPA’s preferred alternative.

The meeting was attended by a few members of the community. There were no comments or
questions from the public at the meeting.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SUMMARY OF COMMENTS AND RESPONSES


A summary of the comments provided during the public comment period are provided below.
The transcript from the public meeting and the comments submitted during the public
comment period can be found in Attachments C and D, respectively, of this appendix.


Comment 1: The proposed remedy will not address 1,4 dioxane. This chemical is extremely
likely to be present at levels substantially higher than NJDEP’s groundwater standard due to the
presence of 1,1,1-trichloroethane.

EPA Response to Comment 1:
EPA sampled for 1,4-dioxane in all of the on-site groundwater monitoring wells prior to the
preliminary design investigation (PDI). Low concentrations of 1,4-dioxane, slightly above the
New Jersey Ground Water Quality Standard, were found in the groundwater in the northern
portion of the Site, while it was only detected in two wells, below the standards, in the southern
portion of the Site. Therefore, during the PDI, only volatile organic compounds were
investigated in the soil and groundwater in the southern portion of the Site. Also, the selected
alternative, in-situ thermal treatment, is considered an applicable technology for treatment of
1,4-dioxane in soil.


ATTACHED TO THIS RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY ARE THE FOLLOWING:


Attachment A – Proposed Plan
Attachment B – Public Notice – Sentinel
Attachment C – April 12, 2023, Public Meeting Transcript
Attachment D – Comments Submitted During Public Comment Period

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ATTACHMENT A


PROPOSED PLAN

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                        Superfund Proposed Plan for Remedy Amendment


                                             Matlack, Inc. Superfund Site

                                    Woolwich Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey
Superfund Proposed Plan                                                                                 March 2023

EPA ANNOUNCES PROPOSED PLAN                                  excavated, the two groundwater plumes will be
                                                             addressed through the two PRBs, respectively, impacted
This Proposed Plan describes the alternatives that the       sediment in Grand Sprute Run will be excavated, and
United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)          institutional controls will be implemented, as necessary.
considered to remediate additional source area
contamination identified in the Drum Disposal Area at        This plan evaluates alternatives for addressing the
the Matlack, Inc. Superfund Site (Site) located in           additional source area contamination identified in the
Woolwich Township, New Jersey, as an amendment to            Drum Disposal Area. The preferred alternative described
the remedy for contaminated soil, sediment, and              in this Proposed Plan involves in-situ thermal treatment
groundwater selected in the 2017 Record of Decision          (ISTT) of vadose (or unsaturated) zone and saturated
(ROD). This Proposed Plan also identifies EPA’s              zone sources of contamination in soil.
preferred alternative for amending the ROD and
provides the rationale for this preference.
                                                               MARK YOUR CALENDARS
The Site cleanup is being addressed as one operable unit.      Public Comment Period:
The 2017 ROD selected excavation and off-site disposal         March 29 – April 28, 2023
of contaminated soil and sediment, the installation of two     EPA will accept written comments on the Proposed
permeable reactive barriers (PRBs) to remediate                Plan during the public comment period. Written
groundwater contamination, and institutional controls.         comments should be addressed to:
When the 2017 ROD was issued, EPA considered the
Former Lagoon Area, located in the northern portion of                           Supinderjit Kaur
                                                                            Remedial Project Manager
the Site, the sole source of contamination.                           U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
                                                                            290 Broadway, 18th Floor
However, the Pre-Design Investigation (PDI), completed                        New York, NY 10007
by EPA in 2022, revealed a second source of                             Email: kaur.supinderjit@epa.gov
contamination south of the Former Lagoon Area. The
investigation identified buried drum remnants containing       Written comments must be postmarked no later than
chlorinated volatile organic compounds (CVOCs) and             April 28, 2023.
elevated concentrations of tetrachloroethene (PCE),
                                                                                  Public Meeting
trichloroethene (TCE), and 1,1,1-trichloroethane (TCA)                             April 12, 2023
in the soil and groundwater. This new source area is          EPA will hold a virtual public meeting to explain the
referred to as the Drum Disposal Area. Concentrations         Proposed Plan and all the alternatives presented in the
of PCE and 1,1,1-TCA in soil and groundwater at the           Focused Feasibility Study. Oral and written comments
Drum Disposal Area are indicative of the potential            will also be accepted at the meeting. To participate in
presence of dense non-aqueous phase liquid (DNAPL).           the meeting and access the administrative record visit:
The 2017 ROD indicates that if DNAPL were to be
found at the Site, it would be addressed in a future           www.epa.gov/superfund/matlack
decision document.

The components of the Site remedy outlined in the 2017
ROD are not being modified in this Proposed Plan. Soil
contamination in the Former Lagoon Area will be

                                                                                                   *676157*
                                                                                                         676157

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

EPA completed PDI activities at the Site over three             solicit public comments pertaining to all of the remedial
phases from August 2019 to February 2022. PDI                   alternatives evaluated, including the preferred
activities included delineation of soil and groundwater         alternative. Changes to the preferred alternative, or a
contamination in the newly discovered Drum Disposal             change to another alternative, may be made if public
Area, a ground penetrating radar study to identify buried       comments or additional data indicate that such a change
drums and drum fragments, and sampling of nearby                would result in a more appropriate remedial action. The
groundwater and soil.                                           final decision regarding the selected remedy will be
                                                                made after EPA has taken into consideration all public
This Proposed Plan includes summaries of cleanup                comments. EPA is soliciting public comments on all of
alternatives evaluated to address contaminated vadose           the alternatives considered in the Proposed Plan, because
and saturated zone sources in the Drum Disposal Area of         EPA may select a remedy other than the preferred
the Site. This Proposed Plan was developed by EPA, the          alternative. This Proposed Plan has been made available
lead agency for the Site, in consultation with the New          to the public for a public comment period that concludes
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection                   on April 28, 2023.
(NJDEP), the support agency. EPA, in consultation with
NJDEP, will select a final remedy for the contaminated          A public meeting will be held during the public comment
media in the Drum Disposal Area after reviewing and             period to present the conclusions of the FFS, to elaborate
considering all information submitted during the 30-day         further on the reasons for proposing the preferred
public comment period. EPA, in consultation with                alternative, and to receive public comments. The public
NJDEP, may modify the preferred alternative or select           meeting will include a presentation by EPA of the
another response action presented in this Proposed Plan         preferred alternative and other cleanup options.
based on new information or public comments.
Therefore, the public is encouraged to review and               Information concerning the public meeting and on
comment on the alternatives presented in this Proposed          submitting written comments can be found in the “Mark
Plan.                                                           Your Calendars” text box on Page 1. Comments received
                                                                at the public meeting, as well as written comments
EPA is issuing this Proposed Plan as part of its                received during the public comment period, will be
community relations responsibilities under Section              documented in the Responsiveness Summary section of
117(a) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,             the ROD Amendment, along with EPA’s responses. The
Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), 42 U.S.C.             ROD Amendment is the document that explains which
§ 9617(a), and Section 300.435(c)(2)(ii) of the National        alternative has been selected to amend the 2017 ROD
Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency              and the basis for the selection of the remedy.
Plan (NCP). This Proposed Plan summarizes
information that can be found in greater detail in the          SCOPE AND ROLE OF THE ACTION
2022 PDI Report and the 2023 Focused Feasibility Study
(FFS) for the Drum Disposal Area, and is also supported         The comprehensive cleanup of the Site is being managed
by the Remedial Investigation (RI) and Feasibility Study        as one operable unit. As with many Superfund sites, the
(FS) Reports completed by EPA in 2017 and other                 contamination at this Site is complex. The 2017 ROD
related documents, all of which can be found in the             addresses contamination in the soil, groundwater, and
administrative record for this Site. The location of the        sediment at the Site, and all components of the 2017
administrative record can be found in the “Mark Your            ROD remain in place. The preferred alternative proposed
Calendars” text box on Page 1 and below in the “For             in this plan will address an additional component of the
more information” text box on Page 17. EPA and                  Site discovered after EPA issued the 2017 ROD.
NJDEP encourage the public to review these documents            Specifically, this plan addresses vadose and saturated
to gain a more comprehensive understanding of activities        zone sources of contamination within the Drum Disposal
for the Site.                                                   Area associated with the southern portion of the Site.

COMMUNITY ROLE IN SELECTION PROCESS                             This Proposed Plan identifies the final action for the
                                                                Drum Disposal Area at the Site.
This Proposed Plan is being issued to inform the public
of EPA’s preferred alternative to address contaminated          The active portion of the proposed remedy focuses solely
sources in the Drum Disposal Area at the Site and to            on the remediation of sources at the Drum Disposal Area.
                                                            2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

However, by taking these actions, the remedy will also           Matlack, Inc. began operations as a truck terminal and
work in conjunction with the components of the remedy            chemical tank clearing facility in approximately 1962,
selected in the 2017 ROD to address contamination                transporting chemicals, petrochemicals, and food-grade
resulting from the discharge of groundwater from the             liquid in bulk using tank trailers (tankers) until 2001. On
southern CVOC plume to seeps, sediment, and surface              March 29, 2001, Matlack, Inc. sought to reorganize
water in Grand Sprute Run.                                       under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code. The case was
                                                                 converted to a Chapter 7 liquidation in October 2002 and
SITE DESCRIPTION                                                 was closed on December 21, 2021.

The Site is located along Route 322 East in Woolwich             The primary source of waste generation at the Site was
Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey (Figure 1) in            the cleaning of tankers that had previously held a variety
a semi-rural area. The Site is bounded by Route 322 to           of substances including petroleum products, xylenes,
the north, an open field to the south and east, and by           benzene, toluene, phenol, glycol, styrene, wax, alum,
Grand Sprute Run to the east. Grand Sprute Run is an             resins, acids, naphthalene, various organic solvents,
approximate 1.25-mile-long stream that drains into               flammable substances, coal tar, and other hazardous
Raccoon Creek.                                                   substances.

SITE BACKGROUND                                                  From approximately 1962 until 1997, Matlack, Inc.
                                                                 washed/cleaned approximately 16 to 20 truck tanks per
The Site includes Matlack, Inc.’s former Swedesboro              day at the Site using a variety of solvents, generating an
Terminal that occupied the northeastern portion of a 79-         estimated 5,000 to 15,000 gallons of wastewater on a
acre parcel. The western portion of the property, owned          daily basis. Until 1976, Matlack, Inc. discharged the
by NJDEP, is a part of the Raccoon Creek Wildlife                wastewater containing cleaning solvents and materials
Management Area.                                                 from the tanks into an unlined surface impoundment
                                                                 (lagoon) located southwest of the terminal building.
A one-story building (formerly known as the terminal             Matlack, Inc. used various solvents, including PCE,
building with an attached tank-cleaning facility) is             methylene chloride, toluene, TCE, acetone, methanol,
located in the northeast quadrant of the Site, and is            and ethanol, to clean the tankers.
surrounded on the north, east, and west by a paved
parking lot and driveway. A former wastewater lagoon             The Former Lagoon Area, Drum Disposal Area and Site
was located south of the former terminal building and is         layout are shown on Figure 2. After discontinuing the use
presently a field with various shrubs. The Site is located       of the unlined lagoon in 1976, Matlack, Inc. began
within a portion of Woolwich Township zoned as                   collecting its wastewater in multiple open-top, in-ground
Woolwich Regional Center and Kings Landing                       concrete tanks for temporary storage, after which it
Redevelopment Area. Under this redevelopment plan,               would transport the wastewater away from the site for
the Site will remain partially zoned as corridor                 disposal.
commercial (CC) and partially zoned for conservation.
The Drum Disposal Area is located in the portion of the          Matlack, Inc. discontinued tanker cleaning operations at
property zoned as CC. The land use surrounding the Site          the Site in November 1997 but continued to service and
is mixed use consisting of agricultural, commercial, and         store its vehicles at the Swedesboro Terminal. The
residential. The surrounding area is rural. Land use at          northeast portion of the Site is currently operated by
and surrounding the Site is expected to stay unchanged           Liberty Kenworth as a medium and heavy-duty truck
for the foreseeable future. EPA conducted an                     sales and service center.
Environmental Justice Screen for the site using EJScreen
2.1. The EJ index percentiles for nearly all of the              Site Geology and Hydrogeology
environmental and demographic indicators for the area
immediately adjacent to the Site are below state and             According to the 2017 ROD and various reports
national averages; therefore, the results did not suggest        prepared for the Site, e.g., Final RI report (HDR 2017b),
that there would be communities with environmental               Surficial Geology of the Bridgeport and Marcus Hook
justice concerns immediately adjacent to the area being          Quadrangles (Stanford 2006a), and Bedrock Geology of
remediated.                                                      the Bridgeport and Marcus Hook Quadrangles (Stanford
                                                                 and Sugarman 2006b), the geological units within the
                                                             3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

vicinity of the Site, from youngest to oldest, are the Cape       aquifer flowed to the west-northwest toward Grand
May Formation, the Pennsauken Formation, the                      Sprute Run in the northern portion of the Site, while
Englishtown Formation, the Woodbury Formation, the                shallow groundwater in the southern portion of the Site
Merchantville Formation, and the undifferentiated                 flowed to the west-southwest toward a topographic low
Magothy-Raritan Formations.                                       at Grand Sprute Run in the vicinity of monitoring well
                                                                  MW-27.
The Cape May Formation, found in the area between
Grand Sprute Run and the source areas, consists of fine           The deep aquifer in the Magothy-Raritan Formations has
to medium sand. The Pennsauken Formation, which is                been found to be separated from the upper unconfined
the shallow unconfined aquifer found in the Former                aquifer by the Woodbury Formation clay confining unit,
Lagoon Area and Drum Disposal Area consists of                    which is over 50 feet thick. Significant head differences
medium- to coarse- grained quartzose sand with a                  (about 30 feet) between the aquifers imply considerable
thickness of approximately 33 feet.                               hydraulic separation. Groundwater in this aquifer flows
                                                                  towards the southeast.
The Woodbury Formation, underlying the Pennsauken
Formation, consists mostly of a dark blue to black blocky         EARLY RESPONSE ACTIONS, REMEDIAL
clay with a thickness of approximately 50 feet. The               INVESTIGATION, AND PRE-DESIGN
Merchantville Formation, underlying the Woodbury                  INVESTIGATION
Formation, consists of mostly silt and clay with a
thickness of approximately 50-60 feet. The Magothy-               Early Response Actions
Raritan Formation, underlying the Merchantville
Formation, consists of quartzose sand, clay, and some             NJDEP began investigating potential groundwater
gravel with a combined thickness of approximately 500             contamination at the Site in December 1982 in response
feet.                                                             to potable water well contamination in the area
                                                                  surrounding the facility. Investigations included
Geophysical survey results reported in the 1990 Matlack           sampling of groundwater, soil, surface water, and
Revised Draft RI report (ERM 1990) prepared by                    sediment associated with identified areas of concern.
Matlack, Inc. under NJDEP oversight indicated that the
Woodbury Formation has local peaks and troughs that               In May 1987, NJDEP and Matlack, Inc. entered into an
may influence the shallow groundwater flow beneath the            Administrative Consent Order. Between 1990 and 2001,
Site. One trough was reported to direct shallow                   Matlack, Inc. conducted a two-phase investigation and
groundwater generally toward the north-northwest, and             remedial/removal actions to address source areas
the other trough directed the groundwater in a more               identified from previous investigations. One such action
westerly direction.                                               included installation of a groundwater treatment system
                                                                  that consisted of extraction wells, an infiltration trench
Investigations have determined that there are two                 and an aeration system, and that was operated from
separate hydrogeologic systems at the Site: a shallow             November 1995 to May 1997 and then again from June
unconfined aquifer in the Pennsauken Formation and the            2006 through 2011. Additional actions included the
deep confined aquifer in the Magothy-Raritan                      removal of aboveground and underground storage tanks
Formation. Water level measurements indicate that the             (ASTs and USTs) used for waste and petroleum, and the
water table occurs from approximately 4 feet below the            excavation and off-site disposal of contaminated soil.
surface at the southeast corner of the Site to
approximately 28 feet below the surface at the northwest          NJDEP conducted additional investigation and sampling
corner of the Site.                                               activities between 2002 and 2009 and a site reassessment
                                                                  in 2011. EPA began investigation activities in 2012 and
The clay trough and clay highs of the Woodbury                    the Site was listed on the National Priorities List in 2013.
Formation identified by the 1990 geophysical                      In 2014, EPA conducted a site investigation to determine
investigation were anticipated to exert some control on           if the former unlined disposal lagoon or other nearby
the direction of groundwater movement in the shallow              source areas were continuing to leak contaminants of
aquifer. Groundwater elevations measured during 2016              potential concern to groundwater and thereby impacting
indicated that groundwater in the shallow/unconfined              Grand Sprute Run and associated wetlands located to the
                                                                  west of the Site.
                                                              4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Remedial Investigation (2015-2016)                             Pre-Design Investigation (2019-2022)

EPA’s RI activities were conducted in three phases:            After issuing the 2017 ROD, EPA began the PDI. PDI
Phase 1 was conducted during July 2015, Phase 2 was            activities were completed in three phases: Phase 1 was
conducted during March, April, and May 2016, and               conducted from August – November 2019, Phase 2 was
Phase 3 was conducted during July and August 2016. RI          conducted from August-December 2020, and Phase 3
activities involved sampling surface water, seeps,             was conducted from November 2021-February 2022.
sediment, soil, and existing and newly installed               Phase 1 PDI activities involved groundwater sampling of
groundwater monitoring wells to further characterize the       known contaminants of concern (COCs) at the Site and
former waste disposal (lagoon) area and the extent of          basic parameters from 37 existing wells, synoptic water
both the petroleum hydrocarbon (PHC) and 4-                    level measurements, a well condition survey,
chloroaniline plume and the CVOC plume identified at           geotechnical investigation using a hollow stem auger
the Site.                                                      drilling method, wetland delineation, a habitat
                                                               assessment, a stage 1A cultural resources survey, and
In surface soil samples collected from a depth of 0 to 2       screening of proposed PRB locations using a membrane
feet below the ground surface, there were no volatile          interface probe hydraulic profiling tool.
organic compounds (VOCs) detected at concentrations
above 2016 New Jersey Residential Direct Contact Soil          During Phase 2 of the PDI, additional groundwater
Remediation Standards (NJRDCSRS). Semi-volatile                samples were taken in conjunction with soil borings
organic compounds (SVOCs) and polychlorinated                  using Direct Push Technology (DPT) to better delineate
biphenyls (PCBs) were identified at concentrations             the northern VOC and 4-chloroaniline plume and the
slightly above the NJRDCSRS at isolated locations              southern CVOC plume. Groundwater samples were
within the Former Lagoon Area.                                 taken from existing and newly installed wells. The Drum
                                                               Disposal Area was discovered during Phase 2, and
In subsurface soil samples collected from depths greater       ground penetrating radar (GPR) was used to locate
than 2 feet, the SVOCs benzyl butyl phthalate, bis(2-          buried drums and drum fragments in the area. Additional
ethylhexyl) phthalate, and naphthalene were found to be        activities included a stage 1B cultural resources survey,
present at concentrations above New Jersey Impact to           sediment sampling, and continued synoptic water level
Groundwater Soil Screening Levels (NJIGWSSL).                  measurements.

The VOCs benzene, PCE, TCE, and total xylenes were             Phase 3 of the PDI utilized groundwater screening and
identified during 2016 sampling at numerous locations          soil sampling with DPT to determine the extent of
at concentrations above the NJIGWSSL. Benzene, PCE,            vadose and saturated zone contamination as well as
TCE and total xylenes were also identified during 2014         investigate the potential presence of DNAPL in the
sampling at two locations at concentrations above              Drum Disposal Area. The investigation revealed that the
NJIGWSSL.                                                      vertical extent of the vadose zone sources extends from
                                                               ground surface to the top of the water table, which is
As noted above, groundwater sampling identified two            approximately 7 feet below ground surface (bgs). The
distinct plumes: one plume consisted of PHC-related            vertical extent of the saturated zone sources extends from
aromatic VOCs (e.g., benzene) and the SVOC 4-                  the water table (approximately 7 feet bgs) to
chloroaniline; the other plume consisted of CVOCs. The         approximately 22 feet bgs. Summaries of the nature and
highest detected concentration of CVOCs was 1,800              extent of contamination specific to the Drum Disposal
micrograms per liter (µg/l) and the highest detected           Area are presented in Section 3.2.4 of the Final PDI
concentration of aromatic compounds was 1,347 µg/l.            Report (CDM Smith 2022). During Phase 2 and Phase 3
The results for surface water and sediment sampling            of the PDI, DNAPL was not observed visually or using
indicated PCE and TCE were present in seep and                 the field test kit. However, the high soil and groundwater
sediment samples above New Jersey Surface Water                concentrations were indicative of the potential presence
Quality Criteria and New Jersey Sediment Screening             of PCE and 1,1,1-TCA DNAPL at select locations in the
Values, respectively.                                          Drum Disposal Area.

                                                               The following five compounds were most frequently
                                                               detected at concentrations exceeding soil remediation
                                                           5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

and groundwater standards in the Drum Disposal Area:               contamination discharging to the seeps and surface water
PCE, TCE, 1,1,1-TCA, 1,1-DCE, and 1,1-DCA. The                     at Grand Sprute Run. More details of the risk
highest PCE, TCE, and 1,1,1-TCA concentrations were                evaluations conducted can be found in the
found in the soil sample RDB-72-S-26.5, where PCE,                 comprehensive HHRA and SLERA documents which
TCE, and 1,1,1-TCA were 38,800 J mg/kg, 410 mg/kg,                 can be found in the administrative record for the Site.
and 1,200 mg/kg, respectively.
                                                                   In the 2017 ROD EPA concluded that sitewide soil
While the 2017 ROD identified the presence of two                  remediation was warranted to reduce contamination
distinct plumes of groundwater contamination, EPA’s                leaching from soil to groundwater that was presenting an
understanding at the time was that they were coming                unacceptable risk to human health and ecological
from the same source. However, based on the PDI, EPA               receptors. As discussed above, during sampling
concluded that the Site has two distinct source areas and          conducted under the PDI for the Site an additional soil
resultant plumes (see Figures 2 and 3). The source of the          source area (i.e., the Drum Disposal Area) was
southern CVOC plume was found to be related to                     discovered south of the Former Lagoon Area. Since this
disposal of drums containing chlorinated solvents in an            area has been identified as the source of the southern
area upgradient/side-gradient of monitoring well PW-04,            CVOC plume, and because of the potential presence of
separate from the Former Lagoon Area. This area is now             DNAPL based on concentrations of PCE and 1,1,1-TCA
referred to as the Drum Disposal Area.                             in soil and groundwater, a remedial action for the Drum
                                                                   Disposal Area is needed to mitigate potential future risk
PRINCIPAL THREATS
                                                                         WHAT IS A “PRINCIPAL THREAT?”
Principal threat wastes are those source materials
                                                                  The NCP establishes an expectation that EPA will use
considered to be highly toxic or highly mobile that
                                                                  treatment to address the principal threats posed by a Site
generally cannot be reliably contained or would present
                                                                  wherever         practicable         (NCP         Section
a significant risk to human health or the environment
                                                                  300.430(a)(1)(iii)(A)). The "principal threat" concept is
should exposure occur. They include liquids and other
                                                                  applied to the characterization of "source materials" at
highly mobile materials (e.g., solvents) or materials
                                                                  a Superfund site. A source material is material that
having high concentrations of toxic compounds. A
                                                                  includes or contains hazardous substances, pollutants or
detailed explanation of principle threat wastes can be
                                                                  contaminants that act as a reservoir for migration of
found in the box, “What is a Principal Threat?”
                                                                  contamination to ground water, surface water or air, or
                                                                  acts as a source for direct exposure. Contaminated
The presence of DNAPL that acts as a source to
                                                                  ground water generally is not considered to be a source
groundwater has been inferred at the Drum Disposal
                                                                  material; however, Non-Aqueous Phase Liquids
Area portion of the Site. As such, this would be
                                                                  (NAPLs) in groundwater may be viewed as source
considered a principal threat waste at the Site if
                                                                  material. Principal threat wastes are those source
identified during future intrusive (e.g., excavation) work.
                                                                  materials considered to be highly toxic or highly mobile
                                                                  that generally cannot be reliably contained or would
SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS
                                                                  present a significant risk to human health or the
                                                                  environment should exposure occur. The decision to
A comprehensive baseline human health risk assessment
                                                                  treat these wastes is made on a site-specific basis
(HHRA) and a screening level ecological risk
                                                                  through a detailed analysis of the alternatives using the
assessment (SLERA) were completed for the Matlack
                                                                  nine remedy selection criteria. This analysis provides a
Site as part of the RI/FS completed by EPA in 2017,
                                                                  basis for making a statutory finding that the remedy
supporting the 2017 ROD. Potential cancer risk and non-
                                                                  employs treatment as a principal element.
cancer hazards stemming from exposure to Site media
including groundwater, soil, sediment, surface water and           from groundwater exposure. The Drum Disposal Area
seeps, were evaluated in the risk assessments. The                 may also act as an ongoing source of contamination to
HHRA concluded that exposure to VOCs and SVOCs in                  surface water, sediment and seep water. As such,
groundwater beneath the Site was associated with cancer            remedial action is needed for this area to mitigate risks
and noncancer risk estimates that exceeded EPA’s                   to human health and the environment associated with
threshold criteria. The SLERA determined the primary               these media.
ecological risk was associated with groundwater
                                                              6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                      WHAT IS HUMAN HEALTH RISK AND HOW IS IT
                                                                                  CALCULATED?
Summaries of the human health risk associated with
these media is as follows:                                       A Superfund baseline human health risk assessment is an analysis of the
                                                                 potential adverse health effects caused by hazardous substance releases
 Groundwater                                                    from a site in the absence of any actions to control or mitigate these
                                                                 under current- and future-land uses. A four-step process is utilized for
                                                                 assessing site-related human health risks for reasonable maximum
Risks and hazards were evaluated for potential future            exposure scenarios.
exposure to groundwater beneath the Site. The
populations of interest included the following potential         Hazard Identification: In this step, the contaminants of concern
future on-Site receptors: adult workers, construction            (COPCs) at the site in various media (i.e., soil, groundwater, surface
                                                                 water, and air) are identified based on such factors as toxicity, frequency
workers and child and adult residents. As summarized             of occurrence, and fate and transport of the contaminants in the
in Table 1, the hazard indices for the future child              environment, concentrations of the contaminants in specific media,
resident, adult resident, and construction worker exceed         mobility, persistence, and bioaccumulation.
EPA’s threshold value of 1. In addition, the combined
excess lifetime cancer risk estimates for the future child       Exposure Assessment: In this step, the different exposure pathways
                                                                 through which people might be exposed to the contaminants identified
and adult resident exceed EPA’s threshold range of               in the previous step are evaluated. Examples of exposure pathways
1×10-6 to 1×10-4. For the future on-Site resident,               include incidental ingestion of and dermal contact with contaminated
groundwater COCs include ethylbenzene, PCE, TCE,                 soil and ingestion of and dermal contact with contaminated
vinyl chloride and 4-chloroaniline.         Additionally,        groundwater. Factors relating to the exposure assessment include, but
                                                                 are not limited to, the concentrations in specific media that people might
exposure to several metals, namely cobalt, iron,                 be exposed to and the frequency and duration of that exposure. Using
manganese and thallium, was associated with elevated             these factors, a “reasonable maximum exposure” scenario, which
noncancer hazard indices. However, since metals are not          portrays the highest level of human exposure that could reasonably be
considered Site-related they were not retained as COCs           expected to occur, is calculated.
for purposes of remedy selection. Lastly, in addition to
                                                                 Toxicity Assessment: In this step, the types of adverse health effects
PCE and TCE, two additional VOCs (biphenyl and                   associated with chemical exposures, and the relationship between
naphthalene) were identified as COCs via the inhalation          magnitude of exposure and severity of adverse effects are determined.
pathway for the future on-Site construction worker               Potential health effects are chemical-specific and may include the risk
working in a trench.                                             of developing cancer over a lifetime or other non-cancer health hazards,
                                                                 such as changes in the normal functions of organs within the body (e.g.,
                                                                 changes in the effectiveness of the immune system). Some chemicals are
The potential for soil vapor intrusion (VI) is evaluated         capable of causing both cancer and noncancer health hazards.
when Site soils and/or groundwater are known or
suspected to contain chemicals that are considered to be         Risk Characterization: This step summarizes and combines outputs of
volatile.     A comparison of maximum detected                   the exposure and toxicity assessments to provide a quantitative
                                                                 assessment of site risks for all COPCs. Exposures are evaluated based
concentrations of volatile chemicals found in site-wide          on the potential risk of developing cancer and the potential for non-
groundwater to EPA’s chemical specific, risk-based               cancer health hazards. The likelihood of an individual developing cancer
groundwater vapor intrusion screening levels (VISLs)             is expressed as a probability. For example, a 10-4 cancer risk means a
was performed. The VISLs provide groundwater levels              “one in ten thousand excess cancer risk;” or one additional cancer may
                                                                 be seen in a population of 10,000 people as a result of exposure to site
associated with an indoor air concentration that                 contaminants under the conditions identified in the Exposure
represents an excess lifetime cancer risk ranging from 1         Assessment. Current Superfund regulations for exposures identify the
x 10-4 and 1 x 10-6 or a noncancer hazard quotient of 1.         range for determining whether remedial action is necessary as an
Concentrations exceeding these screening values                  individual excess lifetime cancer risk of 10-4 to 10-6, corresponding to a
indicate the potential for unacceptable risks or hazards         one in ten thousand to a one in a million excess cancer risk.
from VI. Results of the screening evaluation identified          For noncancer health effects, a “hazard index” (HI) is calculated. The
the following nine chemicals at concentrations greater           key concept for a noncancer HI is that a “threshold” (measured as an HI
than the residential VISLs: 1,2-dichloroethane, 1,4-             of less than or equal to 1) exists below which noncancer health hazards
dichlorobenzene, benzene, ethylbenzene, PCE, TCE,                are not expected to occur. The goal of protection is 10-6 for cancer risk
                                                                 and an HI of 1 for a noncancer health hazard. Chemicals that exceed a
vinyl chloride, naphthalene and cyanide. Based on the            10-4 cancer risk or an HI of 1 are typically those that will require
results of the screening evaluation, the potential for VI        remedial action at the site.
exists in the future if buildings were to be constructed
overlying the plume.



                                                             7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    Table 1: Summary of hazards and risks                                           Hazard
                                                                    Receptor                   Cancer Risk
         associated with groundwater                                                Index
                                                                 Exposure Media: Sediment
                     Hazard                                      Current/Future
   Receptor                       Cancer Risk
                     Index                                        off-Site Child       1
 Future on-Site                                                     Recreator                   1.6 x 10 -5
                       0.6         2.7 x 10 -5
    Worker                                                       Current/Future
 Future on-Site                                                  off-Site Adult       0.1
  Construction         25          1.6 x 10 -5                      Recreator
    Worker                                                       Exposure Media: Surface Water
 Future on-Site                                                  Current/Future
     Child             59                                         off-Site Child       1
   Resident                                                         Recreator
                                   4.3 x 10 -3                                                  7.0 x 10 -6
 Future on-Site                                                  Current/Future
     Adult             46                                        off-Site Adult       0.5
   Resident                                                         Recreator

 Seep Water, Sediment and Surface Water                        In summary, results of the HHRA found that exposure to
                                                                VOCs and SVOCs in groundwater beneath the Site is
Risks and hazards were evaluated for current and future         associated with cancer and noncancer risk estimates that
exposure to seep water, sediment and surface water              exceed EPA’s threshold criteria. Of the COCs identified
within Grand Sprute Run. The populations of interest            in the 2017 risk assessment, PCE, TCE, and benzene are
included child and adult recreators who may visit the           associated with the Drum Disposal Area. Volatile COCs
area and participate in recreational activities such as         were also found at levels that could be of concern for the
wading. The results of the risk assessment are                  future VI pathway. Furthermore, exposure to PCE, TCE,
summarized per media in Table 2. Exposure to seep               and manganese present in seep water samples collected
water via incidental ingestion and dermal contact by a          from Grand Sprute Run was associated with a noncancer
child recreator was the only receptor population that was       hazard that slightly exceeded EPA’s hazard index of 1.
found to exceed EPA’s threshold criteria. The associated
hazard index of 2 was primarily attributable to PCE, TCE        Ecological Risk Assessment
and manganese in seep water; however, manganese is
not considered to be Site-related and was not retained as       A SLERA was conducted that focused on evaluating the
a COC for purposes of remedy selection.                         potential for impacts to sensitive ecological receptors to
                                                                site-related constituents of concern through exposure to
     Table 2: Summary of hazard and risks                       surface soil, surface water, sediment, and seep surface
    associated with seep water, sediment and                    water and sediment. A complete summary of the
                  surface water                                 exposure scenarios can be found in the SLERA in the
                                                                administrative record.
                    Hazard
    Receptor                       Cancer Risk
                    Index                                       The analysis conducted as a part of the SLERA resulted
 Exposure Media: Seep Water                                     in a finding of unacceptable risk for ecological receptors
 Current/Future                                                 exposed to VOCs and SVOCs in surface soil, seep water,
  off-Site Child      2                                         sediment and surface water. The refined evaluation in
    Recreator                                                   Step 3A of the SLERA resulted in a finding of
                                    6.0 x 10 -6                 unacceptable risk for ecological receptors exposed to
 Current/Future
 off-Site Adult      0.9                                        VOCs in surface soil, seep water, sediment and surface
    Recreator                                                   water.

                                                                Although SLERAs that identify unacceptable risk
                                                                usually proceed to a Baseline Ecological Risk
                                                                Assessment (BERA), where additional data and revised

                                                            8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

toxicity values are used to further evaluate the potential       Area. They are as follows:
for ecological impacts, it is evident from the results of
the SLERA, combined with the fate and transport of the                  Control or remove source areas to prevent or
groundwater, that the primary ecological issue is                        minimize further impacts to groundwater, seep
groundwater contamination discharging to the seeps and                   water, surface water and sediment.
Grand Sprute Run. The SLERA evaluations also
identified impacts from surface soils, mainly from                      Prevent     current   and    potential    future
inorganic compounds; however, these are currently not                    unacceptable risks to human receptors through
considered to be Site-related. The remedial alternatives                 ingestion, dermal contact with and inhalation of
evaluated in this proposed plan focus solely on the Drum                 contaminated groundwater.
Disposal Area and will work in conjunction with the
PRB for the southern plume, selected as a remedial                      Prevent potential future unacceptable inhalation
component in the 2017 ROD, to address contamination                      risks to human receptors through subsurface
resulting from the discharge of groundwater from the                     vapor intrusion into indoor air.
southern CVOC plume to seeps, sediment, and surface
water in Grand Sprute Run. Given that the proposed                      Restore groundwater to its expected beneficial
remedial alternatives address the source of                              use to the extent practicable by reducing
contamination in the Drum Disposal Area as part of the                   contaminant concentrations below the more
larger remedy for the Site selected in the 2017 ROD,                     stringent of federal Maximum Contaminant
which addresses the source of contamination in the                       Levels (MCLs), state MCLs and NJ
Former Lagoon Area, no additional ecological                             Groundwater Quality Standards (GWQS).
investigation is needed, as the completed ecological
exposure pathways will be eliminated with the                           Prevent or minimize current and potential future
implementation of the remedial action.                                   unacceptable risks to ecological receptors
                                                                         through direct contact with or ingestion of
Risk Assessment Summary                                                  contaminated soil, sediment, and surface water.
Based on the results of the human health and ecological          Achievement of the first RAO is relevant for this
risk assessments a remedial action is necessary to protect       proposed ROD Amendment and will be referred to
public health, welfare, and the environment from actual          below in this Proposed Plan as the “Source Control
or threatened releases of hazardous substances.                  RAO.”
It is EPA’s judgment that the preferred alternative              To achieve these RAOs, the 2017 ROD selected
summarized in this Proposed Plan is necessary to                 remediation goals (RGs) for COCs in soil, sediment, and
protect public health or welfare or the environment from         groundwater. The RGs for groundwater, sediment, and
actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances            soil remain those selected in the 2017 ROD.
into the environment.
                                                                 The soil RGs selected in the 2017 ROD were based on
REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES                                       the NJDEP Default Impact to Groundwater Soil
                                                                 Screening Levels. In May 2021, these were superseded
Remedial Action Objectives (RAOs) are specific goals             by NJDEP’s New Jersey Migration to Groundwater Soil
to protect human health and the environment. These               Remediation Standards (NJMGWSRS). The PRGs
objectives are based on available information and                selected for the new COCs in the Drum Disposal Area
standards such as ARARs, to-be-considered (TBC)                  (1,1,1-TCA, 1,1-DCA, 1,1-DCE, cis-1,2-DCE) have
advisories, criteria and guidance, and site-specific risk-       been established using the NJMGWSRS (Table 3).
based levels. The primary objective of any remedial
strategy is overall protectiveness.

RAOs for the Site were identified in the 2017 ROD. EPA
has concluded that these RAOs are still appropriate for
the Site, including the source area in the Drum Disposal

                                                             9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  Table 3: Preliminary Remediation Goals for Vadose               and state laws, unless a waiver can be justified pursuant
                       Zone Soil                                  to Section 121(d)(4) of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. §
                                                                  9621(d)(4).
      Chemical of       Preliminary Remediation
      Concern           Goal (mg/kg)                              EPA is proposing to modify the remedy selected in the
      1,1,1-TCA         0.2                                       2017 ROD to include a component for addressing the
      1,1-DCA           0.24                                      soil in the Drum Disposal Area discovered during the
                                                                  design of the remedy selected in the 2017 ROD. Since
      1,1-DCE           0.0069
                                                                  this is a newly discovered area, it was not addressed in
      cis-1,2-DCE       0.35                                      the original ROD and, as such, comparison to the
        Note: The PRGs for benzene (0.005 mg/kg), PCE             original ROD is not relevant here. Please note that while
        (0.005 mg/kg) and TCE (0.01 mg/kg) are consistent         the remedy selected in the 2017 ROD, which includes
        with the RGs selected in the 2017 ROD.                    placement of a PRB for the southern CVOC plume, will
                                                                  address groundwater contamination, it would not
To assure the Source Control RAO is being met, an                 directly address the source of the groundwater
approach was developed to provide a numerical                     contamination in the soil. Rather, potential technologies
concentration-based performance criterion for PCE in              applicable to soil remediation in the Drum Disposal Area
the saturated zone that would work in conjunction with            were identified and screened in the FFS by effectiveness,
existing groundwater cleanup levels identified in the             implementability and cost criteria. The technologies that
2017 ROD. An evaluation was completed to determine                passed the initial screening were then assembled into
an appropriate performance criterion for PCE in the               remedial alternatives.
saturated zone that would achieve source remediation at
the Drum Disposal Area. Based on the results, a soil              The time frames below for construction do not include
concentration for PCE of 1 mg/kg was established as the           the time for designing a remedy, reaching remedy
performance criterion. This concentration is expected to          agreement with responsible parties if they are identified,
reduce the soil COC mass by more than 90% and remove              or the time to procure necessary contracts. All of the
concentrations indicative of DNAPL. Based on an                   following alternatives apply specifically to vadose and
evaluation of the site data using REMChlor modeling, a            saturated zone soil in the Drum Disposal Area.
performance criterion of 1 mg/kg PCE was determined
to provide adequate source remediation to enhance the             The 2017 ROD established that institutional controls
original permeable reactive barrier remedy, such that             (ICs) will be needed until the RAOs are met, which may
existing groundwater RGs can be achieved within a                 include establishment of a New Jersey Groundwater
reasonable timeframe in the downgradient groundwater              Classification Exception Area/Well Restriction Area
of the southern plume.                                            (CEA) that restricts the use of the contaminated aquifer,
                                                                  along with deed notices that restrict development of the
SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES                                  affected areas. Along with the 2017 ROD ICs, additional
                                                                  ICs may be necessary for the remedial alternatives for
Section 121(b)(1) of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. § 9621(b)(1),              the Drum Disposal Area and are described in the
mandates that remedial actions must be protective of              alternatives below. The RD will evaluate whether any
human health and the environment, cost-effective, and             additional ICs are needed for the Drum Disposal Area.
utilize permanent solutions, alternative treatment
technologies, and resource recovery alternatives to the           Alternative 1 - No Action
maximum extent practicable. Section 121(b)(1) of
CERCLA also establishes a preference for remedial                 Alternative 1 is required by the NCP to provide an
actions that employ, as a principal element, treatment to         environmental baseline against which impacts of the
reduce permanently and significantly the volume,                  other remedial alternatives can be compared. This
toxicity, or mobility of the hazardous substances,                alternative would leave the vadose zone and saturated
pollutants, and contaminants at a site. Section 121(d) of         zone sources of contamination at the Drum Disposal
CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. § 9621(d), further specifies that a             Area in their current state. No action would be initiated
remedial action must attain a level or standard of control        to remediate contaminated media or otherwise mitigate
of the hazardous substances, pollutants, and                      the migration of contamination from the vadose zone and
contaminants that at least attains ARARs under federal

                                                             10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

saturated zone sources to the southern CVOC                        necessary, to complete the five-year Site reviews.
groundwater plume that poses unacceptable risks to
human health and the environment.                                  Total Capital Cost:            $5,651,000
                                                                   Total O&M:                     $1,560,000
Total Capital Cost:               $0                               Total Periodic Cost:           $0
Total O&M:                        $0                               Total Present Net Worth:       $6,296,000
Total Periodic Cost:              $0                               Timeframe:                     1 year, O&M In
Total Present Net Worth:          $0                               Perpetuity (O&M cost estimate based on 30 years)
Timeframe:                        0 years
                                                                   Alternative 3 – Removal of Vadose Zone Sources and
Alternative 2 – Containment of Vadose and                          In-Situ Chemical/Biological Treatment of Saturated
Saturated Zone Sources; Institutional Controls                     Zone Sources; Institutional Controls

Alternative 2 includes installation of surface and                 Alternative 3 would consist of removing vadose zone
subsurface containment components for the vadose zone              sources, excavation and removal of drum and drum
and saturated zone sources to minimize migration of                remnants, and performing in-situ chemical/biological
contaminants from the source zone. In this alternative, a          treatment of saturated zone sources to reduce leaching of
barrier wall would be installed as the subsurface                  contaminants to the southern CVOC groundwater plume.
containment component to minimize further subsurface               This alternative includes conventional excavation of
migration of contamination from the vadose and                     vadose zone sources and in-situ chemical/biological
saturated zone sources to downgradient groundwater.                treatment of saturated zone sources. Vadose zone
The barrier wall would be installed around the full                sources would be excavated to the water table at
perimeter of the remediation zones to fully encompass              approximately 7 feet bgs, and it is assumed that no
the vadose zone sources exceeding the PRGs and                     dewatering or shoring would be necessary. The saturated
surround the extent of environmental media exceeding               zone sources would be treated through in-situ chemical
the performance criterion in the saturated zone.                   reduction (ISCR) and in-situ bioremediation (ISB). A
                                                                   chemical reductant coupled with an organic amendment
The barrier wall could be constructed of a rigid structural        would be used to stimulate both biotic and abiotic
material such as steel sheet pile, or flowable low-                degradation of the COCs present in source material. The
permeability material such as soil/cement bentonite                method of amendment delivery would likely be through
slurry or cement bentonite slurry. A low permeability              large diameter augers; however, the exact delivery
cover would be installed as the surface containment                method will be determined as part of the RD.
component across the horizontal extent of the vadose               Performance monitoring would be necessary to evaluate
zone and saturated zone sources. The exact materials               appropriate distribution of the amendments.
used to construct the barrier wall and low permeability
cover would be determined during the RD.                           A CEA and deed notices consistent with the 2017 ROD
                                                                   described above would be included. FYRs will be
Long-term monitoring of the low permeability cover and             conducted along with other response actions mentioned
barrier wall would be required for this alternative,               in the 2017 ROD until the RAOs are met.
including periodic inspections of the cover.
                                                                   Total Capital Cost:              $17,685,000
ICs would be required as part of this alternative,                 Total O&M:                       $0
consisting of a CEA and deed notices consistent with the           Total Periodic Cost:             $0
2017 ROD as described above, or other administrative               Total Present Net Worth:         $17,663,000
and legal measures (i.e., legal controls) intended to              Timeframe:                       1 year, 2 years O&M
control activities within the Drum Disposal Area that
could disturb the cover and/or barrier wall and to prevent         Alternative 4 – Removal of Vadose Zone and
direct contact with contaminated media. Site-wide five-            Saturated Zone Sources; Institutional Controls
year reviews (FYR) will be conducted along with the
other response actions selected in the 2017 ROD until              Alternative 4 would consist of removing vadose zone
the RAOs are met. Monitoring (consisting primarily of              and saturated zone sources to prevent leaching of
nonintrusive visual inspections) would be performed, as
                                                              11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

contaminants to the southern CVOC groundwater plume.              zone sources by vaporizing, extracting, and treating
Under this alternative, the removal of vadose zone                COCs through in-situ thermal treatment (ISTT). Thermal
sources would be performed similarly to Alternative 3.            treatment directly heats the subsurface soil, increasing
Excavation of the vadose zone sources would proceed               the contaminant’s vapor pressure and diffusivity, and
with conventional methods. This portion of the                    decreasing its viscosity. As a result, the evaporation rate
excavation would extend to the water table at                     and mobility of the contaminant is increased, which
approximately 7 feet bgs, and it is assumed that no               ultimately decreases the removal time associated with
dewatering, sloping, or shoring would be necessary. The           soil vapor extraction and/or vacuum enhanced
vertical extent of saturated zone sources reaches an              extraction. ISTT is a well-established technology for the
average depth of 22 feet bgs, but in some areas may               treatment of CVOCs and is expected to address
extend to depths greater than 30 feet bgs. Hence, removal         contaminants in the Drum Disposal Area.
of saturated zone sources, which would require deep
excavation and would likely need a robust dewatering              In this alternative, a substantial number of thermal
system and an excavation support system, is not included          heating points and vapor extraction wells would be
in this alternative. Subsurface drum and drum remnants            required in order to remediate the lateral extent of the
would also be removed in this alternative.                        source contamination. Additionally, the system would
                                                                  demand significant amounts of energy to meet heating
Since this alternative includes excavation of vadose zone         requirements. Extracted vapors would be treated through
soils with COC concentrations that are lower than the             a vapor treatment system consisting of granular activated
values specified in Table 3 for the Drum Disposal Area            carbon. Groundwater extraction may be used in
in order to access saturated soil, excavated material will        conjunction with in-situ thermal remediation to provide
be segregated to separate soils that could potentially be         hydraulic control. Any liquids generated from the vapor
used as backfill from those that would require off-site           treatment system (condensate) or groundwater
disposal. Soil samples would be collected from the                extraction, if necessary for hydraulic control, would be
bottom and sidewalls of the excavated areas to confirm            treated through a liquid treatment system consisting of
that PRGs have been achieved. After collection of                 GAC prior to discharge to Grand Sprute Run. The design
confirmation soil samples, the excavated area would be            of the thermal system, including the vapor extraction
backfilled with a combination of the stockpiled soils that        system and specific method of thermal treatment
are below PRGs and imported fill. Excavated soil with             utilized, would be determined during the RD.
concentrations of COCs greater than the Table 3 values
or performance criteria would be loaded and transported           Subsurface drum and drum remnants would be removed
for disposal to an off-site permitted facility. Following         prior to implementation of ISTT.
backfill of the excavated areas, the ground surface would
be restored to match existing conditions.                         Confirmation soil samples would be collected to
                                                                  evaluate the treatment effectiveness and ensure that
A CEA and deed notices consistent with the 2017 ROD               concentrations of COCs remaining in soil following
described above would be included. Site-wide FYRs will            treatment are below Table 3 values and performance
be conducted along with other response actions until the          criteria. Following completion of the thermal treatment,
RAOs are met.                                                     the ground surface would be restored to match existing
                                                                  conditions.
Total Capital Cost:              $36,509,000
Total O&M:                       $0                               A CEA and deed notices consistent with the 2017 ROD
Total Periodic Cost:             $0                               described above would be included. Site-wide FYRs will
Total Present Net Worth:         $36,509,000                      be conducted along with other response actions until the
Timeframe:                       1 year                           RAOs are met.

Alternative 5: In-Situ Thermal Treatment of Vadose                Total Capital Cost:               $29,469,000
Zone and Saturated Zone Sources; Institutional                    Total O&M:                        $0
Controls.                                                         Total Periodic Cost:              $0
                                                                  Total Present Net Worth:          $29,469,000
Alternative 5 would eliminate vadose zone and saturated           Timeframe:                        1 year

                                                             12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                      EVALUATION CRITERIA FOR SUPERFUND REMEDIAL
EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES                                                           ALTERNATIVES

                                                                     Overall Protectiveness of Human Health and the Environment
In evaluating the remedial alternatives, each alternative            evaluates whether and how an alternative eliminates, reduces, or
is assessed against nine evaluation criteria set forth in the        controls threats to public health and the environment through
NCP: overall protection of human health and the                      institutional controls, engineering controls, or treatment.
environment, compliance with ARARs, long-term
                                                                     Compliance with Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate
effectiveness and permanence, reduction of toxicity,                 Requirements (ARARs) evaluates whether the alternative meets
mobility, or volume through treatment, short-term                    federal and state environmental statutes, regulations, and other
effectiveness, implementability, cost, and state and                 requirements that pertain to the site, or whether a waiver is justified.
community acceptance. Refer to the table below for a
                                                                     Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence considers the ability of an
more detailed description of the evaluation criteria.
                                                                     alternative to maintain protection of human health and the environment
                                                                     over time.
This section of the Proposed Plan summarizes the
evaluation of the relative performance of each alternative           Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume (TMV) of
against the nine criteria, noting how each compare to the            Contaminants through Treatment evaluates an alternative's use of
                                                                     treatment to reduce the harmful effects of principal contaminants, their
others under consideration. A detailed analysis of                   ability to move in the environment, and the amount of contamination
alternatives can be found in the FFS.                                present.

Overall Protection of Human Health and the                           Short-term Effectiveness considers the length of time needed to
                                                                     implement an alternative and the risks the alternative poses to workers,
Environment
                                                                     the community, and the environment during implementation.

Since Alternative 1 would not address the risks posed by             Implementability considers the technical and administrative
the Site, it would not be protective of human health and             feasibility of implementing the alternative, including factors such as
the environment.                                                     the relative availability of goods and services.

                                                                     Cost includes estimated capital and annual operations and maintenance
If implemented properly, Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5                 costs, as well as present worth cost. Present worth cost is the total cost
would provide protection of human health and the                     of an alternative over time in terms of today's dollar value. Cost
environment by eliminating, reducing, or controlling                 estimates are expected to be accurate within a range of +50 to -30
                                                                     percent.
hazards and risk through containment, treatment, and/or
removal of contamination in the Drum Disposal Area.                  State/Support Agency Acceptance considers whether the State agrees
                                                                     with the EPA's analyses and recommendations, as described in the
Because the “No Action” alternative, Alternative 1, is               RI/FS and Proposed Plan.
not protective of human health and the environment, it
                                                                     Community Acceptance considers whether the local community
was eliminated from further consideration under the                  agrees with EPA's analyses and preferred alternative. Comments
remaining eight criteria.                                            received on the Proposed Plan are an important indicator of community
                                                                     acceptance.
Compliance with Applicable or Relevant and
Appropriate Requirements                                             For Alternatives 3 and 4, the location-specific and
                                                                     action-specific ARARs for the disposal phase would be
Actions taken at any Superfund site must meet all                    met through design and implementation of the remedy,
ARARs or provide grounds for invoking a waiver of                    including on-site management of remediation waste,
those requirements.                                                  mitigating potential impacts to endangered species and
                                                                     migratory birds, management of air emissions, and soil
While no chemical-specific ARARs were identified for                 erosion and sedimentation control. Alternative 3 would
the Drum Disposal Area, Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 will             need to comply with the substantive elements of the rules
enhance the compliance of the 2017 remedy with                       established under the Underground Injection Control
chemical-specific ARARs associated with achievement                  Program because of the delivery of amendments with
of groundwater RGs through treatment, containment or                 large-diameter augers. Alternative 5 may involve air
removal of the contamination.                                        emissions associated with the in-situ treatment process
                                                                     that would need to be adequately controlled to comply

                                                                13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

with ARARs. Alternative 2 would include a deed notice            saturated zone sources rather than treatment and reduces
for the foreseeable future to prevent direct contact with        the mobility but does not reduce the toxicity or volume.
the contaminated media in the Drum Disposal Area.
                                                                 Alternative 3 provides moderate to high reduction of
Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence                           toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment because
                                                                 it uses ISCR and ISB in the saturated zone. These in-situ
Alternative 2 is expected to successfully contain the            chemical treatment methods are well-established
COCs in the Drum Disposal Area and would provide                 technologies and are expected to treat COCs through an
moderate long-term effectiveness and permanence.                 irreversible process. However, there is the possibility of
However, since vadose zone and saturated zone sources            residual leaching of daughter products due to the
would be contained and left in place under this                  potential of incomplete degradation. Vadose zone
alternative, maintenance and monitoring would be                 sources would be reduced through excavation and off-
required in perpetuity. Additionally, this alternative           site disposal. The excavated material may undergo
would be susceptible to the impacts of climate change or         treatment, as needed, to comply with the requirements of
flooding and it would rely on ICs for protectiveness by          the disposal facility.
preventing direct contact with the contaminated media.
                                                                 Alternative 4 provides low reduction of toxicity,
Alternative 3 would provide moderate to high long-term           mobility, or volume through treatment because it calls
effectiveness and permanence. The vadose zone sources            for the removal of vadose and saturated zone sources as
would be removed under this alternative and the                  opposed to treatment. However, excavated material may
saturated zone sources would be chemically treated.              undergo treatment, as needed, to comply with ARARs,
However, due to the nature of in-situ chemical treatment,        and/or the requirements of the disposal facility.
there may be saturated zone sources associated with              Additionally, excavation in the saturated zone will
incomplete degradation of the COCs. Alternative 3                require dewatering and treatment of the wastewater prior
would also rely on ICs for protectiveness.                       to disposal.

Alternative 4 would provide high long-term                       Alternative 5 would provide a high reduction of toxicity,
effectiveness and permanence, as there would be no               mobility, or volume through treatment because it
contamination left behind. Similar to Alternative 3,             includes complete destruction of contamination in both
Alternative 4 completely removes the vadose zone                 the saturated and vadose zone sources. Unlike the other
sources. However, Alternative 4 also permanently                 alternatives, Alternative 5 relies solely on treatment to
removes saturated zone sources, thereby eliminating the          achieve remedial goals. Furthermore, thermal treatment
possibility that any source area contaminants could              is a well-established technology for the treatment of
remain above PRGs in the targeted area.                          CVOCs and presents comparatively little possibility of
                                                                 incomplete degradation of CVOCs when compared to
Alternative 5 would provide high long-term                       Alternative 3.
effectiveness and permanence, as there would be no
contamination left behind. Due to the nature of in-situ          Short-Term Effectiveness
thermal treatment technology, there is significantly less
risk of incomplete treatment of COCs when compared to            Alternative 2 would provide moderate to high short-term
Alternative 3. Alternative 5 is expected to permanently          effectiveness in that there would be minimally disruptive
remove COCs from the source area.                                short-term impacts to the community during
                                                                 construction and the Source Control RAO for the Drum
Alternatives 4 and 5 are likely to have higher long-term         Disposal Area would be achieved in a year or less.
effectiveness and permanence than Alternatives 2 and 3
because they are more technologically reliable and have          Alternative 3 has moderate short-term effectiveness
the potential to more completely remove contamination.           because it is likely to have short-term impacts to the
                                                                 surrounding community and workers, and it would
Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility,           Volume     of         achieve the Source Control RAO for the Drum Disposal
Contamination through Treatment                                  Area in approximately three years. Impacts to the
                                                                 community and workers would be a result of the hauling
Alternative 2 employs containment of the vadose and              of contaminated soil and mobilization of a large diameter
                                                            14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

auger drill rig using public roadways.                              shallow aquifer during excavation. Additionally,
                                                                    extracted groundwater would need to be treated. The
Alternative 4 is expected to have low short-term                    difficulties associated with transport and disposal of
effectiveness because it requires the most excavation and           significant quantities of contaminated soil must also be
transportation of contaminated soil. Deep excavation                considered with this alternative. Alternative 4 is
poses significant short-term impacts and higher risks to            expected to be more implementable than Alternative 2
site workers. It is expected that the Source Control RAO            but less implementable than Alternative 3.
for the Drum Disposal Area would be achieved in 1 year
or less.                                                            Alternative 5 is expected to be moderately
                                                                    implementable due to the need for specialized equipment
Alternative 5 is expected to have high short-term                   and services. A large number of heating points and vapor
effectiveness as it will involve significantly less                 extraction wells would need to be installed, hydraulic
disturbance to soils than Alternatives 3 and 4. In situ             controls implemented, and significant amounts of energy
thermal treatment poses its own safety risks to workers             will be required to operate the system. It is possible that
and the community associated with the high                          coordination with the local power company could delay
temperatures and the power required to complete thermal             the remedial action due to the significant energy demand.
treatment. These risks could be managed through the use             Alternative 5 is expected to be as implementable as
of specialized operators, adherence to safety                       Alternative 3.
requirements, establishment of work zones, and use of
PPE. Minimal risk to workers and the community is                   Cost
associated with high temperatures and electricity
required to operate the thermal system. Thermal                     Total present worth costs for Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5
treatment is expected to effectively achieve the Source             are summarized below. Present worth is calculated
Control RAO for the Drum Disposal Area in 1 year or                 using a discount rate of seven percent.
less.
                                                                    Alternative 2: Containment
Implementability                                                         Total Present-Worth Cost $6,296,000
                                                                         Implemented within 1 year
Alternative 2 is considered moderately implementable
                                                                         LTM for 30 Years
because installing the barrier wall and low permeability
cover could be relatively easily implemented. However,
                                                                    Alternative 3: Removal of Vadose Zone Sources and In-
there could be administrative challenges in managing a
                                                                    situ Treatment of Saturated Sources
containment remedy that would require maintenance and
                                                                          Total Present-Worth Cost $17,663,000
monitoring in perpetuity.
                                                                          Implemented within 1 year
Alternative 3 is considered moderately implementable                      LTM for 2 Years
due to the need for specialized equipment and services
for in-situ soil mixing with large diameter augers. The             Alternative 4: Removal of Saturated and Vadose Zone
success of this alternative relies heavily on the ability of        Sources
the augers to induce proper mixing of the soil and                       Total Present-Worth Cost $36,509,000
amendments in the saturated zone. Alternative 3 is                       Implemented within 1 Year, Confirmation
expected to be more implementable than Alternative 2                        Sampling
because there is no need for perpetual maintenance and                   No LTM needed
monitoring.
                                                                    Alternative 5: In-Situ Thermal Treatment of Vadose and
The implementability of Alternative 4 is considered low             Saturated Zone Sources
to moderate due to the need for specialized equipment                    Total Present-Worth Cost $29,469,000
and services for the saturated soils. The excavation of                  1 year of Thermal Treatment, Confirmation
saturated zone sources would require the use of sheet                       Sampling
piling and a robust dewatering system. Dewatering could                  No LTM needed
pose a challenge as significant pumping would be
required to maintain an appropriate water level in the
                                                               15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

State Acceptance                                                  Alternative is $29,469,000. This is an engineering cost
                                                                  estimate that is expected to be within the range of plus
NJDEP concurs with EPA’s preferred alternative.                   50 percent to minus 30 percent of the actual project cost.
                                                                  Further detail on the cost is presented in Section 6 of the
Community Acceptance                                              FFS. While the preferred remedy would ultimately result
                                                                  in reduction of contaminant levels in groundwater such
Community acceptance of the Preferred Alternative will            that levels would allow for unlimited use and unlimited
be evaluated after the public comment period ends and             exposure, it is anticipated that it would take longer than
will be described in the ROD Amendment. Comments                  five years to achieve these levels. As a result, in
received during the public comment period will be                 accordance with CERCLA, the Site is to be reviewed at
addressed in the Responsiveness Summary section of the            least once every five years until cleanup levels are
ROD Amendment. Based on public comment, the                       achieved and unrestricted use is achieved.
Preferred Alternative could be modified from the version
presented in this Proposed Plan.                                  Consistent with EPA Region 2’s Clean and Green policy,
                                                                  EPA will evaluate the use of sustainable technologies
PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE                                             and practices with respect to implementation of the
                                                                  selected remedy.
Based upon evaluation of the remedial alternatives, EPA
proposes Alternative 5, In-Situ Thermal Treatment of              Basis for the Remedy Preference
Vadose Zone and Saturated Zone sources, as the
Preferred Alternative to address the contaminated                 Remedial Alternative 5 is the preferred alternative for the
sources in the Drum Disposal Area. Thermal                        Drum Disposal Area at the Site because it meets the
remediation in the Drum Disposal Area will involve the            threshold of criteria protecting human health and the
direct heating of contaminated subsurface soils such that         environment, and complying with ARARs, and would
COCs can be vaporized, extracted by vapor extraction              provide the highest reduction of toxicity, mobility, or
wells, and treated by granular activated carbon. The              volume through treatment, is highly effective in the long-
source of contamination in the Drum Disposal Area was             term and short-term at removing COCs, and is expected
already delineated during the PDI for the remedy                  to achieve Source Control RAO in approximately 1 year
selected in the 2017 ROD; however, additional                     or less. Alternative 1 was eliminated from consideration
investigation is necessary to determine the specifications        because no action would fail to meet the threshold
of the treatment. Accordingly, if further investigation           criterion to protect human health and the environment.
merits an expanded thermal treatment zone, or any other
adjustment to the treatment area or method,                       Alternative 2 has significant advantages in cost
modifications will be made as needed. In-situ thermal             efficiency and has similar implementability to the
treatment is a well-established technology for the                Preferred Alternative. Despite these advantages,
treatment of CVOCs and is expected to achieve RAOs.               Alternative 2 is not preferred because it rates lower than
                                                                  the other alternatives in terms of its ability to reduce
Implementation of Alternative 5 will include:                     toxicity, mobility, or volume of contaminants through
    Installation of thermal heating points and vapor             treatment and would require perpetual maintenance.
      extraction wells
    Transportation and disposal of contaminated                  The preferred thermal treatment poses significant
      media generated from thermal heating points                 advantages over the in-situ treatment of Alternative 3
      and vapor extraction well installation                      because ISTT would permanently degrade both vadose
                                                                  and saturated zone sources with COC concentrations
    Collection and treatment of generated vapor and
                                                                  above PRGs. The success of Alternative 3 depends on
      liquid waste through treatment system
                                                                  the ability of the auger to properly mix and distribute
      consisting of granular activated carbon and
                                                                  amendments and the ability of the amendments to fully
      discharge to surface water
                                                                  degrade contaminants, therefore it is technically less
    Confirmatory soil sampling
                                                                  reliable than Alternative 5. Since Alternative 3 is
    Institutional controls                                       expected to be as implementable as Alternative 5 due to
                                                                  similar demands for specialized equipment and services,
The total estimated present-worth cost for the Preferred

                                                             16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

the basis for the preference of Alternative 5 over                 period.
Alternative 3 is based on technical reliability and long-
term and short-term permanence. These factors outweigh             The dates for the public comment period; the date,
the cost advantages of Alternative 3.                              location, and time of the public meeting; and the
                                                                   locations of the Administrative Record files are provided
Compared to Alternative 5, the only other alternative that         on the front page of this Proposed Plan.
could provide the same high level of permanence and
technical reliability in eliminating contamination in the
vadose and saturated zones is Alternative 4. Since the
sources would be removed through excavation in
Alternative 4, there is no risk of incomplete degradation            FOR FURTHER INFORMATION
of COCs as in Alternative 3. However, deep excavation
into the saturated zone would require significant                    The administrative record file, which contains copies
transportation and disposal of contaminated media,                   of the Proposed Plan and supporting documentation, is
specialized sheet piling, and a robust dewatering system,            available at the following locations:
all of which are elements that reduce the
                                                                     EPA Region 2 Superfund Records Center
implementability and short-term effectiveness of
                                                                     290 Broadway, 18th Floor
Alternative 4. Although Alternative 5 poses its own                  New York, New York 10007-1866
implementability challenges, such as a high energy                   (212) 637-4308
demand, a high number of thermal heating points and                  Hours: Monday-Friday – 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
vapor extraction wells, and hydraulic controls, it is
expected to be more effective in the short and long term             Township of Woolwich
than the other alternatives, and would cost less than                Jane Dibella
Alternative 4.                                                       Administrator
                                                                     jdibella@woolwichtwp.org
Based on the information available at this time, EPA                 120 Village Green Drive
                                                                     Woolwich Township NJ 08085
believes the preferred alternative meets the threshold
                                                                     (856) 467-2666, x-3101
criteria and provides the best balance of tradeoffs                  Hours: Monday-Friday – 9 AM. To 5 PM.
compared to the other alternatives with respect to the
balancing criteria. The preferred alternative satisfies the
following statutory requirements of CERCLA Section                   In addition, the administrative record file is available
121: 1) be protective of human health and the                        on-line at:
environment; 2) comply with ARARs; 3) be cost
effective; 4) utilize permanent solutions and alternative            www.epa.gov/superfund/matlack
treatment technologies or resource recovery
technologies to the maximum extent practicable; and 5)
satisfy the preference for treatment as a principal
element. EPA will assess the modifying criterion of
community acceptance in the ROD following the close
of the public comment period.

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

EPA provides information regarding the cleanup of the
Site to the public through meetings, the Administrative
Record file for the Site, and announcements published in
the local newspaper. EPA and NJDEP encourage the
public to gain a more comprehensive understanding of
the Site and the Superfund activities that have been
conducted there. The final remedy for the Drum Disposal
Area will be selected after reviewing and considering all
information submitted during a 30-day public comment
                                                              17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Figure 1 - Site Location Map

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Figure 2 - Site Features

                           19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   Groundwater Flow




Figure 3 - Sitewide Contamination in Groundwater

                                                     20

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ATTACHMENT B


PUBLIC NOTICE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 108 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        OATH OF PUBLICATION
STATE OF NEW JERSEY, GLOUCESTER COUNTY, ss:
Cynthia Merckx being duly sworn on her oath, says she is the Editor and Publisher of The Sentinel of
Gloucester County, a weekly newspaper printed and published in Malaga, Township of Franklin,
County of Gloucester, State of New Jersey, and that a legal notice of which the annexed is a true copy,
was published in "The Sentinel" for a period of.. ..l..week, once a week successively, to wit:
March 30t\ 2023

Sworn and subscribed before me on this day:
March 30t\ 2023




Melissa A.Merckx ID#50027221

My Commission Expires 11116/2025

              Melissa A Merckx
              NOTARY PUBLIC
             State of New Jersey
               10 # 50027221
      My Commission Expires 11/16/2025




                                                                                nv"                     n
                                                                               Ag
                                          EPA ANNOUNCES MODIFICATION TO THE CLEANUP PLAN
                                         AT THE MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE IN WOOLWICH, NJ
                           The u.s. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is proposing to modify the 2017 cleanup plan for the Matlack,
                         Inc. Superfund site in Woolwich, New Jersey, to include the Drum Disposal Area which was discovered during
                         the Pre-Design Investigation for the site.
                           EPA is proposing In-situ Thermal Treatment (ISIT) as the cleanup for the contaminated source soil in the Drum
                         Disposal Area. Thermal treatment directly heats the subsurface soil, increasing the contaminant's vapor pressure,
                         and decreasing its viscosity (thickness). Through this process, contaminants of concern can be vaporized,
                         extracted, and treated using in-situ (or in place) thermal treatment.
                           EPA is taking comments from the public on the proposed cleanup plan at the Matlack, Inc. site from March
                         29,2023 to April 28, 2023. EPA will consider comments submitted during the comment period before making
                         a final decision. Stakeholders are encouraged to review the plan, attend the public meeting, and comment on
                         the cleanup alternatives. Comments may be emailed to Kaur.SupindeIjit@epa.gov or postmarked to the mailing
                         address below no later than April 28, 2023.

                         Supinderjit Kaur
                         290 Broadway, 18th Floor
                         New York, NY 10007-1866

                         EP A will also be holding a virtual public meeting on April 12, 2023 at 6:00pm. For more information, please
                         contact EPA's Community Involvement Coordinator, Shereen Kandil at kandil.shereen@epa.gov or visit www.
                         epa.gov/superfund/matlack.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 109 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     ATTACHMENT C


PUBLIC MEETING TRANSCRIPT

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 110 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                        ·

 ·1

 ·2

 ·3

 ·4

 ·5

 ·6

 ·7

 ·8

 ·9

 10· ·MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
 · · ·RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT
 11· ·PROPOSED REMEDIAL ACTION PLAN

 12· · · VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING

 13· · ·Wednesday, April 12, 2023

 14

 15

 16

 17

 18

 19

 20

 21

 22

 23

 24

 25


www.huseby.com       Huseby Global Litigation   800-333-2082
                                                           YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 111 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                              Meeting                    Page 2

 ·1· · · · · (Beginning of Audio Recording.)
 ·2· · · · · MS. KANDIL:· Hi, good evening,
 ·3· ·everyone.· We'll be starting in just a moment.
 ·4· ·Thank you.
 ·5· · · · · (Pause)
 ·6· · · · · MR. MELENDEZ:· All right.· Good
 ·7· ·evening, and welcome to Matlack, Inc. public
 ·8· ·meeting, everyone.· We're here to discuss
 ·9· ·updating the 2017 cleanup plan.
 10· · · · · Before we start, we're going to give a
 11· ·few minutes before starting.
 12· · · · · We'll be starting in a minute.
 13· · · · · All right.· Good evening, everyone.
 14· ·And welcome to the Matlack, Inc. public
 15· ·meeting to discuss updating the 2017 cleanup
 16· ·plan.· My name is Angely Melendez, and I am a
 17· ·community involvement coordinator or a CIC,
 18· ·and I will be facilitating tonight's meeting
 19· ·alongside Shereen Kandil, who's also a CIC.
 20· · · · · Before getting into the presentation,
 21· ·I'll go over some logistical information.
 22· ·Shereen, can you please help us out here?
 23· · · · · MS. KANDIL:· Good evening, everyone.
 24· ·Again, my name is Shereen Kandil.· I just
 25· ·wanted to go over some Zoom features in case

www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation    800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 112 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                      Page 3

 ·1· ·you aren't familiar with the features that are
 ·2· ·available.· If you hover over your screen, you
 ·3· ·will see a toolbar pop up at the bottom of
 ·4· ·your screen.· There are just some icons that
 ·5· ·I'd like to point out.
 ·6· · · · · The first one is the microphone, looks
 ·7· ·like a microphone.· It's the mute button, so
 ·8· ·when we get to the Q&A/comment portion of
 ·9· ·portion our meeting, if you choose to provide
 10· ·any comments or ask any questions verbally,
 11· ·you can do so by unmuting your line.
 12· · · · · The other feature I'd like to point out
 13· ·is the chat feature.· If you cannot see the
 14· ·chat icon, as indicated in the slide in front
 15· ·of you, there's a "more" button that has three
 16· ·little dots that says, "more."
 17· · · · · If you click on that, there should be
 18· ·an option to choose, "chat," and you may ask
 19· ·questions and provide comments throughout the
 20· ·presentation via the chat feature, and of
 21· ·course, during the Q&A.· And we will make sure
 22· ·to respond to your questions and comments
 23· ·after -- during that Q&A portion.
 24· · · · · We do ask, though, that you -- whenever
 25· ·you do have a question or comment that you put

www.huseby.com       Huseby Global Litigation      800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 113 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                     Page 4

 ·1· ·into your chat, to please put your first and
 ·2· ·last name, as we do have a stenographer that
 ·3· ·will be transcribing this meeting.· Next
 ·4· ·slide, please.
 ·5· · · · · A few other features, also, if you
 ·6· ·cannot find these features right at the front
 ·7· ·of your toolbar, you can click on the "more"
 ·8· ·button, but we want to point out the closed
 ·9· ·captioning feature.· If you need closed
 10· ·captioning, you just click on that, and the
 11· ·closed captioning will appear on your screen.
 12· · · · · And then, finally, if you do choose to
 13· ·ask questions or provide comments verbally, we
 14· ·do ask that you raise your hand.· You can find
 15· ·the raise-hand feature by clicking on the
 16· ·reactions button and then click on "raise
 17· ·hand."· And we'll call on you once we have --
 18· ·once we open up the Q&A portion of our
 19· ·meeting.
 20· · · · · Thank you, Angely.· Back to you.
 21· · · · · MR. MELENDEZ:· All right.· Thank you,
 22· ·Shereen.· So let's go over some ground rules.
 23· ·We'll be answering questions during the Q&A
 24· ·portion at the end of the presentation.
 25· · · · · So -- but throughout, you can use the

www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation   800-333-2082
                                                                 YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 114 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                    MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                               Meeting                   Page 5

 ·1· ·chatbox to write questions and comments.· We
 ·2· ·just ask that you please identify yourself
 ·3· ·because, as I said before, there's a
 ·4· ·stenographer who will be recording this
 ·5· ·meeting.· And for your awareness, we will also
 ·6· ·be recording this session.· Throughout the
 ·7· ·meeting, please be respectful.
 ·8· · · · · So the order of the meeting will go as
 ·9· ·introductions; we'll then meet the team.
 10· ·We'll go over EPA and the Superfund Program,
 11· ·site history, investigations, cleanup
 12· ·alternatives, preferred cleanup plans, and
 13· ·we'll open it up to questions and comments.
 14· · · · · As I said before, my name is Angely
 15· ·Melendez.· I am a community involvement
 16· ·coordinator, and I am joined with Shereen
 17· ·Kandil, who's the Community Affairs Team lead.
 18· · · · · Our remedial project manager is
 19· ·Supinderjit along with Michael Grossman.· Our
 20· ·mega-projects section chief is Stephanie
 21· ·Vaughn.· Our hydrogeologist is Rachel
 22· ·Griffths, and our risk assessor is Ula
 23· ·Filipowicz.
 24· · · · · So let's get into why we're on here.
 25· ·Supinderjit, can you please take it away?

www.huseby.com          Huseby Global Litigation   800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 115 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                      Page 6

 ·1· · · · · MS. KANDIL:· Supinderjit, if you're
 ·2· ·speaking, we don't hear you, so if you can
 ·3· ·just --
 ·4· · · · · MS. KAUR:· Oh, thank you, I was on
 ·5· ·mute.· Thank you, Angely.· Hi, everyone.· I'm
 ·6· ·Supinderjit.· I'm the project manager for
 ·7· ·Matlack along with Michael.
 ·8· · · · · So in 2017, EPA selected a cleanup plan
 ·9· ·for Matlack.· During the design of the cleanup
 10· ·plan, we found an additional area of
 11· ·contamination that was not known about during
 12· ·the process of selecting the cleanup plan back
 13· ·in 2017.· And therefore, EPA's proposing an
 14· ·amendment to the 2017 cleanup plan to address
 15· ·this additional area.
 16· · · · · So we're tonight to discuss EPA's
 17· ·proposed amendment to the selected cleanup
 18· ·plan for the Matlack, Inc. Superfund Site.
 19· ·The proposed plan was issued on March 29th.
 20· ·You can find IT at the EPA's website on the
 21· ·Matlack, Inc. site profile page.
 22· · · · · We will be accepting verbal and written
 23· ·comments until April 28th, and all of these
 24· ·comments will be considered and included
 25· ·formally in the administrative record.· We

www.huseby.com       Huseby Global Litigation      800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 116 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                      Page 7

 ·1· ·will be assessing these comments in the
 ·2· ·Responsiveness Summary of the Amended Record
 ·3· ·of Decision.
 ·4· · · · · So before we go into details about the
 ·5· ·proposed amendment to the cleanup plan for
 ·6· ·this additional area, I'll give a brief
 ·7· ·overview of site background and the
 ·8· ·investigations that have been conducted so far
 ·9· ·and what's been done so far at Matlack.
 10· · · · · Matlack is located on Route 322 East in
 11· ·Woolwich Township in New Jersey.· There still
 12· ·exists a former Swedesboro Terminal that was
 13· ·owned by Matlack, Inc.
 14· · · · · It's a one-story building along with a
 15· ·parking lot that's in the northeastern portion
 16· ·of the property.· And it's currently being
 17· ·leased by Coopersburg & Liberty Kenworth.
 18· ·They are a truck sales and service center.
 19· · · · · So here's a map of Matlack.· This is
 20· ·approximate site location.· It runs along,
 21· ·again, 322 East in Woolwich Township.· There
 22· ·is a water body that runs across the site, as
 23· ·well.· It's called Grand Sprute Run, which
 24· ·discharges into a larger water body called
 25· ·Raccoon Creek.

www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation    800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 117 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                      Page 8

 ·1· · · · · So Matlack, Inc. operated at the site
 ·2· ·from 1962 to 2001.· Operations mainly included
 ·3· ·transportation of a variety of chemicals in
 ·4· ·tank trailers, and they also cleaned the tank
 ·5· ·trailers onsite using various solvents.· And
 ·6· ·for a portion of time, from 1962 to 1976, theY
 ·7· ·discharged the wastewater from the cleaning
 ·8· ·operations of the tank trailers into an
 ·9· ·unlined lagoon, which we refer as the former
 10· ·lagoon area.
 11· · · · · New Jersey Department of Environmental
 12· ·Protection got involved at the site in 1982.
 13· ·They began investigations, and under their
 14· ·oversight, Matlack, Inc. conducted
 15· ·investigations and cleanup activities.
 16· · · · · These cleanup activities included a
 17· ·groundwater extraction and treatment system.
 18· ·In 2001, Matlack, Inc declared bankruptcy, and
 19· ·they ceased operations.
 20· · · · · So IN 2012, the EPA began its own
 21· ·investigations at this site and after
 22· ·conducting these investigations, the site was
 23· ·listed on the National Priorities List in
 24· ·2013.· And in 2015, EPA began a remedial
 25· ·investigation and feasibility study.

www.huseby.com       Huseby Global Litigation      800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 118 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                      Page 9

 ·1· · · · · So we began that process to fully
 ·2· ·understand what the nature and extent of
 ·3· ·contamination is at the site, what risks are
 ·4· ·posed by the contamination at the site, and to
 ·5· ·develop a cleanup plan to address this
 ·6· ·contamination.
 ·7· · · · · In 2017, as I mentioned earlier, a
 ·8· ·Record of Decision was signed which selected a
 ·9· ·cleanup plan for the site.
 10· · · · · So this a more detailed map of the
 11· ·site.· As I mentioned, there's a one-story
 12· ·building in the northeastern portion of the
 13· ·site, which is by Liberty Kenworth, and they
 14· ·also use the parking lot.· And south of this
 15· ·parcel or portion of the site is the former
 16· ·lagoon area where the wastewater was dumped
 17· ·for a portion of time.
 18· · · · · And south of the former lagoon area is
 19· ·the drum disposal area.· And this is the
 20· ·additional area of contamination that was
 21· ·found.
 22· · · · · There's also Grand Sprute Run, which is
 23· ·sort of on the western portion of the property
 24· ·or, I'm sorry, of the site.· And the site is
 25· ·actually owned by two entitles.· The ESTATE

www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation    800-333-2082
                                                                  YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 119 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                              Meeting                  Page 10

 ·1· ·owns the portion that is being rented out to
 ·2· ·Liberty Kenworth and the other portion is
 ·3· ·owned by New Jersey DEP, which is outlined in
 ·4· ·blue here.
 ·5· · · · · So there are two aquifers that exist at
 ·6· ·the site.· There is a shallow unconfined
 ·7· ·aquifer which is in the Pensauken Formation.
 ·8· ·And groundwater in this aquifer flows towards
 ·9· ·the Grand Sprute Run, and there is a deeper
 10· ·aquifer in the Magothy-Raaritan formation.
 11· · · · · So there's a -- there are two -- so
 12· ·between the two aquifers, there is the
 13· ·Woodbury Clay, which is a confining unit
 14· ·between them.
 15· · · · · So the remedial investigation that was
 16· ·conducted to define the nature and extent of
 17· ·contamination to figure out where the
 18· ·contamination is, how much contamination there
 19· ·is, there was sampling done for groundwater,
 20· ·soil, surface water, sediment, and seep water.
 21· ·Seep water is groundwater discharging to the
 22· ·surface.
 23· · · · · And it was found -- the results of the
 24· ·remedial investigation found that there's
 25· ·contaminants of potential concern in all media

www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation    800-333-2082
                                                                 YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 120 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                    Page 11

 ·1· ·sampled, meaning there was contamination in --
 ·2· ·contaminants in ground water, soil, surface
 ·3· ·water, sediment, and seep water.
 ·4· · · · · So after we figured out what was there,
 ·5· ·human health and ecological risks assessments
 ·6· ·were conducted to figure out if there were
 ·7· ·risks to this contamination.
 ·8· · · · · The human health risk assessment found
 ·9· ·that there were unacceptable risks due to
 10· ·exposure to contaminants in groundwater, and
 11· ·the risks were primarily related to volatile
 12· ·and semi-volatile organic compounds.· And
 13· ·there were no risks found associated with
 14· ·soil, sediment, or surface water.
 15· · · · · And the ecological risk assessment also
 16· ·found that there was greatest ecological risk
 17· ·from contaminated groundwater with volatile
 18· ·organic compounds that were discharging to the
 19· ·seep water, and through the sediment, into
 20· ·Grand Sprute Run.
 21· · · · · So now that we knew where the
 22· ·contamination was, it's in the soil, the
 23· ·groundwater, sediment, seep water, and we knew
 24· ·that there were risks associated to exposure
 25· ·to groundwater, we then conducted a

www.huseby.com       Huseby Global Litigation      800-333-2082
                                                                 YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 121 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                    Page 12

 ·1· ·feasibility study.
 ·2· · · · · So in this map, you can see the dash.
 ·3· ·There are two dashed lines, and these are for
 ·4· ·groundwater plumes.· They're displaying the
 ·5· ·two separate groundwater plumes that were
 ·6· ·found in the remedial investigation.
 ·7· · · · · The northern plume is -- consists
 ·8· ·mostly of (inaudible) and volatile organic
 ·9· ·compounds while the southern plume groundwater
 10· ·plume, there was found to be mostly
 11· ·chlorinated volatile organic compounds.· And
 12· ·the soil that -- the exceedances they found in
 13· ·contaminants for the soil was mostly in the
 14· ·former lagoon area.
 15· · · · · And there was an isolated area of
 16· ·sediment that had exceedances, as well.· And
 17· ·the feasibility study not only looked at
 18· ·options to clean up groundwater but soil and
 19· ·sediment, as well.
 20· · · · · And that was because soil was acting as
 21· ·a source to groundwater contamination.· And so
 22· ·the feasibility study looked at cleanup
 23· ·options for both soil, sediment, and
 24· ·groundwater.
 25· · · · · And from the feasibility study, a

www.huseby.com       Huseby Global Litigation      800-333-2082
                                                                 YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 122 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                    Page 13

 ·1· ·preferred cleanup option was selected in the
 ·2· ·2017 Record of Decision.
 ·3· · · · · And that included two -- installation
 ·4· ·of two groundwater passive barrier walls to
 ·5· ·treat the two distinct groundwater plumes
 ·6· ·that, you know, that were displayed in this
 ·7· ·map, and excavation of contaminated soil
 ·8· ·within the former lagoon area, again, which is
 ·9· ·outlined in -- through here, and excavation of
 10· ·contaminated sediment along Grand Sprute Run,
 11· ·which was also isolated.
 12· · · · · And along with those alternatives or
 13· ·cleanup options, we were going to do long-term
 14· ·monitoring and institutional controls.
 15· · · · · So we were at the point where we did
 16· ·the remedial investigation and feasibility
 17· ·study.· There's a proposed plan and Record of
 18· ·Decision.· And we are currently doing the
 19· ·remedial design for this cleanup plan, so
 20· ·figuring out all the details of how to
 21· ·implement it.
 22· · · · · And this is where we found the
 23· ·additional area of contamination that we
 24· ·referred to as the drum disposal area.· And
 25· ·from here, we are going to go into details of

www.huseby.com        Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                 YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 123 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                    Page 14

 ·1· ·this additional area of contamination and the
 ·2· ·proposed amendment for this.
 ·3· · · · · And for this, I'll turn it over to my
 ·4· ·colleague, Michael Grossman, who will go into
 ·5· ·details.
 ·6· · · · · MR. GROSSMAN:· Hi, this is Michael
 ·7· ·Grossman, the other remedial project manager
 ·8· ·for the site.· First, I'm going to talk about
 ·9· ·the pre-design investigation.
 10· · · · · And this investigation was launched to
 11· ·support the design of the remedy that was
 12· ·outlined in the 2017 Record of Decision.· More
 13· ·specifically, the PDI was conducted to fully
 14· ·define the contamination identified in the
 15· ·ROD.· And the pre-designed investigation was
 16· ·conducted in three phases from 2019 to 2022.
 17· · · · · PDI activities included: groundwater,
 18· ·soil, and sediment sampling, a geotechnical
 19· ·investigation, wetland delineation, habitat
 20· ·assessment, a cultural resources survey, and
 21· ·also a ground-penetrating radar study was
 22· ·performed to identify drums and drum fragments
 23· ·that were buried in the newly discovered drum
 24· ·disposal area.
 25· · · · · Moving onto the findings of the PDI,

www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation    800-333-2082
                                                                 YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 124 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                    Page 15

 ·1· ·the main finding that is relevant to the plan
 ·2· ·that we are proposing today is that a new
 ·3· ·source area of contamination in soil related
 ·4· ·to the disposal of drums containing
 ·5· ·chlorinated solvents was identified, and this
 ·6· ·area was located south of the former lagoon
 ·7· ·area and is now referred to as the drum
 ·8· ·disposal area.
 ·9· · · · · The primary contaminants of concern
 10· ·that were found in the drum disposal area
 11· ·include: tetrachloroethene, or PCE;
 12· ·trichloroethene, or TCE; 1,1,1-
 13· ·trichloroethane, or 1,1,1-TCA; 1,1-
 14· ·dichloroethene, or 1,1-DCE; 1,1-
 15· ·dichloroethane, or 1,1-DCA; cis-1,2,-
 16· ·dichloroethene, or cis-1,2-DCE; and benzene.
 17· · · · · Here we see a figure from the pre-
 18· ·design investigation that provides a good
 19· ·representation of our understanding of the
 20· ·site following this investigation.· And as we
 21· ·can see, we have the lagoon outlined in blue,
 22· ·and the soil in that area is acting as a
 23· ·source of contamination for the orange and
 24· ·green plumes, groundwater plumes.
 25· · · · · And the plume in orange is a benzene

www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation    800-333-2082
                                                                 YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 125 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                    Page 16

 ·1· ·plume while the green plume is a (inaudible)
 ·2· ·plume that are both stemming from the lagoon
 ·3· ·area.· And below that, we see the drum
 ·4· ·disposal area outlined in black, where the
 ·5· ·soil contamination in that area is acting as a
 ·6· ·source for the pink groundwater plume that
 ·7· ·represents PCE.
 ·8· · · · · Here we have another figure and this
 ·9· ·figure represents a cross section of the soil
 10· ·contamination in the drum disposal area.· And
 11· ·this figure was generated based on data
 12· ·obtained from soil and groundwater sampling in
 13· ·the drum disposal.
 14· · · · · And just to orient yourselves, we have
 15· ·some little images of drums at the top of the
 16· ·photo, and these drums were disposed of on the
 17· ·surface.· So everything below those drums
 18· ·represents the subsurface.
 19· · · · · Also, in the image, we have this pink
 20· ·shading.· The pink shading represents areas of
 21· ·contamination, where the areas of lighter pink
 22· ·represent areas of less intense contamination,
 23· ·while the areas of more intense or hotter pink
 24· ·represent areas of more intense contamination.
 25· · · · · And as you can see here, the

www.huseby.com       Huseby Global Litigation      800-333-2082
                                                                 YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 126 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                    Page 17

 ·1· ·contaminants originated in the surface in the
 ·2· ·Sandy Pensauken formation, but due to gravity
 ·3· ·and their density being greater than water,
 ·4· ·the contaminants moved through the Sandy
 ·5· ·Pensauken formation and down below the water
 ·6· ·table.
 ·7· · · · · The water table, you can see, is
 ·8· ·represented by that blue line there, and
 ·9· ·essentially, these contaminants move down
 10· ·through the soil and into the Woodbury
 11· ·formation clay where they have sort of
 12· ·gathered there, and the contamination is
 13· ·highly saturated in that Woodbury formation
 14· ·clay.
 15· · · · · But based on the findings of the PDI,
 16· ·EPA decided to conduct a focused feasibility
 17· ·study.· More specifically, the reason a
 18· ·focused feasibility study was necessary was
 19· ·because the original 2017 cleanup plan would
 20· ·not adequately address the newly discovered
 21· ·area of contamination.
 22· · · · · So the focused feasibility study was
 23· ·developed to evaluate several different
 24· ·cleanup alternatives, specifically for the
 25· ·drum disposal area.· And in this FFS, or

www.huseby.com       Huseby Global Litigation      800-333-2082
                                                                 YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 127 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                    Page 18

 ·1· ·focused feasibility study, a range of
 ·2· ·alternatives were evaluated to clean up the
 ·3· ·soil in the drum disposal area.
 ·4· · · · · It also should be noted that the
 ·5· ·remedial action objectives, or cleanup
 ·6· ·objectives, that were used for the focused
 ·7· ·feasibility study are identical to those that
 ·8· ·were used in the original 2017 remedy, in the
 ·9· ·2017 Record of Decision.
 10· · · · · However, the first remedial action
 11· ·objective is the one that is most relevant to
 12· ·the drum disposal area.· And that first
 13· ·remedial action objective is to control or
 14· ·remove source areas to prevent or minimize
 15· ·impacts to sediment and seep water and further
 16· ·impacts to ground water.
 17· · · · · So in the FFS, five cleanup
 18· ·alternatives were evaluated, the first
 19· ·alternative being the no action alternative.
 20· ·The second alternative was a containment
 21· ·remedy that focused on containing unsaturated
 22· ·and saturated zone sources.
 23· · · · · Alternative 3 called for the removal of
 24· ·unsaturated zone sources and the use of in
 25· ·situ chemical treatment of saturated zone

www.huseby.com       Huseby Global Litigation      800-333-2082
                                                                 YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 128 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                    Page 19

 ·1· ·sources.· Alternative 4 was to remove
 ·2· ·unsaturated and saturated zone sources, while
 ·3· ·Alternative 5 was the use of in situ, or in
 ·4· ·place, thermal treatment of unsaturated and
 ·5· ·saturated zone sources.
 ·6· · · · · And just to clarify, the unsaturated
 ·7· ·zone refers to the area of soil that lies
 ·8· ·above the water table while the saturated zone
 ·9· ·refers to the soil that is below the water
 10· ·table that is saturated with water.
 11· · · · · So these five alternatives were
 12· ·evaluated in the focused feasibility study
 13· ·using the nine evaluation criteria.· The first
 14· ·and most important of the nine evaluation
 15· ·criteria are the threshold criteria.
 16· · · · · And an alternative needs to meet these
 17· ·criteria in order to be further evaluated.
 18· ·And these criteria are the overall protection
 19· ·of human health and the environment as well as
 20· ·compliance with applicable or relevant and
 21· ·appropriate standards.
 22· · · · · If an alternative meets these criteria,
 23· ·they are further evaluated using the balancing
 24· ·criteria.· This criteria are long-term
 25· ·effectiveness and permanence, reduction of

www.huseby.com       Huseby Global Litigation      800-333-2082
                                                                 YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 129 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                    Page 20

 ·1· ·toxicity, mobility, and volume through
 ·2· ·treatment, short-term effectiveness,
 ·3· ·implementability, and cost.
 ·4· · · · · Lastly, we have two modifying criteria.
 ·5· ·Those being community and state acceptance.
 ·6· · · · · So after evaluating the five
 ·7· ·alternatives in the FFS, EPA's preferred
 ·8· ·alternative is Alternative Number 5, which is
 ·9· ·in situ, or in place, thermal treatment of
 10· ·vadose and saturated zone sources.· And the
 11· ·reason that Alternative 5 is EPA's preferred
 12· ·alternative is because it provides the highest
 13· ·reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume
 14· ·through treatment.
 15· · · · · It is highly effective in the long term
 16· ·and the short term at removing contaminants of
 17· ·concern.· It is expected to achieve source
 18· ·control cleanup objectives in approximately
 19· ·one year or less, and it will achieve cleanup
 20· ·objectives and goals in the most effective
 21· ·way.· It is faster and easier to implement.
 22· · · · · It also should be noted that although
 23· ·we are selecting or we are selecting
 24· ·Alternative 5 as our preferred alternative for
 25· ·the drum disposal area, that the original

www.huseby.com       Huseby Global Litigation      800-333-2082
                                                                 YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 130 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                    Page 21

 ·1· ·cleanup remedy outlined in the 2017 Record of
 ·2· ·Decision still remains in place, and
 ·3· ·Alternative 5 would be used in conjunction
 ·4· ·with the original remedy in order to achieve
 ·5· ·cleanup of the site.
 ·6· · · · · Just a brief description of in situ
 ·7· ·thermal treatment.· It was involve the
 ·8· ·installation of thermal heating points and
 ·9· ·vapor extraction wells.· These thermal heating
 10· ·points would be used to heat the soil to treat
 11· ·the contamination.· We would transport and
 12· ·dispose of contaminated media generating from
 13· ·thermal heating points and vapor extraction
 14· ·well installation.
 15· · · · · We would collect and treat generated
 16· ·vapor and liquid waste through the treatment
 17· ·system consisting of granular activated
 18· ·carbon.· We would also do some soil sampling
 19· ·to confirm that the treatment was effective.
 20· ·And lastly, we would implement some
 21· ·institutional controls.
 22· · · · · Here's an example of in situ thermal
 23· ·treatment look like.· If you look at the photo
 24· ·on the left-hand side, this provides a
 25· ·representation of what thermal treatment may

www.huseby.com       Huseby Global Litigation      800-333-2082
                                                                 YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 131 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                    Page 22

 ·1· ·look like in the subsurface.· Here, we have
 ·2· ·some thermal heating wells that would be
 ·3· ·inserted into the areas of soil that are
 ·4· ·contaminated.
 ·5· · · · · And as a result of the heat created
 ·6· ·from those thermal wells, the contaminants in
 ·7· ·the soil would be vaporized and then extracted
 ·8· ·using a vapor extraction system, and those
 ·9· ·contaminated vapors would then be transported
 10· ·to a vapor treatment building where they would
 11· ·receive further treatment.
 12· · · · · And if you look at the photo on the
 13· ·right, you see a more practical sense of what
 14· ·thermal treatment may look like from the
 15· ·surface.· And that's what it may look like.
 16· ·You can see the thermal wells there.
 17· · · · · Now, thank you very much.· We'll be
 18· ·accepting public comments from the 29th
 19· ·through April 28th.· You can address written
 20· ·comments to Supinderjit or myself at the
 21· ·following address, or you can reach us through
 22· ·the telephone or email at those numbers and
 23· ·emails that you see there.· Thank you very
 24· ·much.
 25· · · · · MR. MELENDEZ:· All right.· Thank you.

www.huseby.com        Huseby Global Litigation     800-333-2082
                                                                 YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 132 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                    Page 23

 ·1· ·Again, this is Angely, CIC.· At this time,
 ·2· ·we've reached the Q&A portion of our meeting.
 ·3· ·When we switch over to the audio lines, please
 ·4· ·remember to clearly state your first and last
 ·5· ·name before a question or comment.· We will
 ·6· ·now turn to the chatbox.· Shereen?
 ·7· · · · · MS. KANDIL:· Thank you, Angely.· At
 ·8· ·this time, there are no comments or questions
 ·9· ·in the chatbox, nor are there any questions or
 10· ·comments on the Facebook chat.
 11· · · · · MR. MELENDEZ:· Okay.
 12· · · · · MS. KANDIL:· (Inaudible) phone line,
 13· ·so.
 14· · · · · MR. MELENDEZ:· We'll go to the phone
 15· ·lines.· Please unmute yourself if you have any
 16· ·questions.· Okay.· Any questions on the chat
 17· ·or?
 18· · · · · MS. KANDIL:· No, no questions have come
 19· ·up.· No comments have come up.· I think we can
 20· ·just, you know, hang around here a little bit
 21· ·to see if anybody has any questions.
 22· · · · · Can we go to the previous slide that
 23· ·states the public comment period?· Thank you.
 24· ·So this, you know, public meeting was an
 25· ·opportunity for anyone to provide any comments

www.huseby.com       Huseby Global Litigation      800-333-2082
                                                                 YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 133 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                    Page 24

 ·1· ·or questions.· But this is not the only
 ·2· ·opportunity.
 ·3· · · · · As Michael mentioned, public -- the
 ·4· ·public comment period closes on the April
 ·5· ·28th, so if you do have questions or comments
 ·6· ·after reading the proposed plan and after
 ·7· ·participating in this meeting, you may contact
 ·8· ·either Supinderjit or Michael via the
 ·9· ·telephone number or email address or you may
 10· ·submit your comments directly via mail.
 11· · · · · And the address is there, EPA, 290
 12· ·Broadway, 18th Floor, and you would just have
 13· ·to make sure it's to Supinderjit or Michael.
 14· ·Okay.· I think we're going to wait another
 15· ·five minutes.· We'll check in again after five
 16· ·minutes, and then, if there's no comments or
 17· ·questions, I'm looking at Facebook, there's
 18· ·nothing there, either, we can end the meeting.
 19· · · · · (Pause)
 20· · · · · MR. MELENDEZ:· All right.· We'll be
 21· ·wrapping up this meeting.· Thank you,
 22· ·everyone, for joining.· As a reminder, the
 23· ·open comment period will be until April 28th.
 24· ·You can contact anyone that's been in this
 25· ·meeting.· Two emails are printed on the screen

www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation    800-333-2082
                                                                 YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 134 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                            Meeting                   Page 25

 ·1· ·as of now.· You could also find more
 ·2· ·information on our website.· Thank you.· We
 ·3· ·appreciate your attendance.
 ·4· · · · · MS. KANDIL:· Just I saw that someone
 ·5· ·new joined at the end.· I know that you
 ·6· ·probably missed the entire presentation, but
 ·7· ·we do -- we were streaming it on Facebook, so
 ·8· ·you can see the recording on Facebook on our
 ·9· ·Region 2 Facebook account.
 10· · · · · We also have the PowerPoint
 11· ·presentation posted our site profile page, the
 12· ·webpage, so if I can put it in the -- I put
 13· ·the links in the chat, and if you, again, have
 14· ·any questions or comments on the proposed plan
 15· ·or on the presentation, you can contact the
 16· ·two remedial project managers, Supinderjit or
 17· ·Michael.· Their contacts are also on the site
 18· ·profile page.
 19· · · · · So I'm going to say goodbye.· I'm going
 20· ·to add the links to the chat, and I hope you
 21· ·all have a wonderful evening.
 22· · · · · (End of Audio Recording.)
 23
 24
 25

www.huseby.com        Huseby Global Litigation   800-333-2082
                                                                YVer1f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 135 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                              Meeting                        Page 26

 ·1· · · · · · · · · · · · · · CERTIFICATE

 ·2
 · · · · · · · ·I, Wendy Sawyer, do hereby certify that I was
 ·3
 · · ·authorized to and transcribed the foregoing recorded
 ·4
 · · ·proceedings, and that the transcript is a true record, to
 ·5
 · · ·the best of my ability.
 ·6

 ·7

 ·8
 · · · · · · · ·DATED this 26th day of April, 2023.
 ·9

 10

 11
 · · · · · · · ·______________________________________
 12
 · · · · · · · ·WENDY SAWYER, CDLT
 13

 14

 15

 16

 17

 18

 19

 20

 21

 22

 23

 24

 25


www.huseby.com         Huseby Global Litigation          800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 136 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                                     Meeting                          ·Index: 1,1,1-..area
                      2023    26:8            acting  12:20         18:2,18
          1                                     15:22 16:5          19:11 20:7
                      26th    26:8
 1,1,1-       15:12   28th    6:23            action  18:5,        Amended      7:2
                          22:19                 10,13,19           amendment
 1,1,1-TCA
     15:13                24:5,23             activated             6:14,17
                      290    24:11              21:17               7:5 14:2
 1,1-     15:13,
     14               29th    6:19            activities           Angely 2:16
                          22:18                 8:15,16             4:20 5:14
 1,1-DCA
                                                14:17               6:5 23:1,7
     15:15
                                 3            add    25:20         answering
 1,1-DCE
                                              additional            4:23
     15:14            3     18:23
                                                6:10,15            applicable
 18th     24:12       322    7:10,21            7:6 9:20            19:20
 1962     8:2,6                                 13:23 14:1         approximate
 1976     8:6                    4            address 6:14          7:20
 1982     8:12                                  9:5 17:20
                      4     19:1                                   approximately
                                                22:19,21            20:18
          2
                                                24:9,11
                                 5                                 April 6:23
                                              adequately            22:19
 2    25:9            5    19:3                 17:20               24:4,23
 2001     8:2,18          20:8,11,24          administrative        26:8
                          21:3                  6:25
 2012     8:20                                                     aquifer
 2013     8:24                   A
                                              Affairs       5:17    10:7,8,10
 2015     8:24                                alongside            aquifers
                      ability        26:5       2:19                10:5,12
 2017    2:9,15
                      acceptance              alternative          area 6:10,
     6:8,13,14
     9:7 13:2             20:5                  18:19,20,           15 7:6
     14:12            accepting                 23 19:1,3,          8:10 9:16,
     17:19                6:22 22:18            16,22               18,19,20
     18:8,9                                     20:8,11,            12:14,15
                      account        25:9
     21:1                                       12,24 21:3          13:8,23,24
                      achieve                                       14:1,24
 2019     14:16                               alternatives
                          20:17,19                                  15:3,6,7,
                                                5:12 13:12
 2022     14:16           21:4                                      8,10,22
                                                17:24


www.huseby.com                   Huseby Global Litigation                   800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 137 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                              Meeting                        ·Index: areas..comment
   16:3,4,5,     bankruptcy            captioning            cis-1,2-dce
   10 17:21,      8:18                   4:9,10,11             15:16
   25 18:3,12    barrier      13:4     carbon        21:18   clarify      19:6
   19:7 20:25
                 based 16:11           case     2:25         clay  10:13
 areas  16:20,    17:15                                        17:11,14
   21,22,23,                           CDLT     26:12
   24 18:14      began 8:13,           ceased        8:19    clean     12:18
   22:3           20,24 9:1                                    18:2
                                       center        7:18
 assessing       beginning                                   cleaned      8:4
                  2:1                  CERTIFICATE
   7:1                                                       cleaning      8:7
                                         26:1
 assessment      benzene
                                       certify       26:2    cleanup  2:9,
   11:8,15        15:16,25                                     15 5:11,12
   14:20         bit     23:20         chat  3:13,             6:8,9,12,
                                         14,18,20              14,17 7:5
 assessments     black     16:4          4:1 23:10,            8:15,16
   11:5
                 blue 10:4               16 25:13,             9:5,9
 assessor         15:21 17:8             20                    12:22
   5:22                                                        13:1,13,19
                 body     7:22,        chatbox       5:1
 attendance       24                     23:6,9                17:19,24
   25:3                                                        18:5,17
                 bottom       3:3      check     24:15
 audio  2:1                                                    20:18,19
                 Broadway              chemical                21:1,5
   23:3 25:22
                  24:12                  18:25
 authorized                                                  click  3:17
                 building              chemicals               4:7,10,16
   26:3
                  7:14 9:12              8:3
                                                             clicking
 awareness        22:10                chief     5:20          4:15
   5:5
                 buried       14:23    chlorinated           closed     4:8,
          B      button 3:7,             12:11 15:5            9,11
                  15 4:8,16            choose  3:9,          closes     24:4
 back  4:20                              18 4:12
   6:12                   C                                  colleague
                                       CIC  2:17,19            14:4
 background                              23:1
                 call     4:17                               collect
   7:7
                 called 7:23,          cis-1,2,-               21:15
 balancing                               15:15
                  24 18:23                                   comment      3:25
   19:23


www.huseby.com            Huseby Global Litigation                    800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 138 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                              Meeting           ·Index: comments..developed
   23:5,23        21:19                 14:1,14            day   26:8
   24:4,23       conjunction            15:3,23            decided
 comments         21:3                  16:5,10,            17:16
   3:10,19,22                           21,22,24
                 considered             17:12,21           Decision7:3
   4:13 5:1,      6:24                                      9:8 13:2,
   13 6:23,24                           21:11
                 consisting                                 18 14:12
   7:1 22:18,                         control               18:9 21:2
   20 23:8,       21:17                 18:13
   10,19,25                             20:18              declared
                 consists
   24:5,10,16     12:7                                      8:18
                                      controls
   25:14                                13:14              deeper     10:9
                 contact
 community        24:7,24               21:21              define     10:16
   2:17 5:15,     25:15               Coopersburg           14:14
   17 20:5                              7:17
                 contacts                                  delineation
 compliance       25:17                                     14:19
                                      coordinator
   19:20                                2:17 5:16
                 containment                               density     17:3
 compounds        18:20               cost     20:3        DEP   10:3
   11:12,18
                 contaminants         created       22:5
   12:9,11                                                 Department
                  10:25                                     8:11
 concern          11:2,10             Creek     7:25
   10:25 15:9     12:13 15:9          criteria             description
   20:17          17:1,4,9              19:13,15,           21:6
 conduct          20:16 22:6            17,18,22,          design     6:9
   17:16         contaminated           24 20:4             13:19
                  11:17               cross     16:9        14:11
 conducted
                  13:7,10                                   15:18
   7:8 8:14                           cultural
   10:16          21:12                 14:20              detailed
   11:6,25        22:4,9                                    9:10
   14:13,16      contamination                  D          details7:4
 conducting       6:11 9:3,                                 13:20,25
   8:22           4,6,20              dash     12:2         14:5
                  10:17,18            dashed        12:3
 confining                                                 develop     9:5
                  11:1,7,22
   10:13          12:21               data     16:11       developed
 confirm          13:23               DATED     26:8        17:23



www.huseby.com           Huseby Global Litigation                   800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 139 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                    MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                               Meeting        ·Index: dichloroethane..feasibility
 dichloroethane   distinct              emails        22:23    7,13,23
   15:15           13:5                   24:25                25:21
 dichloroethene   dots     3:16         end  4:24             excavation
   15:14,16       drum 9:19               24:18                13:7,9
 directly          13:24                  25:5,22             exceedances
   24:10           14:22,23             entire        25:6     12:12,16
 discharged        15:7,10              entitles              exist    10:5
   8:7             16:3,10,13             9:25
                   17:25                                      exists       7:12
 discharges        18:3,12              environment           expected
   7:24            20:25                  19:19                20:17
 discharging      drums     14:22       Environmental         exposure
   10:21           15:4                   8:11                 11:10,24
   11:18           16:15,16,            EPA  5:10             extent       9:2
 discovered        17                     6:8 8:20,            10:16
   14:23          due 11:9                24 17:16
   17:20                                  24:11               extracted
                   17:2
                                                               22:7
 discuss 2:8,     dumped       9:16     EPA's  6:13,
   15 6:16                                16,20               extraction
                                          20:7,11              8:17 21:9,
 displayed                 E                                   13 22:8
   13:6                                 essentially
                  earlier      9:7        17:9
 displaying                                                            F
   12:4           easier       20:21    ESTATE        9:25
                  East     7:10,                              Facebook
 disposal                               evaluate
                   21                                          23:10
   9:19 13:24                             17:23
                                                               24:17
   14:24          ecological            evaluated              25:7,8,9
   15:4,8,10       11:5,15,16             18:2,18
   16:4,10,13                                                 facilitating
                  effective               19:12,17,
   17:25                                                       2:18
                   20:15,20               23
   18:3,12                                                    familiar      3:1
                   21:19                evaluating
   20:25
                  effectiveness           20:6                faster       20:21
 dispose
                   19:25 20:2           evaluation            feasibility
   21:12
                  email     22:22         19:13,14             8:25 12:1,
 disposed                                                      17,22,25
                   24:9                 evening       2:2,
   16:16


www.huseby.com             Huseby Global Litigation                    800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 140 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                                Meeting          ·Index: feature..hydrogeologist
   13:16           foregoing            goals     20:20       12:4,5,9,
   17:16,18,        26:3                good  2:2,6,          18,21,24
   22 18:1,7       formally               13,23               13:4,5
   19:12            6:25                  15:18               14:17
 feature                                                      15:24
                   formation            goodbye               16:6,12
   3:12,13,20       10:7,10               25:19
   4:9,15           17:2,5,11,          Grand  7:23                   H
 features           13                    9:22 10:9
   2:25 3:1        found   6:10           11:20              habitat
   4:5,6            9:21                  13:10               14:19
 FFS  17:25         10:23,24            granular             hand     4:14,
   18:17 20:7       11:8,13,16            21:17               17
 figure  10:17      12:6,10,12
                                        gravity       17:2   hang     23:20
   11:6 15:17       13:22
                    15:10               greater       17:3   health 11:5,
   16:8,9,11
                                                              8 19:19
                   fragments            greatest
 figured    11:4
                    14:22                 11:16              hear     6:2
 figuring
                   front   3:14         green     15:24      heat 21:10
   13:20
                    4:6                   16:1                22:5
 Filipowicz
                   fully 9:1            Griffths             heating
   5:23
                    14:13                 5:22                21:8,9,13
 finally    4:12                                              22:2
                                        Grossman
 find  4:6,14              G              5:19 14:4,         highest
   6:20 25:1                              6,7                 20:12
                   gathered
 finding    15:1                        ground  4:22         highly       17:13
                    17:12
 findings                                 11:2 18:16          20:15
                   generated
   14:25                                ground-              history      5:11
                    16:11
   17:15                                penetrating
                    21:15                                    hope     25:20
 Floor     24:12                          14:21
                   generating                                hotter       16:23
 flows     10:8     21:12               groundwater
                                          8:17 10:8,         hover     3:2
 focused           geotechnical
                                          19,21              human 11:5,8
   17:16,18,        14:18                 11:10,17,           19:19
   22 18:1,6,
                   give    2:10           23,25
   21 19:12                                                  hydrogeologist
                    7:6

www.huseby.com             Huseby Global Litigation                   800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 141 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                        MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                                   Meeting                              ·Index: icon..lot
   5:21               information          issued        6:19   launched
                       2:21 25:2                                 14:10
          I           inserted                       J          lead     5:17
                       22:3                                     leased       7:17
 icon     3:14                             Jersey  7:11
                      installation           8:11 10:3
 icons     3:4                                                  left-hand
                       13:3 21:8,                                21:24
 identical                                 joined        5:16
                       14
   18:7                                      25:5               Liberty7:17
                      institutional
                                           joining               9:13 10:2
 identified            13:14
   14:14 15:5                                24:22              lies     19:7
                       21:21
 identify      5:2    intense                                   lighter
                                                     K
   14:22               16:22,23,                                 16:21
 image     16:19       24                  Kandil  2:2,         lines 12:3
                      introductions          19,23,24            23:3,15
 images       16:15
                       5:9                   5:17 6:1           links      25:13,
 impacts                                     23:7,12,18
                      investigation                              20
   18:15,16                                  25:4
                       8:25                                     liquid       21:16
 implement                                 KAUR     6:4
                       10:15,24
   13:21                                                        List     8:23
                       12:6 13:16          Kenworth
   20:21               14:9,10,                                 listed       8:23
                                             7:17 9:13
   21:20               15,19                 10:2               located       7:10
 implementabili        15:18,20                                  15:6
                                           knew     11:21,
 ty 20:3
                      investigations         23                 location
 important             5:11 7:8                                  7:20
   19:14               8:13,15,                      L          logistical
 inaudible             21,22
                                                                 2:21
   12:8 16:1          involve    21:7      lagoon  8:9,
   23:12                                     10 9:16,18         long     20:15
                      involved               12:14 13:8
 include                                                        long-term
                       8:12                  15:6,21
   15:11                                                         13:13
                      involvement            16:2                19:24
 included              2:17 5:15           larger        7:24   looked
   6:24 8:2,
                      isolated             lastly        20:4    12:17,22
   16 13:3
                       12:15                 21:20
   14:17                                                        lot 7:15
                       13:11
                                                                 9:14

www.huseby.com                Huseby Global Litigation                    800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 142 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                      MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                                 Meeting      ·Index: Magothy-raaritan..outlined
                     21,25                move     17:9         one-story
         M                                                       7:14 9:11
                    meets     19:22       moved     17:4
 Magothy-           mega-projects         Moving        14:25   onsite     8:5
 raaritan            5:20                                       open 4:18
   10:10                                  mute     3:7
                    Melendez                6:5                  5:13 24:23
 mail    24:10       2:6,16                                     operated     8:1
 main    15:1        4:21 5:15                      N           operations
 make  3:21          22:25                                       8:2,8,19
                     23:11,14             National
   24:13                                                        opportunity
                     24:20                  8:23
 manager 5:18                                                    23:25 24:2
                    mentioned             nature        9:2
   6:6 14:7                                                     option     3:18
                     9:7,11                 10:16
 managers            24:3                                        13:1
                                          newly  14:23
   25:16                                                        options
                    Michael5:19             17:20
 map  7:19           6:7 14:4,6                                  12:18,23
                                          northeastern
   9:10 12:2         24:3,8,13                                   13:13
                                            7:15 9:12
   13:7              25:17                                      orange
                                          northern
 March     6:19     microphone                                   15:23,25
                                            12:7
 Matlack 2:7,        3:6,7                                      order 5:8
                                          noted  18:4
   14 6:7,9,        minimize                                     19:17 21:4
                                            20:22
   18,21 7:9,        18:14                                      organic
   10,13,19                               number        20:8
                    minute     2:12                              11:12,18
   8:1,14,18                                24:9
                                                                 12:8,11
 meaning     11:1   minutes2:11           numbers
                     24:15,16                                   orient     16:14
                                            22:22
 media  10:25                                                   original
   21:12            missed     25:6
                                                    O            17:19 18:8
                    mobility
 meet  5:9                                                       20:25 21:4
   19:16             20:1,13
                                          objective             originated
 meeting  2:8,      modifying               18:11,13             17:1
   15,18 3:9         20:4
                                          objectives            outlined
   4:3,19           moment     2:3          18:5,6               10:3 13:9
   5:5,7,8          monitoring              20:18,20             14:12
   23:2,24           13:14                obtained               15:21 16:4
   24:7,18,                                 16:12                21:1


www.huseby.com               Huseby Global Litigation                    800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 143 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                        MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                                   Meeting                         ·Index: oversight..put
 oversight            phone     23:12,        10:1,2               8:23
   8:14                14                     23:2                proceedings
 overview      7:7    photo 16:16           posed     9:4          26:4
 owned  7:13           21:23                posted        25:11   process      6:12
   9:25 10:3           22:12                                       9:1
                                            potential
 owns     10:1        pink 16:6,              10:25               profile6:21
                       19,20,21,                                   25:11,18
                       23                   Powerpoint
          P                                   25:10               Program      5:10
                      place 19:4
 parcel       9:15     20:9 21:2            practical             project5:18
                                              22:13                6:6 14:7
 parking      7:15    plan 2:9,16
                                            pre-     15:17         25:16
   9:14                6:8,10,12,
                       14,18,19                                   property
 participating                              pre-design
                       7:5 9:5,9              14:9                 7:16 9:23
   24:7
                       13:17,19                                   proposed
 passive      13:4                          pre-designed
                       15:1 17:19                                  6:17,19
                                              14:15
 Pause  2:5            24:6 25:14                                  7:5 13:17
   24:19                                    preferred              14:2 24:6
                      plans     5:12
                                              5:12 13:1            25:14
 PCE  15:11           plume 12:7,             20:7,11,24
   16:7                9,10 15:25                                 proposing
                                            presentation           6:13 15:2
 PDI  14:13,           16:1,2,6
                                              2:20 3:20
   17,25              plumes 12:4,                                protection
                                              4:24 25:6,
   17:15               5 13:5                                      8:12 19:18
                                              11,15
 Pensauken             15:24                                      provide3:9,
                                            prevent
   10:7 17:2,         point 3:5,12                                 19 4:13
                                              18:14
   5                   4:8 13:15                                   23:25
                                            previous
 performed                                                        public 2:7,
                      points    21:8,         23:22
   14:22               10,13                                       14 22:18
                                            primarily              23:23,24
 period  23:23        pop     3:3             11:11                24:3,4
   24:4,23
                      portion3:8,           primary       15:9    put 3:25
 permanence
                       9,23 4:18,                                  4:1 25:12
   19:25                                    printed
                       24 7:15
                                              24:25
 phases       14:16    8:6 9:12,
                       15,17,23             Priorities



www.huseby.com                 Huseby Global Litigation                    800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 144 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                                  Meeting                        ·Index: Q&a..saturated
                     reason     17:17        13:16,19            Responsiveness
          Q           20:11                  14:7 18:5,            7:2
                     receive                 10,13               result       22:5
 Q&a  3:21,23
                      22:11                  25:16
   4:18,23                                                       results
   23:2              record 6:25           remedy  14:11           10:23
                      7:2 9:8                18:8,21
 Q&a/comment                                                     risk  5:22
                      13:2,17                21:1,4
   3:8                                                             11:8,15,16
                      14:12 18:9           remember
 question                                                        risks  9:3
                      21:1 26:4              23:4
   3:25 23:5                                                       11:5,7,9,
                     recorded              reminder
 questions                                                         11,13,24
                      26:3                   24:22
   3:10,19,22                                                    ROD     14:15
   4:13,23           recording             removal
                      2:1 5:4,6              18:23               Route     7:10
   5:1,13
   23:8,9,16,         25:8,22              remove        18:14   rules     4:22
   18,21             reduction               19:1                Run  7:23
   24:1,5,17          19:25                                        9:22 10:9
                                           removing
   25:14              20:13                                        11:20
                                             20:16
                     refer     8:9                                 13:10
          R                                rented        10:1
                     referred                                    runs     7:20,
                                           represent
 Raccoon      7:25    13:24 15:7                                   22
                                             16:22,24
 Rachel       5:21   refers     19:7,      representation                 S
 radar     14:21      9                      15:19
                     Region     25:9         21:25               sales     7:18
 raise     4:14,
   16                related               represented           sampled      11:1
 raise-hand           11:11 15:3             17:8                sampling
   4:15              relevant              represents              10:19
                      15:1 18:11             16:7,9,18,            14:18
 range     18:1
                      19:20                  20                    16:12
 reach     22:21                                                   21:18
                     remains     21:2      resources
 reached      23:2                           14:20               Sandy     17:2,4
                     remedial
 reactions            5:18 8:24            respectful            saturated
   4:16               10:15,24               5:7                   17:13
 reading      24:6    12:6                                         18:22,25
                                           respond       3:22


www.huseby.com                Huseby Global Litigation                    800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 145 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                      MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                                 Meeting                      ·Index: Sawyer..surface
   19:2,5,8,         16:20                  19:7,9              23:4
   10 20:10         shallow     10:6        21:10,18          states      23:23
 Sawyer     26:2,                           22:3,7
                    Shereen                                   stemming
   12                2:19,22,24           solvents      8:5     16:2
 screen  3:2,4       4:22 5:16              15:5
                                                              stenographer
   4:11 24:25        23:6                 sort  9:23            4:2 5:4
 section     5:20   short     20:16         17:11
                                                              Stephanie
   16:9             short-term            source  12:21         5:20
 sediment            20:2                   15:3,23
                                            16:6 18:14        streaming
   10:20            side     21:24                              25:7
   11:3,14,                                 20:17
   19,23            signed    9:8         sources             study  8:25
   12:16,19,        site 5:11               18:22,24            12:1,17,
   23 13:10          6:18,21                19:1,2,5            22,25
   14:18             7:7,20,22              20:10               13:17
   18:15             8:1,12,21,                                 14:21
                                          south  9:14,          17:17,18,
 seep  10:20,        22 9:3,4,              18 15:6
                     9,11,13,                                   22 18:1,7
   21 11:3,                               southern              19:12
   19,23             15,24 10:6
                     14:8 15:20             12:9              submit      24:10
   18:15
                     21:5                 speaking      6:2   subsurface
 selected            25:11,17             specifically          16:18 22:1
   6:8,17 9:8
   13:1             situ 18:25              14:13             Summary      7:2
                     19:3 20:9              17:17,24
 selecting                                                    Superfund
                     21:6,22              Sprute  7:23
   6:12 20:23                                                   5:10 6:18
                    slide 3:14              9:22 10:9
 semi-volatile                                                Supinderjit
                     4:4 23:22              11:20
   11:12                                    13:10               5:19,25
                    soil 10:20                                  6:1,6
 sense     22:13     11:2,14,22           standards             22:20
 separate            12:12,13,              19:21               24:8,13
   12:5              18,20,23             start     2:10        25:16
 service     7:18    13:7 14:18
                     15:3,22              starting            support
 session     5:6     16:5,9,12              2:3,11,12           14:11
 shading             17:10 18:3           state     20:5      surface



www.huseby.com               Huseby Global Litigation                   800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 146 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                        MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                                   Meeting                         ·Index: survey..water
   10:20,22            19:15                  8:17 18:25           19:2,4,6
   11:2,14            time 8:6                19:4 20:2,          updating
   16:17 17:1          9:17 23:1,             9,14 21:7,           2:9,15
   22:15               8                      16,19,23,
 survey       14:20                           25 22:10,
                      today     15:2                                       V
                                              11,14
 Swedesboro           tonight     6:16      trichloroethan        vadose       20:10
   7:12
                      tonight's             e 15:13
                                                                  vapor 21:9,
 switch       23:3     2:18                 trichloroethen         13,16
 system  8:17         toolbar     3:3       e 15:12                22:8,10
   21:17 22:8          4:7                  truck     7:18        vaporized
                      top     16:15         true     26:4          22:7
          T
                      Township              turn  14:3            vapors       22:9
 table  17:6,7         7:11,21                23:6                variety      8:3
   19:8,10
                      toxicity                                    Vaughn       5:21
 talk     14:8         20:1,13                        U
                                                                  verbal       6:22
 tank     8:4,8       trailers              Ula     5:22          verbally
 TCE     15:12         8:4,5,8
                                            unacceptable           3:10 4:13
 team     5:9,17      transcribed             11:9                volatile
                       26:3
 telephone                                  unconfined             11:11,17
   22:22 24:9         transcribing            10:6                 12:8,11
                       4:3
 term     20:15,                            understand            volume       20:1,
   16                 transcript              9:2                  13
                       26:4
 Terminal                                   understanding
   7:12               transport               15:19                        W
                       21:11
 tetrachloroeth                             unit     10:13        wait     24:14
 ene 15:11            transportation
                                            unlined       8:9     walls     13:4
 thermal 19:4          8:3
                                            unmute        23:15   wanted       2:25
   20:9 21:7,         transported
   8,9,13,22,          22:9                 unmuting              waste     21:16
   25 22:2,6,                                 3:11
                      treat 13:5                                  wastewater
   14,16               21:10,15             unsaturated            8:7 9:16
 threshold                                    18:21,24
                      treatment                                   water     7:22,


www.huseby.com                 Huseby Global Litigation                    800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 147 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       MATLACK, INC. SUPERFUND SITE
                                  Meeting              ·Index: webpage..Zoom
   24 10:20,
   21 11:2,3,               Z
   14,19,23
                     zone 18:22,
   17:3,5,7
                      24,25
   18:15,16
                      19:2,5,7,8
   19:8,9,10
                      20:10
 webpage
                     Zoom   2:25
   25:12
 website      6:20
   25:2
 wells  21:9
   22:2,6,16
 Wendy     26:2,
   12
 western      9:23
 wetland
   14:19
 wonderful
   25:21
 Woodbury
   10:13
   17:10,13
 Woolwich
   7:11,21
 wrapping
   24:21
 write     5:1
 written      6:22
   22:19

          Y

 year    20:19



www.huseby.com              Huseby Global Litigation            800-333-2082

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 148 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  ATTACHMENT D


WRITTEN COMMENTS

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 149 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Kaur, Supinderjit

From:                 Ed Putnam <eputnam@pennjerseyenv.com>
Sent:                 Sunday, April 2, 2023 8:00 PM
To:                   Kaur, Supinderjit
Cc:                   Mumford, Fred; Vaughn, Stephanie; Schmidt, Mark; Grossman, Michael
Subject:              RE: Matlack PRAP
Attachments:          ffrro_factsheet_contaminant_14-dioxane_january2014_final.pdf


Ok, here’s my formal public comment;
The proposed remedy will not address 1,4 dioxane. This chemical is extremely likely to be present at levels substantially
higher than NJDEP’s groundwater standard due to the presence of 1,1,1 TCA. See EPA fact sheet.

Fred, I hope you’ll follow‐up on this.

Thank You.
Ed

From: Kaur, Supinderjit <Kaur.Supinderjit@epa.gov>
Sent: Friday, March 31, 2023 4:54 PM
To: Ed Putnam <eputnam@pennjerseyenv.com>
Cc: Mumford, Fred <Fred.Mumford@dep.nj.gov>; Vaughn, Stephanie <Vaughn.Stephanie@epa.gov>; Schmidt, Mark
<schmidt.mark@epa.gov>; Grossman, Michael <Grossman.Michael@epa.gov>
Subject: RE: Matlack PRAP

Hi Ed,

The full administrative record for the site is available at EPA’s webpage for the site, www.epa.gov/superfund/matlack.
This question along with others received during the public comment period, which is scheduled to run through April 28,
will be fully addressed in the responsiveness summary portion of the Record of Decision.

Thank you,

Supinder

Supinderjit Kaur
Remedial Project Manager
EPA, Region 2, SEMD-SPB-MPS
290 Broadway, 18th Floor
New York, NY 10007
212-637-4167
kaur.supinderjit@epa.gov




From: Ed Putnam <eputnam@pennjerseyenv.com>
Sent: Thursday, March 30, 2023 4:18 PM
To: Kaur, Supinderjit <Kaur.Supinderjit@epa.gov>
Cc: Mumford, Fred <Fred.Mumford@dep.nj.gov>
Subject: RE: Matlack PRAP
                                                            1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 150 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Since you have significant 111 TCA, what were the 1,4 dioxane levels?

From: Kaur, Supinderjit <Kaur.Supinderjit@epa.gov>
Sent: Thursday, March 30, 2023 2:56 PM
To: Ed Putnam <eputnam@pennjerseyenv.com>
Subject: RE: Matlack PRAP

Hi Ed,

The pdf is attached, let me know if you have difficulty accessing it.

Thank you!

Supinder

From: Ed Putnam <eputnam@pennjerseyenv.com>
Sent: Thursday, March 30, 2023 2:16 PM
To: Kaur, Supinderjit <Kaur.Supinderjit@epa.gov>
Subject: Matlack PRAP

Would you please send me a pdf. of the PRAP that is out for comment.
Thanks

Edward W. Putnam
Director of Redevelopment




744 Milford Warren Glen Road
Milford, NJ 08848
(888) 679-7462 x8455 office
(908) 329-6060 x8455 office
(267) 738-1533 cell
eputnam@pennjerseyenv.com
www.pennjerseyenv.com



LEGAL NOTICE: Unless expressly stated otherwise, this message is confidential and may be privileged. It is intended for the addressee(s) only.
Access to this E‐mail by anyone else is unauthorized. If you are not an addressee, any disclosure or copying of the contents of this E‐mail or any
action taken (or not taken) in reliance on it is unauthorized and may be unlawful. If you are not an addressee, please inform the sender
immediately.

Please consider the environment before printing this, or any other, email.




                                                                          2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 151 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        Technical Fact Sheet –
                                                                   1,4-Dioxane
                                                                                      November 2017


                                                                TECHNICAL FACT SHEET – 1,4-DIOXANE

                                      Introduction
 At a Glance
                                      This fact sheet, developed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
  Flammable liquid and a fire        (EPA) Federal Facilities Restoration and Reuse Office (FFRRO), provides a
   hazard. Potentially explosive if   summary of the emerging contaminant 1,4-dioxane, including physical and
   exposed to light or air.           chemical properties; environmental and health impacts; existing federal and
  Found at many federal facilities   state guidelines; detection and treatment methods; and additional sources of
   because of its widespread use      information. This fact sheet is intended for use by site managers who may
   as a stabilizer in certain         address 1,4-dioxane at cleanup sites or in drinking water supplies and for
   chlorinated solvents, paint        those in a position to consider whether 1,4-dioxane should be added to the
   strippers, greases and waxes.      analytical suite for site investigations.
  Short-lived in the atmosphere,     1,4-Dioxane is a likely human carcinogen and has been found in
   may leach readily from soil to     groundwater at sites throughout the United States. The physical and
   groundwater, migrates rapidly      chemical properties and behavior of 1,4-dioxane create challenges for its
   in groundwater and is relatively   characterization and treatment. It is highly mobile and does not readily
   resistant to biodegradation in     biodegrade in the environment.
   the subsurface.
  Classified by EPA as “likely to    What is 1,4-dioxane?
   be carcinogenic to humans” by
   all routes of exposure.             1,4-Dioxane is a synthetic industrial chemical that is completely miscible
                                        in water (EPA 2006; ATSDR 2012).
  Short-term exposure may
   cause eye, nose and throat          Synonyms include dioxane, dioxan, p-dioxane, diethylene dioxide,
   irritation; long-term exposure       diethylene oxide, diethylene ether and glycol ethylene ether (EPA 2006;
   may cause kidney and liver           ATSDR 2012; Mohr 2001).
   damage.
                                       1,4-Dioxane is unstable at elevated temperatures and pressures and
  Federal screening levels, state      may form explosive mixtures with prolonged exposure to light or air
   health-based drinking water          (EPA 2006; HSDB 2011).
   guidance values and federal
   occupational exposure limits        1,4-Dioxane is a likely contaminant at many sites contaminated with
   have been established.               certain chlorinated solvents (particularly 1,1,1-trichloroethane [TCA])
  Modifications to existing sample     because of its widespread use as a stabilizer for chlorinated solvents
   preparation procedures may be        (EPA 2013a; Mohr 2001). Historically, the main use (90 percent) of 1,4-
   required to achieve the              dioxane was as a stabilizer of chlorinated solvents such as TCA
   increased sensitivity needed for     (ATSDR 2012). Use of TCA was phased out under the 1995 Montreal
   detection of 1,4-dioxane.            Protocol and the use of 1,4-dioxane as a solvent stabilizer was
                                        terminated (ECJRC 2002; NTP 2016). Lack of recent reports for other
  Common treatment                     previously reported uses suggest that many other industrial, commercial
   technologies include advanced        and consumer uses were also stopped.
   oxidation processes and
   bioremediation.                    Disclaimer: The U.S. EPA prepared this fact sheet using the most recent publicly-
  No federal maximum                 available scientific information; additional information can be obtained from the source
   contaminant level (MCL) has        documents. This fact sheet is not intended to be used as a primary source of
   been established for 1,4-          information and is not intended, nor can it be relied on, to create any rights enforceable
                                      by any party in litigation with the United States. Mention of trade names or commercial
   dioxane in drinking water.         products does not constitute endorsement or recommendation for use.



United States                                     Office of Land and Emergency                               EPA 505-F-17-011
Environmental Protection Agency                   Management (5106P)                                           November 2017
                                                            1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 152 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Technical Fact Sheet – 1,4-Dioxane

                                                                         product in the manufacture of polyethylene
 It is a by-product present in many goods, including
                                                                         terephthalate (PET) plastic (Mohr 2001).
  paint strippers, dyes, greases, antifreeze and
  aircraft deicing fluids, and in some consumer                        Traces of 1,4-dioxane may be present in some
  products (deodorants, shampoos and cosmetics)                         food supplements, food containing residues from
  (ATSDR 2012; Mohr 2001).                                              packaging adhesives or on food crops treated with
                                                                        pesticides that contain 1,4-dioxane (ATSDR 2012;
 1,4-Dioxane is used as a purifying agent in the
                                                                        DHHS 2011).
  manufacture of pharmaceuticals and is a by-

                    Exhibit 1: Physical and Chemical Properties of 1,4-Dioxane (ATSDR 2012)

                                       Property                                      1,4-Dioxane

                  Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) number                              123-91-1
                  Physical description (physical state at room            Clear, flammable liquid with a faint,
                  temperature)                                                       pleasant odor
                  Molecular weight (g/mol)                                               88.11
                  Water solubility                                                      Miscible
                                o
                  Melting point ( C)                                                      11.8
                                o
                  Boiling point ( C) at 760 mm Hg                                        101.1
                                        o
                  Vapor pressure at 25 C (mm Hg)                                          38.1
                  Specific gravity                                                       1.033
                  Octanol-water partition coefficient (log Kow)                          -0.27
                  Organic carbon partition coefficient (log Koc)                          1.23
                                              o          3
                  Henry’s law constant at 25 C (atm-m /mol)                           4.80 X 10-6
Abbreviations: g/mol – grams per mole; oC – degrees Celsius; mm Hg – millimeters of mercury; atm-m3/mol – atmosphere-
cubic meters per mole

Existence of 1,4-dioxane in the environment
 1,4-Dioxane is typically found at some solvent                       It does not bioaccumulate, biomagnify, or
  release sites and PET manufacturing facilities                        bioconcentrate in the food chain (ATSDR 2012;
  (ATSDR 2012; Mohr 2001).                                              Mohr 2001).
 It is short-lived in the atmosphere, with an                         1,4-Dioxane is frequently present at sites with TCA
  estimated 1- to 3-day half-life due to                                contamination (Mohr 2001; Adamson 2014).
  photooxidation (ATSDR 2012; DHHS 2011).
                                                                       It may migrate rapidly in groundwater, ahead of
 Migration to groundwater is weakly retarded by                        other contaminants (DHHS 2011; EPA 2006).
  sorption of 1,4-dioxane to soil particles; it is
                                                                       Where delineated, 1,4-dioxane is frequently found
  expected to move rapidly from soil to groundwater
                                                                        within previously delineated chlorinated solvent
  (EPA 2006; ATSDR 2012).
                                                                        plumes and existing monitoring networks
 It is relatively resistant to biodegradation in water                 (Adamson 2014).
  and soil, although recent studies have identified
                                                                       As of 2016, 1,4-dioxane had been identified at
  degrading bacteria (Inoue 2016; Pugazhendi
                                                                        more than 34 sites on the EPA National Priorities
  2015; Sales 2013).
                                                                        List (NPL); it may be present (but samples were
                                                                        not analyzed for it) at many other sites (EPA
                                                                        2016b).




                                                                  2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 153 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Technical Fact Sheet – 1,4-Dioxane

What are the routes of exposure and the potential health effects of 1,4-
dioxane?
 Exposure may occur through ingestion of                         dioxane may be slightly toxic to the developing
  contaminated food and water, or dermal contact.                 fetus (ATSDR 2012; Giavini and others 1985).
  Worker exposures may include inhalation of                   Animal studies showed increased incidences of
  vapors (ATSDR 2012; DHHS 2011; EU 2002).                      nasal cavity, liver and gall bladder tumors after
 Potential exposure could occur during production              exposure to 1,4-dioxane (ATSDR 2012; DHHS
  and use of 1,4-dioxane as a stabilizer or solvent             2011; EPA IRIS 2013).
  (DHHS 2011; EU 2002).                                        EPA has classified 1,4-dioxane as “likely to be
 Short-term exposure to high levels of 1,4-dioxane             carcinogenic to humans” by all routes of exposure
  may result in nausea, drowsiness, headache, and               (EPA IRIS 2013).
  irritation of the eyes, nose and throat (ATSDR               The U.S. Department of Health and Human
  2012; EPA 2013b; NIOSH 2010; EU 2002). 1,4-                   Services states that “1,4-dioxane is reasonably
  Dioxane is readily absorbed through the lungs and             anticipated to be a human carcinogen based on
  gastrointestinal tract. Some 1,4-dioxane may also             sufficient evidence of carcinogenicity from studies
  pass through the skin, but studies indicate that              in experimental animals” (DHHS 2011).
  much of it will evaporate before it is absorbed.
  Distribution is rapid and uniform in the lung, liver,        The National Institute for Occupational Safety and
  kidney, spleen, colon and skeletal muscle tissue              Health (NIOSH) considers 1,4-dioxane a potential
  (ATSDR 2012).                                                 occupational carcinogen (NIOSH 2010).
 1,4-Dioxane is weakly genotoxic and reproductive             The European Union has classified 1,4-dioxane as
  effects in humans are unknown; however, a                     having limited evidence of carcinogenic effect (EU
  developmental study on rats indicated that 1,4-               2002).

Are there any federal and state guidelines and health standards for 1,4-
dioxane?
 EPA’s Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS)              EPA’s drinking water equivalent level is 1 mg/L
  database includes a chronic oral reference dose               (EPA 2012). EPA has calculated a screening level
  (RfD) of 0.03 milligrams per kilogram per day                 of 0.46 µg/L for tap water, based on a 1 in 10-6
  (mg/kg/day) based on liver and kidney toxicity in             lifetime excess cancer risk (EPA 2017b).
  animals and a chronic inhalation reference
                                                               EPA established a 1-day health advisory of 4.0
  concentration (RfC) of 0.03 milligrams per cubic
                                                                milligrams per liter (mg/L) and a 10-day health
  meter (mg/m3) based on atrophy and respiratory
                                                                advisory of 0.4 mg/L in drinking water for a 10-
  metaplasia inside the nasal cavity of animals (EPA
                                                                kilogram child and a lifetime health advisory of 0.2
  IRIS 2013).
                                                                mg/L in drinking water (EPA 2012).
 The cancer risk assessment for 1,4-dioxane is
                                                               EPA has calculated a residential soil screening
  based on an oral slope factor of 0.1 mg/kg/day
                                                                level (SSL) of 5.3 milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg)
  and the drinking water unit risk is 2.9 x 10-6
                                                                and an industrial SSL of 24 mg/kg. The soil-to-
  micrograms per liter (µg/L) (EPA IRIS 2013).
                                                                groundwater risk-based SSL is 9.4 x 10-5 mg/kg
 EPA risk assessments indicate that the drinking               (EPA 2017b).
  water concentration representing a 1 x 10-6 cancer
                                                               EPA has calculated a residential air screening
  risk level for 1,4-dioxane is 0.35 µg/L (EPA IRIS
                                                                level of 0.56 micrograms per cubic meter (µg/m3)
  2013).
                                                                and an industrial air screening level of 2.5 µg/m3
 No federal maximum contaminant level (MCL) for                (EPA 2017b).
  drinking water has been established (EPA 2012).
                                                               A reportable quantity of 100 pounds has been
 1,4-Dioxane is included on the fourth drinking                established under the Comprehensive
  water contaminant candidate list and is included in           Environmental Response, Compensation, and
  the Third Unregulated Contaminant Monitoring                  Liability Act (EPA 2011).
  Rule (EPA 2009; EPA 2016a).
                                                               The Occupational Safety and Health
                                                                Administration (OSHA) established a permissible
                                                          3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 154 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Technical Fact Sheet – 1,4-Dioxane

    exposure limit (PEL) for 1,4-dioxane of 100 parts
    per million (ppm) or 360 mg/m3 as an 8-hour time                                 Guideline
    weighted average (TWA). While OSHA has                            State                            Source
                                                                                      (µg/L)
    established a PEL for 1,4-dioxane, OSHA has                      Alaska             77          AL DEC 2016
    recognized that many of its PELs are outdated and
                                                                    California           1.0        Cal/EPA 2011
    inadequate for ensuring the protection of worker
    health. OSHA recommends that employers follow                   Colorado            0.35        CDPHE 2017
    the California OSHA limit of 0.28 ppm, the NIOSH               Connecticut           3.0         CTDPH 2013
    recommended exposure limit of 1 ppm as a 30-
    minute ceiling, or the American Conference of                   Delaware             6.0        DE DNR 1999
    Governmental Industrial Hygienists threshold limit               Florida             3.2         FDEP 2005
    value of 20 ppm (OSHA 2017).                                     Indiana             7.8         IDEM 2015
 Various states have established drinking water                      Maine              4.0        MEDEP 2016
  and groundwater guidelines, including the
  following:                                                     Massachusetts           0.3        MADEP 2004
                                                                   Mississippi          6.09        MS DEQ 2002
                                                                 New Hampshire          0.25        NH DES 2011
                                                                   New Jersey            0.4         NJDEP 2015
                                                                  North Carolina         3.0        NCDENR 2015
                                                                  Pennsylvania           6.4         PADEP 2011
                                                                      Texas              9.1         TCEQ 2016
                                                                    Vermont              3.0         VTDEP 2016
                                                                   Washington          0.438        WA ECY 2015
                                                                  West Virginia          6.1        WV DEP 2009



What detection and site characterization methods are available for 1,4-
dioxane?
                                                                 Method 5021); vacuum distillation (EPA SW-846
 As a result of the limitations in the analytical
                                                                 Method 8261); and azeotropic distillation (EPA
  methods to detect 1,4-dioxane, it has been difficult
                                                                 SW-846 Method 5031) (EPA 2006).
  to identify its occurrence in the environment. The
  miscibility of 1,4-dioxane in water causes poor             NIOSH Method 1602 uses gas chromatography –
  purging efficiency and results in high detection             flame ionization detection (GC-FID) to determine
  limits (ATSDR 2012; EPA 2006; Mohr 2001).                    the concentration of 1,4-dioxane in air (ATSDR
                                                               2012; NIOSH 2010).
 The Contract Laboratory Program SOW SOM02.3
  includes a CRQL of 2.0 µg/L in water, 67 µg/kg in           EPA SW-846 Method 8015D uses gas
  low soil and 2,000 µg/kg in medium soil (EPA                 chromatography (GC) to determine the
  2013c).                                                      concentration of 1,4-dioxane in environmental
                                                               samples. Samples may be introduced into the GC
 Conventional analytical methods can detect 1,4-
                                                               column by a variety of techniques including the
  dioxane only at concentrations 100 times greater
                                                               injection of the concentrate from azeotropic
  than the concentrations of volatile organic
                                                               distillation (EPA SW-846 Method 5031). The lower
  compounds. Modifications of existing analytical
                                                               quantitation limits for 1,4-dioxane in aqueous
  methods and their sample preparation procedures
                                                               matrices by azeotropic microdistillation are 12 µg/L
  may be needed to achieve lower detection limits
                                                               (reagent water), 15 µg/L (groundwater) and 16
  for 1,4-dioxane (EPA 2006; Mohr 2001).
                                                               µg/L (leachate) (EPA 2003).
 High-temperature sample preparation techniques
                                                              EPA SW-846 Method 8260B detects 1,4-dioxane
  improve the recovery of 1,4-dioxane. These
                                                               in a variety of solid waste matrices using GC and
  techniques include purging at elevated
                                                               mass spectrometry (MS). The detection limit
  temperature (EPA SW-846 Method 5030);
  equilibrium headspace analysis (EPA SW-846
                                                         4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 155 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Technical Fact Sheet – 1,4-Dioxane

    depends on the instrument and choice of sample            EPA Method 522 uses solid phase extraction and
    preparation method (ATSDR 2012).                           GC-MS with selected ion monitoring for the
                                                               detection of 1,4-dioxane in drinking water with
 A laboratory study is underway to develop a
                                                               detection limits as low as 0.02 µg/L (EPA 2008).
  passive flux meter (PFM) approach to enhance the
  capture of 1,4-dioxane in the PFM sorbent to                GC-MS detection methods using solid phase
  improve accuracy. Results to date show that the              extraction followed by desorption with an organic
  PFM is capable of quantifying low absorbing                  solvent have been developed to remove 1,4-
  compounds such as 1,4-dioxane (DoD SERDP                     dioxane from the aqueous phase. Detection limits
  2013b).                                                      as low as 0.03 µg/L have been achieved by
                                                               passing the aqueous sample through an activated
 EPA Method 1624 uses isotopic dilution gas
                                                               carbon column, following by elution with acetone-
  chromatography – mass spectrometry (GC-MS) to
                                                               dichloromethane (ATSDR 2012; Kadokami and
  detect 1,4-dioxane in water, soil and municipal
                                                               others 1990).
  discharges. The detection limit for this method is
  10 µg/L (ATSDR 2012; EPA 2001b).                            Lab studies indicate effective methods for
                                                               monitoring growth of dioxane-degrading bacteria
 EPA SW-846 Method 8270 uses liquid-liquid
                                                               in culture (Gedalanga 2014).
  extraction and isotope dilution by capillary column
  GC-MS. This method is often modified for the                Studies are underway to develop and assess
  detection of low levels of 1,4-dioxane in water              methods for performing compound-specific isotope
  (EPA 2007).                                                  analysis (CSIA) on low levels of 1,4-dioxane in
                                                               groundwater (DoD SERDP 2016).

What technologies are being used to treat 1,4-dioxane?
 Pump-and-treat remediation can treat dissolved                degrade or deactivate 1,4-dioxane (EPA 2001a,
  1,4-dioxane in groundwater and control                        2013a; Ferro and others 2013).
  groundwater plume migration, but requires ex-situ           Microbial degradation in engineered bioreactors
  treatment tailored for the unique properties of 1,4-         has been documented under enhanced conditions
  dioxane (e.g., its low octanol-water partition               or where selected strains of bacteria capable of
  coefficient makes 1,4-dioxane hydrophilic) (EPA              degrading 1,4-dioxane are cultured, but the impact
  2006; Kiker and others 2010).                                of the presence of chlorinated solvent co-
 Commercially available advanced oxidation                    contaminants on biodegradation of 1,4-dioxane
  processes using hydrogen peroxide with ultraviolet           needs to be further investigated (EPA 2006,
  light or ozone can be used to treat 1,4-dioxane in           2013a; Mahendra and others 2013).
  wastewater (Asano and others 2012; EPA 2006).               Results from a 2012 laboratory study found 1,4-
 Peroxone and iron activated persulfate oxidation             dioxane-transforming activity to be relatively
  of 1,4-dioxane might aid in the cleanup of VOC-              common among monooxygenase-expressing
  contaminated sites (Eberle 2015; Zhong 2015; Li              bacteria; however, both TCA and 1,1-
  2016; SERDP 2013d).                                          dichloroethene inhibited 1,4-dioxane degradation
                                                               by bacterial isolates (DoD SERDP 2012).
 In-situ chemical oxidation can be successfully
  combined with bioaugmentation for managing                  Isobutane-metabolizing bacteria can consistently
  dioxane contamination (DoD SERDP 2013d;                      degrade low (<100 ppb) concentrations of 1,4-
  Adamson 2015).                                               dioxane, often to concentrations <1 ppb. These
                                                               organisms also can degrade many chlorinated co-
 Ex-situ bioremediation using a fixed-film, moving-           contaminants such as TCA and 1,1-dichoroethene
  bed biological treatment system is also used to              (1,1-DCE) (DoD SERDP 2013c).
  treat 1,4-dioxane in groundwater (EPA 2006).
                                                              Ethane effectively serves as a cometabolite for
 Electrical resistance heating may be an effective            facilitating the biodegradation of 1,4-dioxane at
  treatment method (Oberle 2015).                              relevant field concentrations (DoD SERDP 2013f).
 Phytoremediation is being explored as a means to            Biodegradation rates are subject to interactions
  remove the compound from shallow groundwater.                among transition metals and natural organic
  Pilot-scale studies have demonstrated the ability            ligands in the environment. (Pornwongthong 2014;
  of hybrid poplars to take up and effectively                 DoD SERDP 2013e).

                                                         5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 156 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Technical Fact Sheet – 1,4-Dioxane

 Photocatalysis has been shown to remove 1,4-                   oxidation; and dynamic subsurface groundwater
  dioxane in aqueous solutions. Laboratory studies               circulation (Odah and others 2005).
  documented that the surface plasmon resonance
                                                               1,4-Dioxane was reduced by greater than 90
  of gold nanoparticles on titanium dioxide (Au –
                                                                percent in the treatment zone with no apparent
  TiO2) promotes the photocatalytic degradation of
                                                                downward migration of 1,4-dioxane using
  1,4-dioxane (Min and others 2009; Vescovi and
                                                                enhanced or extreme SVE, which uses a
  others 2010).
                                                                combination of increased air flow, sweeping with
 Other in-well combined treatment technologies                 drier air, increased temperature, decreased
  being assessed include air sparging; soil vapor               infiltration and more focused vapor extraction to
  extraction (SVE); enhanced bioremediation-                    enhance 1,4-dioxane remediation in soils (DoD
                                                                SERDP 2013a).

Where can I find more information about 1,4-dioxane?
                                                                 www.ct.gov/dph/lib/dph/environmental_health/eoh
 Adamson, D. Mahendra S., Walker, K, Rauch, S.,
                                                                 a/groundwater_well_contamination/110916_ct_act
  Sengupta, S., and C. Newell. 2014. “A Multisite
                                                                 ion_level_list_nov_2016_update.pdf
  Survey to Identify the Scale of the 1,4-Dioxane
  Problem at Contaminated Groundwater Sites.”                  Delaware Department of Natural Resources and
  Environmental Science and Technology. Volume 1                Environmental Control (DE DNREC). 1999.
  (5). Pages 254 to 258.                                        “Remediation Standards Guidance.”
                                                                www.dnrec.state.de.us/DNREC2000/Divisions/AW
 Adamson, D., Anderson R., Mahendra, S., and C.
                                                                M/sirb/DOCS/PDFS/Misc/RemStnd.pdf
  Newell. 2015. “Evidence of 1,4-Dioxane
  Attenuation at Groundwater Sites Contaminated                European Chemicals Bureau. 2002. European
  with Chlorinated Solvents and 1,4-Dioxane.”                   Union Risk Assessment Report 1,4-Dioxane.
  Environmental Science and Technology. Volume                  echa.europa.eu/documents/10162/a4e83a6a-
  49 (11). Pages 6510 to 6518.                                  c421-4243-a8df-3e84893082aa
 Alaska Department of Environmental (AL DEC).                 Ferro, A.M., Kennedy, J., and J.C. LaRue. 2013.
  2008. “Groundwater Cleanup Levels.”                           “Phytoremediation of 1,4-Dioxane-Containing
  dec.alaska.gov/spar/csp/guidance_forms/docs/Gro               Recovered Groundwater.” International Journal of
  undwater_Cleanup_Levels.pdf                                   Phytoremediation. Volume 15. Pages 911 to 923.
 Asano, M., Kishimoto, N., Shimada, H., and Y.                Gedalanga, P., Pornwongthong, P., Mora, R.,
  Ono. 2012. “Degradation of 1,4-Dioxane Using                  Chiang, S., Baldwin, B., Ogles, D., and S.
  Ozone Oxidation with UV Irradiation (Ozone/UV)                Mahendra. 2014. “Identification of Biomarker
  Treatment.” Journal of Environmental Science and              Genes to Predict Biodegradation of 1,4-Dioxane.”
  Engineering. Volume A (1). Pages 371 to 379.                  Applied and Environmental Microbiology. Volume
                                                                10. Pages 3209 to 3218.
 Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
  Registry (ATSDR). 2012. “Toxicological Profile for           Giavini, E., Vismara, C., and M.L Broccia. 1985.
  1,4-Dioxane.” www.atsdr.cdc.gov/                              “Teratogenesis Study of Dioxane in Rats.”
  toxprofiles/TP.asp?id=955&tid=199                             Toxicology Letters. Volume 26 (1). Pages 85 to
                                                                88.
 California Department of Public Health (CDPH).
  2011. “1,4-Dioxane.” Drinking Water Systems.                 Hazardous Substances Data Bank (HSDB). 2011.
  www.waterboards.ca.gov/drinking_water/certlic/dri             “1,4-Dioxane.” toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/
  nkingwater/14-Dioxane.shtml
                                                               Indiana Department of Environmental
 Colorado Department of Public Health and the                  Management (IDEM). 2016. “IDEM Screening and
  Environment (CDPHE). 2017. “The Basic                         Closure Levels.” www.in.gov/idem/
  Standards and Methodologies for Surface Water.”               landquality/files/risc_screening_table_2016.pdf
  https://www.colorado.gov/pacific/sites/default/files/
                                                               Inoue, D., Tsunoda, T., Sawada, K., Yamamoto,
  31_2017-03.pdf
                                                                N., Saito, Y., Sei, K., and M. Ike. 2016. “1,4-
 Connecticut Department of Public Health                       Dioxane degradation potential of members of the
  (CTDEP). 2013. “Action Level List for Private                 genera Pseudonocardia and Rhodococcus.”
  Wells.”                                                       Biodegradation. Volume 27. Pages 277 to 286.


                                                          6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 157 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Technical Fact Sheet – 1,4-Dioxane


Where can I find more information about 1,4-dioxane? (continued)
 Kadokami, K., Koga, M., and A. Otsuki. 1990.                 Brownfield Sites.” www.deq.state.ms.us/
  “Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometric                       MDEQ.nsf/pdf/GARD_brownfieldrisk/$File/Proced.
  Determination of Traces of Hydrophilic and                   pdf
  Volatile Organic Compounds in Water after                  Mohr, T.K.G. 2001. “1,4-Dioxane and Other
  Preconcentration with Activated Carbon.”                    Solvent Stabilizers White Paper.” Santa Clara
  Analytical Sciences. Volume 6 (6). Pages 843 to             Valley Water District of California. San Jose,
  849.                                                        California.
 Kiker, J.H., Connolly, J.B., Murray, W.A., Pearson,        National Institute for Occupational Safety and
  S.C., Reed, S.E., and R.J. Robert. 2010. “Ex-Situ           Health (NIOSH). 2010. “Dioxane.” NIOSH Pocket
  Wellhead Treatment of 1,4-Dioxane Using                     Guide to Chemical Hazards.
  Fenton's Reagent.” Proceedings of the Annual                www.cdc.gov/niosh/npg/npgd0237.html
  International Conference on Soils, Sediments,
  Water and Energy. Volume 15, Article 18.                   New Hampshire Department of Environmental
                                                              Services (NH DES). 2011. “Change in Reporting
 Li, B., and J. Zhu. 2016. “Simultaneous                     Limit for 1,4-Dioxane.” www.des.nh.gov/
  Degradation Of 1,1,1-Trichloroethane and Solvent            organization/divisions/waste/hwrb/sss/hwrp/docum
  Stabilizer 1,4-Dioxane by a Sono-Activated                  ents/report-limits14dioxane.pdf
  Persulfate Process.” Chemical Engineering
  Journal. Volume 284 (15). Pages 750 to 763.                New Jersey Department of Environmental
                                                              Protection (NJDEP). 2015. “Interim Ground Water
 Mahendra, S., Grostern, A., and L. Alvarez-Cohen.           Quality Standards.” www.nj.gov/dep/wms/
  2013. “The Impact of Chlorinated Solvent Co-                bears/gwqs_interim_criteria_table.htm
  Contaminants on the Biodegradation Kinetics of
  1,4-Dioxane.” Chemosphere. Volume 91 (1).                  North Carolina Department of Environmental
  Pages 88 to 92.                                             Quality (NCDEQ). 2013. “Groundwater
                                                              Classification and Standards.”
 Maine Department of Environmental Protection                https://deq.nc.gov/about/divisions/water-
  (MEDEP). 2016. “Maine Remedial Action                       resources/water-resources-rules/nc-
  Guidelines (RAGs) for Sites Contaminated with               administrative-code-statutes
  Hazardous Substances.”
  www.maine.gov/dep/spills/publications/guidance/r           Oberle, D. Crownover, E., and M. Kluger. 2015. “In
  ags/ME-RAGS-Revised-Final_020516.pdf                        Situ Remediation of 1,4-Dioxane Using Electrical
                                                              Resistance Heating.” Remediation Journal.
 Massachusetts Department of Environmental                   Volume 25 (2). Pages 35 to 42.
  Protection (Mass DEP). 2012. “Standards and
  Guidelines or Contaminants in Massachusetts                Odah, M.M., Powell, R., and D.J. Riddle. 2005.
  Drinking Waters.” www.mass.gov/eea/                         “ART In-Well Technology Proves Effective in
  agencies/massdep/water/drinking/standards/stand             Treating 1,4-Dioxane Contamination.”
  ards-and-guidelines-for-drinking-water-                     Remediation Journal. Volume 15 (3). Pages 51 to
  contaminants.html                                           64.
 Min, B.K., Heo, J.E., Youn, N.K., Joo, O.S., Lee,          Occupational Safety and Health Administration
  H., Kim, J.H., and H.S. Kim. 2009. “Tuning of the           (OSHA). 2017 Permissible Exposure Limits –
  Photocatalytic 1,4-Dioxane Degradation with                 Annotated Tables, Table Z-1. www.osha.
  Surface Plasmon Resonance of Gold                           gov/dsg/annotated-pels/index.html
  Nanoparticles on Titania.” Catalysis                       Pornwongthong, P., Mulchandani A., Gedalanga,
  Communications. Volume 10 (5). Pages 712 to                 P.B., and S. Mahendra. 2014. “Transition Metals
  715.                                                        and Organic Ligands Influence Biodegradation of
 Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality             1,4-Dioxane.” Applied Biochemistry and
  (MS DEQ). 2002. “Risk Evaluation Procedures for             Biotechnology. Volume 173 (1). Pages 291 to 306.
  Voluntary Cleanup and Redevelopment of




                                                        7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 158 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Technical Fact Sheet – 1,4-Dioxane


Where can I find more information about 1,4-dioxane? (continued)
 Pugazhendi, A., Banu, J., Dhavamani, J., and I.              Areas/Environmental-Restoration/Contaminated-
  Yeom. 2015. “Biodegradation of 1,4-dioxane by                Groundwater/Emerging-Issues/ER-2302
  Rhodanobacter AYS5 and the Role of Additional             DoD SERDP. 2013e. “In Situ Biodegradation of
  Substrates.” Annals of Microbiology. Volume 645.           1,4-Dioxane: Effects of Metals and Chlorinated
  Pages 2201 to 2208.                                        Solvent Co-Contaminants.” ER-2300. www.serdp-
 Sales, C., Grostrem, A., Parales, J., Parales, R.,         estcp.org/Program-Areas/Environmental-
  and L. Alvarez-Cohen. 2013. “Oxidation of the              Restoration/Contaminated-
  Cyclic Ethers 1,4-Dioxane and Tetrahydrofuran by           Groundwater/Emerging-Issues/ER-2300
  a Monooxygenase in Two Pseudonocardia                     DoD SERDP. 2013f. “In Situ Bioremediation of
  species.” Applied and Environmental Microbiology.          1,4-Dioxane by Methane Oxidizing Bacteria in
  Volume 79. Pages 7702 to 7708.                             Coupled Anaerobic-Aerobic Zones.” ER-2306.
 Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.                 www.serdp-estcp.org/Program-
  2016. “Texas Risk Reduction Program (TRRP)                 Areas/Environmental-Restoration/Contaminated-
  Protective Concentration Levels (PCLs).”                   Groundwater/Emerging-Issues/ER-2306
  www.tceq.texas.gov/remediation/trrp/trrppcls.html         DoD SERDP. 2016. “Extending the Applicability of
 U.S. Department of Defense (DoD). Strategic                Compound-Specific Isotope Analysis to Low
  Environmental Research and Development                     Concentrations of 1,4-Dioxane.” ER-2535.
  Program (SERDP). 2012. “Oxygenase-Catalyzed                www.serdp-estcp.org/Program-
  Biodegradation of Emerging Water Contaminants:             Areas/Environmental-Restoration/Contaminated-
  1,4-Dioxane and N-Nitrosodimethylamine.” ER-               Groundwater/Emerging-Issues/ER-2535/ER-2535
  1417. www.serdp-estcp.org/Program-                        U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
  Areas/Environmental-Restoration/Contaminated-              (DHHS). 2014. “Report on Carcinogens, Twelfth
  Groundwater/Emerging-Issues/ER-1417                        Edition.” Public Health Service, National
 DoD SERDP. 2013a. “1,4-Dioxane Remediation                 Toxicology Program. 13th Edition.
  by Extreme Soil Vapor Extraction (XSVE).” ER-              ntp.niehs.nih.gov/ntp/roc/content/profiles/dioxane.
  201326. www.serdp-estcp.org/Program-                       pdf
  Areas/Environmental-Restoration/Contaminated-             U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
  Groundwater/Emerging-Issues/ER-201326                      1996a. “Method 8260B: Volatile Organic
 DoD SERDP. 2013b. “Development of a Passive                Compounds by Gas Chromatography/Mass
  Flux Meter Approach to Quantifying 1,4-Dioxane             Spectrometry (GC/MS).”
  Mass Flux.” ER-2304. www.serdp-                            www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-
  estcp.org/Program-Areas/Environmental-                     12/documents/8260b.pdf
  Restoration/Contaminated-                                 EPA. 2001a. “Brownfields Technology Primer:
  Groundwater/Emerging-Issues/ER-2304                        Selecting and Using Phytoremediation for Site
 DoD SERDP. 2013c. “Evaluation of Branched                  Cleanup.” EPA 542-R-01-006.
  Hydrocarbons as Stimulants for In Situ                     www.brownfieldstsc.org/pdfs/phytoremprimer.pdf
  Cometabolic Biodegradation of 1,4-Dioxane and             EPA. 2001b. “Appendix A To Part 136—Methods
  Its Associated Co-Contaminants.” ER-2303.                  For Organic Chemical Analysis Of Municipal And
  www.serdp-estcp.org/Program-                               Industrial Wastewater, Method 1624.” Code of
  Areas/Environmental-Restoration/Contaminated-              Federal Regulations. Code of Federal
  Groundwater/Emerging-Issues/ER-2303                        Regulations. 40 CFR Part 136.
 DoD SERDP. 2013d. “Facilitated Transport                  EPA. 2003. “Method 8015D: Nonhalogenated
  Enabled In Situ Chemical Oxidation of 1,4-                 Organics Using GC/FID.” SW-846.
  Dioxane-Contaminated Groundwater.” ER-2302.                www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-
  www.serdp-estcp.org/Program-                               12/documents/8015d_r4.pdf




                                                       8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 159 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Technical Fact Sheet – 1,4-Dioxane

Where can I find more information about 1,4-dioxane? (continued)
 EPA. 2006. “Treatment Technologies for 1,4-                 contract-laboratory-program-statement-work-
  Dioxane: Fundamentals and Field Applications.”              organic-superfund-methods-multi-media-multi-0
  EPA 542-R-06-009. clu-                                     EPA. 2016a. “Contaminant Candidate List 4-CCL
  in.org/download/remed/542r06009.pdf                         4.” www.epa.gov/ccl/draft-contaminant-candidate-
                                                              list-4-ccl-4
 EPA. 2007. “Method 8270D: Semivolatile Organic
  Compounds by Gas Chromatography/Mass                       EPA. 2016b. Superfund Information Systems.
  Spectrometry (GC/MS).”                                      Superfund Site Information. cumulis.epa.
  www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-                    gov/supercpad/cursites/srchsites.cfm
  07/documents/epa-8270d.pdf
                                                             EPA. 2017b. Regional Screening Level (RSL)
 EPA. 2008. “Method 522: Determination of 1,4-               Summary Table. www.epa.gov/risk/regional-
  Dioxane in Drinking Water By Solid Phase                    screening-levels-rsls-generic-tables-may-2016
  Extraction (SPE) and Gas Chromatography/Mass
                                                             EPA. Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS).
  Spectrometry (GC/MS) with Selected Ion
                                                              2013. “1,4-Dioxane (CASRN 123-91-1).”
  Monitoring (SIM).” EPA/600/R-08/101.
                                                              cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/iris2/chemicalLanding.cfm?su
  cfpub.epa.gov/si/si_public_record_report.cfm?dirE
                                                              bstance_nmbr=326
  ntryId=199229
                                                             Vermont Department of Environmental
 EPA. 2009. “Drinking Water Contaminant
                                                              Conservation (VTDEC). 2016. “Interim
  Candidate List 3 – Final.” Federal Register Notice.
                                                              Groundwater Quality Standards.”
  www.federalregister.gov/articles/2009/10/08/E9-
                                                              dec.vermont.gov/sites/dec/files/documents/interim
  24287/drinking-water-contaminant-candidate-list-
                                                              gwqstandards_2016.pdf
  3-final
                                                             Vescovi, T., Coleman, H., and R. Amal. 2010.
 EPA. 2011. “Reportable Quantities of Hazardous
                                                              “The Effect of pH on UV-Based Advanced
  Substances Designated Pursuant to Section 311
                                                              Oxidation Technologies - 1,4-Dioxane
  of the Clean Water Act. Code of Federal
                                                              Degradation.” Journal of Hazardous Materials.
  Regulations.” 40 CFR 302.4.
                                                              Volume 182. Pages 75 to 79.
  www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2011-title40-
  vol28/pdf/CFR-2011-title40-vol28-sec302-4.pdf              Washington Department of Ecology (ECY). 2015.
                                                              “Groundwater Methods B and A ARARs.”
 EPA. 2012. “2012 Edition of Drinking Water
                                                              fortress.wa.gov/ecy/clarc/FocusSheets/Groundwat
  Standards and Health Advisories.”
                                                              er%20Methods%20B%20and%20A%20and%20A
  www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-
                                                              RARs.pdf
  09/documents/dwstandards2012.pdf
                                                             West Virginia Department of Environmental
 EPA. 2013a. “1,4-Dioxane.” clu-
                                                              Protection (WV DEP). 2009. “Voluntary
  in.org/contaminantfocus/default.focus/sec/1,4-
                                                              Remediation and Redevelopment Rule.”
  Dioxane/cat/Overview/
                                                              www.dep.wv.gov/dlr/oer/voluntarymain/Documents
 EPA. 2013b. “1,4-Dioxane (1,4-Diethyleneoxide).”            /60CSR3%20VRRA%20rule%206-5-09.pdf
  Technology Transfer Network Air Toxics Website.
                                                             Zhong, H., Brusseau, M., Wang, Y., Yan, N., Quiq,
  semspub.epa.gov/work/09/2129341.pdf
                                                              L., and G. Johnson. 2015. “In-Situ Activation of
 EPA. 2013c. “EPA Contract Laboratory Program                Persulfate by Iron Filings and Degradation of 1,4-
  Statement of Work for Organic Superfund                     Dioxane” Water Research. Volume 83. Pages 104
  Methods SOM02.3.” www.epa.gov/clp/epa-                      to 111.


Contact Information
If you have any questions or comments on this fact sheet, please contact: Mary Cooke, FFRRO, at
cooke.maryt@epa.gov.




                                                        9
