LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: DECLARATION STATEMENT, RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT, RENORA, INC. SITE, (O.U. 2), EDISON TOWNSHIP, MIDDLESEX COUNTY, NEW JERSEY.
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/67218
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: d9b07f0861e0d39680782422abbcfd7a39e2675a570bf55b9c06c0c645c1baa4
Source PDF pages: 154
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 SDMS Document


                                 PB94-963847
                    67218        EPA/ROD/R02-94/242
                                 April 1995




EPA Superfund
    Record of Decision:


        Renora, Inc.
        (O.U. 2), Edison Township, NJ
        9/30/1994




 U.S. EPA Region II Library
   290 Broadway, 16th Fl-
 New York, NY 10007-1866

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     DECLARATION STATEMENT
                  RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT
                         RENORA, INC. SITE
Site Name and Location
Renora, Inc.
Edison Township, Middlesex County, New Jersey
Statement of Basis and Purpose
This Record of Decision (ROD) Amendment documents the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA's) selection of a modified
remedy for the Renora, Inc. site. The first ROD, which was
issued on September 29, 1987, is being amended for that component
of the remedy addresssing soils contaminated with polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). This modified remedy was selected
in accordance with the requirements of the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980,
as amended (CERCLA), 42 U.S.C. §9601 et seq., and to the extent
practicable, the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution
Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 CFR Part 300. This document explains
the factual and legal basis for amending the remedy for the
Renora site. An administrative record for the site, established
pursuant to the NCP, 40 CFR 300.800, contains the documents that
form the basis for EPA's selection of the remedial action (see
Appendix III).
The State of New Jersey can not concur with the selected remedy
unless institutional controls are established.
Assessment of the Site
Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from this
site, if not addressed by implementing the response action
selected in this ROD Amendment, may present an imminent and
substantial threat to public health, welfare or the environment.
Description of the Selected Remedy
The initial ROD for the Renora site included the excavation and
off-site disposal of soils contaminated with polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs) and biodegradation of PAH-contaminated soils.
The first phase of the remedy, involving the PCB-contaminated
soils, has been completed. Treatability studies conducted
subsequent to the ROD indicated that biodegradation will not
effectively reduce PAHs to acceptable levels. Therefore, the
remedy will be modified to include the removal of surface soils
contaminated with PAHs.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The major components of the modified remedy Eire as follows:
     •   Excavation and off-site disposal of the top two feet of
         contaminated surface soils and any debris at an EPA
         approved landfill; and
     •    Backfill of the site with certified clean fill.
Declaration of Statutory Determinations
The selected remedy meets the requirements for remedial actions
set forth in CERCLA §121, 42 U.S.C. §9621: (1) it is protective
of human health and the environment; (2) it attains a level or
standard of control of the hazardous substances, pollutants and
contaminants, which at least attains the legally applicable or
relevant and appropriate requirements under federal and state
laws; (3) it is cost-effective; and (4) it utilizes permanent
solutions and alternative treatment (or resource recovery)
technologies to the maximum extent practicable. However, because
treatment of hazardous substances, pollutants or contaminants at
the site was not found to be practicable, the remedy does not
satisfy the statutory preference for treatment as a principal
element.
A five-year review of the remedial action pursuant to CERCLA
§121(c), 42 U.S.C. §9621(c), may not be necessary because this
remedy will not result in hazardous substances remaining on the
site above health-based levels.



William J. Mufezyrfskj^ P-E.          Date
Deputy Regional Administrator
U.S. EPA, Region

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         RENORA. INC. SITE
                   RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT
                         TABLE OF CONTENTS


TITLE                                                           PAGE

I.      SITE DESCRIPTION                                         1

II.     SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES                 2

III.    HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION                    4

IV.     SCOPE AND ROLE OF AMENDED RESPONSE ACTION                5

V.      SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS                          5

VI.     SUMMARY OF SITE RISK                                     8

VII.    REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES                              16

VIII.   DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES                    17

IX.     SUMMARY OF COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES ..      20

X.      SELECTED REMEDY                                         27

XI.     STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS                                28

X.      DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES                    29


APPENDICES

APPENDIX I.     FIGURES
APPENDIX II.    TABLES
APPENDIX III.   ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX
APPENDIX IV.    RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY
APPENDIX V.     CORRESPONDENCE RECEIVED DURING PUBLIC COMMENT
                PERIOD
APPENDIX VI.    STATE CONCURRENCE LETTER

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         LIST OF FIGURES

1.   Site Location Map
2.   Property Layout
3.   Site Stratigraphy
4.   Phase II Feasibility Study Field Investigation
     Sampling Locations
5.   Map of Potable Wells in the Vicinity of the
     the Renora Site

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          LIST OF TABLES

1.    Groundwater Sample Analytical Results
2.    Surface and Subsurface Soil Sample Analytical Results
3.    Mill Brook Surface Water Analytical Results
4.    Mill Brook Sediment Analytical Results
5.    Human Health Contaminants of Concern
5A.   Contaminants of Concern - Frequency of Detection
6.    Summary of Exposure Pathways
6A.   Toxicity Values for Contaminants of Concern
7.    Summary of Carcinogenic Risks
8.    Summary of Non-Carcinogenic Risks
9.    Ecological Contaminants of Concern
10.   Surface Water Ecological Risk Summary
11.   Sediment Ecological Risk Summary
12.   Alternative 1 Cost Summary
13.   Alternative 2 Cost Summary
14.   Alternative 3 Cost Summary
15.   Alternative 4 Cost Summary
16.   List of ARARs

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     DECISION SUMMARY FOR THE RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT

                          RENORA, INC.

SITE DESCRIPTION

Location
The Renora, Inc. (Renora) site is located at 83 Main Street in
the Bonhamtown section of Edison Township, Middlesex County, New
Jersey (see Figure 1). The site occupies approximately one acre
of the total property owned by dementi Brothers Inc., and is
enclosed by a perimeter chain link fence with locking gates. The
Clementi property is bordered to the north by Mill Brook, to the
south by the New Jersey Turnpike (Turnpike) right-of-way, to the
east by South Main Street, and to the west by a Conrail right-of-
way. Figure 2 shows the site and surrounding land use.
The site is currently zoned for light industrial use. Land use
in the vicinity of the site is primarily residential and light
industrial. The Clementi property adjacent to the site is
occupied by an automobile repair and body shop, welding,
machinery and electric supply shops, a rag cleaning operation, an
excavation and construction company, and a delicatessen. The
portion of dementi's property located between the site and the
Turnpike right-of-way is used for storage of miscellaneous
material including gravel, wood, sand, and abandoned vehicles.

Residential uses in the vicinity of the site include an apartment
complex located south of the Turnpike, approximately 200 feet
from the site, and the Edison Glen Condominium Complex, which is
located directly across Mill Brook. The Edison Glen Condominium
Complex contains 315 housing units. Sensitive land uses in the
vicinity of the site include a senior citizen center, located
approximately 1,700 feet south, and a nursery school, located
within 2,000 feet of the site.
Topography and Hydroaeology

The topography of the site, which was built up from the
floodplain with demolition debris and fill, is relatively flat.
Surface elevations range from approximately 62.5 feet above mean
sea level (msl) in the western corner of the site to
approximately 66 feet above msl along the southeastern perimeter.
The northwestern edge of the site slopes steeply down nine to
twelve feet to Mill Brook. The direction of runoff drainage
across the site is toward Mill Brook.

The site is underlain by a surficial fill layer consisting of
construction debris in a sandy silty matrix with traces of clay,
ranging in thickness from two to eleven feet. The fill layer is
underlain by a layer of naturally deposited sediments of fine-
grained sandy or clayey silt, with occasional layers of clay,

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ranging in thickness from three to ten feet. The fine grained
sediments are underlain by a layer of weathered bedrock, which is
composed of clay, silt and fine sand. Figure 3 shows a
generalized geologic cross section of the site.
There are two water bearing zones or aquifers underlying the
site; the overburden, or shallow aquifer and the deep, or bedrock
aquifer. The clay and fine-grained materials of the deep bedrock
aquifer are not favorable for ground water flow and will
typically exhibit a lower hydraulic conductivity than the coarser
grained overburden materials. The lower hydraulic conductivity,
combined with the thickness of the weathered bedrock, limits the
downward flow of ground water from the overburden to the deep
bedrock aquifer; thus confining ground water flow to the
horizontal direction in the shallow aquifer.
Water level measurements were taken in monitoring wells located
on the site and in piezometers located in Mill Brook and on
opposite banks of Mill Brook. Measurements indicated that ground
water levels in the shallow zone were higher on the Edison Glen
side of Mill Brook than those on the Renora side. In addition,
the brook's surface is lower in elevation than the water table on
both sides. This indicates that the ground water from beneath
Edison Glen and the site moves towards and discharges to Mill
Brook. Ground water from beneath the site does not appear to
flow under the brook to Edison Glen.
SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES
Mr. Clementi acquired the property from the New Jersey Turnpike
Authority in November 1976. Renora operations began in 1978 when
dementi leased a portion of his property to Ronald Kaschner, who
had registered Renora with the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP) as a collector and hauler of
waste oils in October 1977. During the period of its operation
(1978-1982), Renora transported and accepted materials containing
hazardous substances for transfer, storage, and blending.
Contamination of the facility occurred as a result of transfer
spills and container leaks from accumulated wastes.
During a July 12, 1978 site inspection conducted by NJDEP and the
Edison Township Department of Health and Human Resources, several
minor spills were observed. In addition, the NJDEP and Edison
Township determined that the facility was operating as a special
waste transfer facility without proper registration. At that
time, NJDEP advised Mr. Kaschner to register as a Special Waste
Transfer Facility.
On March 28, 1980, NJDEP issued a Notice of Prosecution ordering
Mr. Kaschner to cease operations and remediate the site. NJDEP
conducted an inspection on June 24, 1980 to assess compliance
with the Notice of Prosecution. The inspection revealed that

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

although operations had ceased, no remedial actions had taken
place. Consequently, in July 1980, NJDEP served Mr. Kaschner
with an official notice directing him to clean up the site. Site
inspections conducted throughout the remainder of July and August
1980 indicated that there had been no substantial improvement in
site conditions.
In August 1980, Mr. Kaschner and NJDEP entered into an Order and
Settlement Agreement for site cleanup with a scheduled completion
date of October 1980. In November 1980, NJDEP revoked Mr.
Kaschner's registration to collect and haul waste, effectively
putting him out of business. Claiming lack of funds, Mr.
Kaschner abandoned cleanup activities in December 1980. He
abandoned the site in June 1982 and EPA included it on the
National Priorities List on December 20, 1982.
In August 1984, EPA, in consultation with NJDEP, determined that
site conditions presented an imminent danger to human health and
the environment and that a removal action was necessary. On
September 28, 1984, EPA issued an Administrative Order, under
Section 106 of CERCLA, to all known potentially responsible
parties (PRPs) for the performance of this action. The Order
directed the PRPs to remove all containers, contents, and visibly
contaminated soil from the site. A removal action was initiated
in October 1984, and was completed on April 17, 1985.
Approximately 1,000 drums, 25 tankers, truck trailers and their
contents, and 200 tons of visibly contaminated soils were shipped
off site for proper disposal. All removal activities were
conducted under EPA oversight.
On September 17, 1984, EPA sent Notice Letters to all PRPs giving
them the opportunity to conduct or finance the Remedial
Investigation and Feasibility Study (RI/FS). On May 29, 1985, an
Administrative Consent Order (EPA Docket Number: II-CERCLA-50112)
was signed between the EPA and a group of the PRPs performing the
RI/FS. This study was conducted out between May 1985 and the
summer of 1987. All work was carried out under EPA oversight.
In support of the RI/FS, Camp Dresser & McKee (COM) conducted an
Endangerment Assessment, under contract to EPA, to assess the
risk posed to human health and the environment.
The first Record of Decision (ROD) for the site was signed on
September 28, 1987. The selected remedy included the following
components: excavation and off-site disposal of all
Polychlorinated Biphenyl (PCB) contaminated soils with
concentrations above 5 milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg);
biodegradation of all Polycyclic Aromatic Hyrdrocarbon (PAH)
contaminated soils with concentrations above 10 mg/kg, using
ground water as an irrigation medium in the bioremediation
treatment system; and backfilling and revegetation of the site.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

A group of the PRPs entered into a Consent Decree with EPA and
NJDEP on March 21, 1989 for the conduct of the design and
implementation of the remedy selected in the ROD. The PCB soil
excavation and site restoration phase of the selected remedy was
completed by the PRPs in January 1989. The site fencing was
replaced to prevent public access to the site. Details regarding
the PCB-contaminated soil removal are documented in the Sampling
and Analysis Results for the PCB Excavation and Off-Site
Landfilling Phase of the Site Remediation Report (BCM Engineers
Inc., August 1989).
To achieve the bioremediation of the PAH-contaminated soils, a
group of the PRPs conducted treatability studies between 1989 and
1990. Results of the studies indicated that although the
microbial activity in the soil was within expected requirements
for biodegradation, no reduction in PAH concentration was
observed. The inability of the microbial population to degrade
the contaminants present, in the soils was determined to be due
to: 1) the high clay content of the soil, which tends to bind to
the PAHs, making them unavailable for microbial degradation; 2)
the presence of non-contamination related organic carbon, which
served as a preferential carbon source for the microorganisms;
and 3) the complexity of the PAH structure, which made it
difficult to biodegrade these contaminants. In addition, the
petroleum hydrocarbons present are predominantly composed of high
boiling point hydrocarbons, which are not easily degradable. The
studies concluded that bioremediation is not a viable treatment
method for the PAH-contaminated soils.
EPA, in consultation with NJDEP, determined that it would be
necessary to redefine the nature and extent of site contamination
and reassess remedial alternatives for the site. An Order
Modifying the Consent Decree for a group of the PRPs' performance
of a Phase II Feasibility Study (FS) was entered and became
effective on March 18, 1991.
As part of the Phase II FS, additional treatability studies for
stabilization/solidification and asphalt blending were performed.
The studies concluded that stabilization/solidification
technologies would not be effective in treating the PAH-
contaminated soil.
The Phase II FS also included additional field investigations to
determine the extent of contamination remaining at the site. The
results of these .investigations are presented under the "Summary
of Site Characteristics", below.
HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
The Phase II FS report and the Proposed Plan for this ROD
Amendment were released to the public for comment on July 20,
1994. These documents were made available to the public in the

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

administrative record file at information repositories in the
Edison Township Public Library and EPA's Region II Office in New
York City. The notice for these documents was published in the
News Tribune on July 20, 1994. A public comment period was held
from July 20, 1994 to August 18, 1994. In addition, a public
meeting was held on August 9, 1994 to present the Proposed Plan
for the site. At this meeting, representatives from EPA answered
questions regarding remedial alternatives under consideration.
All comments which were received by EPA during the public comment
period, including the verbal comments expressed at the public
meeting, are addressed in the Responsiveness Summary, which is
attached as Appendix IV.
SCOPE AND ROLE OF RESPONSE WITHIN SITE STRATEGY
This is an amendment to the first ROD, which selected removal of
PCB-contaminated soils and bioremediation of PAH-contaminated
soils as the remedy for the site. As previously described under
the "Site History and Enforcement Activities", actions to reduce
site risks, including removal of waste vessels and PCB-
contaminated soils, have been completed. EPA expected that
bioremediation would be successful in addressing the residual
soil contamination. However, treatability studies indicated that
this treatment method was not viable for the PAH-contaminated
soils.
The primary objective of the ROD Amendment is to address the
residual soil contamination at the site. Consequently, a new and
final remedy to address the PAH-contaminated soils is being
selected.
SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS

Additional field investigations were conducted by the PRPs as
part of the Phase II FS. The purpose of the field investigations
was to:
     •    Define the present nature and extent of
          contamination at the site.
     •    Examine possible sources of oil seeps observed in Mill
          Brook.
     •    Determine existing ground water quality and ground
          water usage in the vicinity of the site.
     •    Determine the potential impact of site contamination on
          Mill Brook surface water and sediments.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

To attain these objectives, the following activities were
undertaken:
            Surface and subsurface soil sampling
            Ground Water Sampling
            Surface water and sediment sampling
            Test pit excavation
            Well survey
See Figure 4 for all sampling locations. The results of the
field investigation are summarized as follows.
Well Survey Results
A well search identified the existence of eleven potential
drinking water supply wells located in the vicinity of the site.
Of the eleven wells identified, four wells are active, four wells
are located outside Edison Township and the status of three wells
is unknown. Of the four active wells, two are located upgradient
from the site and two are located more than one mile away from
the site. In addition, all four active wells are screened in the
deep aquifer (greater than 100 feet) and are not expected to be
impacted by site contamination. Figure 5 depicts the location of
ten of the eleven potential drinking water wells.
Edison Township residents depend on public water for their
potable water supply. Edison Township purchases its public water
supply from Elizabethtown Water Company and Middlesex Water
Company. Both companies rely on surface water as their primary
source for drinking water. The Middlesex Water Company also
maintains three deep wells, located four to five miles north of
the site, that are used only in summertime drought conditions.
Ground Water Investigation
Ground water samples were collected from the three on-site
monitoring wells and one off-site monitoring well. Analysis was
performed on both filtered and unfiltered ground water samples.
As shown in Table 1, analytical results indicate that volatile
organic compounds (VOCs) and semi-volatile organic compounds
(semi-VOCs) were detected at low levels in both on- and off-site
monitoring wells.
Metals detected in on-site, unfiltered ground water samples
included arsenic, chromium, lead and zinc; lead (0.013 ppm) was
the only metal detected at concentrations exceeding federal
Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs) and state Ground Water Quality
Standards (GWQS). Metals detected in the on-site, filtered
ground water samples included arsenic, chromium, lead and zinc;
however, no metals were detected above MCLs or GWQS. Arsenic was
the only metal in off-site filtered and unfiltered ground water

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

samples detected above MCLs and GWQS (0.082 and 0.093 ppm,
respectively).
Surface and Subsurface Soil Investigation
Surface (0-2 feet) and subsurface (greater than 2 feet) soil
samples were collected during the installation of monitoring
wells and soil borings, and during the excavation of one test
pit. A total of 29 soil samples were collected. One sample from
each soil boring was analyzed for Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA) characteristics of toxicity, ignitability,
corrosivity, and reactivity. In addition, six seep borings were
placed along the adjacent fence line and advanced to the
gronndwater surface to investigate a potential source of oil
seepage into Mill Brook.
As shown in Table 2, the analytical results indicate that PAHs
are present at variable levels throughout the site. The highest
levels of PAHs are found in the surface soils, in which the
maximum concentration of total PAHs detected was 180 ppm. PAHs
detected in the surface soils include benzo(a)pyrene,
benzo(b)fluoranthene, benzo(a)anthracene, chrysene and
fluoranthene. PAHs are found in the subsurface soils, but at
considerably lower levels.
VOCs including benzene, toluene and xylene were detected at low
levels in the surface and subsurface soils. Metals including
arsenic and lead were detected at low levels in the surface
soils, at maximum concentrations of 10 ppm and 210 ppm,
respectively. The maximum concentrations of arsenic and lead
detected in the subsurface soils (8-10 feet), were 721 ppm and
338 ppm, respectively.
All analyses for RCRA Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure
(TCLP) were negative, with the exception of the lead level in one
boring. The concentration of lead in the leachate was 10.5
milligrams per liter (mg/1), exceeding the 5 mg/1 limit.
Results from the six seep borings placed along the fence line
adjacent to Mill Brook did not indicate the presence of oil, or
constituents of oil. In addition, no sludges or other indicators
of hazardous waste or toxic substances were observed.
Surface Water and Sediment Investigation
Three surface water samples were collected from Mill Brook from
locations upgradient from the site, adjacent to the site, and
downgradient from the site. As shown in Table 3, the analytical
results of the surface water samples indicate that concentrations
of all compounds detected were below the federal and state water
quality standards, with the exception of chromium (0.0264 ppm),
which was detected above both the federal and state water quality

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

criteria and, alpha-BHC (0.052 ppm), which was detected above
state water quality criteria. Low levels of VOCs, semi-VOCs,
metals and pesticides/herbicides were detected. However, there
was no significant difference in concentrations of any of the
contaminants detected in the upstream, adjacent and downstream
samples.

Three sediment samples were collected from Mill Brook at the same
locations as the surface water samples. As shown in Table 4, the
analytical results of the sediment samples indicate that
concentrations of PAHs were significantly greater in sediments
located adjacent to, and downstream from the site; upstream
731 ppb, adjacent 9,693 ppb, downstream 3,955 ppb. Low levels of
metals including arsenic, copper, chromium, lead and zinc were
detected in all three samples. In addition, several
pesticides/herbicides including dieldrin and gamma and alpha
chlordane were detected at low levels in all three sampling
locations. However, with the exception of the PAHs, there was no
significant difference in the concentrations of contaminants
detected in the upstream, adjacent and downstream samples.

SUMMARY OF SITE RISK
EPA conducted a baseline risk assessment to evaluate potential
risks to human health and the environment associated with the
current state of the site. The risk assessment addressed
contaminants in the ground water, surface soils, subsurface
soils, Mill Brook surface water and sediments.
Human Health Risk Assessment
A four-step process is utilized for assessing site-related human
health risks: Hazard Identification—identifies the contaminants
of concern at the site based on several factors such as toxicity,
frequency of occurrence, and concentration. Exposure Assessment-
-estimates the magnitude of actual and/or potential human expo-
sures, the frequency and duration of these exposures, and the
pathways (e.g., ingesting contaminated well-water) by which
humans are potentially exposed. Toxicity Assessment—determines
the types of adverse health effects associated with chemical
exposures, and the relationship between magnitude of exposure
(dose) and severity of adverse effects (response). Risk
Characterization—summarizes and combines outputs of the exposure
and toxicity assessments to provide a quantitative assessment of
site-related risks.

The baseline risk assessment began with the selection of
contaminants of concern that would be representative of site
risks. Due to the limited number of samples collected as
part of the Phase II FS, the baseline Risk Assessment
conservatively considers all contaminants detected at the site as
potential contaminants of concern (COCs). No contaminants were

                                8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

eliminated as COCs based on frequency of detection or
concentration. Of the chemicals detected, only carbon disulfide
and carbazole were eliminated due to their relative lack of
toxicity. Tables 5 and 5A list all COCs (by media) and their
frequency of detection at the site, respectively.
EPA's Risk Assessment identified the following eight potential
exposure pathways by which the public could be exposed to
contaminant releases at the site under current and future land-
use conditions: 1) ingestion of chemicals in filtered and
unfiltered ground water; 2) ingestion of chemicals in surface
soil; 3) dermal contact with chemicals in surface soil; 4)
ingestion of chemicals in subsurface soil; 5) dermal contact with
chemicals in subsurface soil; 6) ingestion of chemicals in Mill
Brook sediments; 7) dermal contact with chemicals in Mill Brook
sediments; and 8) dermal contact with chemicals in Mill Brook
surface water. The exposure pathways considered are listed in
Table 6.
For the purposes of this human health evaluation, potentially
exposed populations include adjacent residents, trespassers and
excavation workers. As the site is presently inactive and
surrounded by a chain-link fence, the only receptors considered
under the current land-use scenario were youth trespassers.
Under the future land-use scenario, four potential receptors
including youth trespassers, adult and child adjacent residents,
and excavation workers were identified. As the site is currently
zoned for light industrial use, an on-site residential scenario
was not addressed in the risk assessment. Rather, a future
adjacent resident land-use scenario was considered due to the
site's proximity to residential development and the likelihood of
continued residential use of adjacent areas.
The reasonable maximum exposure to COCs was evaluated in all
cases. In addition, the central tendency exposure was evaluated
for ground water and subsurface soils exposure pathways.
Under current EPA guidelines, the risk assessment considers the
likelihood of carcinogenic (cancer causing) and non-carcinogenic
effects due to exposure to COCs separately. It was assumed that
the toxic effects of the site-related chemicals would be
additive. Thus, carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic risk
associated exposures to individual COCs were summed to indicate
potential risks associated with mixtures of potential carcinogens
and non-carcinogens, respectively.
Potential carcinogenic risks were evaluated using cancer slope
factors (SFs) developed by EPA's Carcinogenic Risk Assessment
Verification Endeavor for estimating excess lifetime cancer risks
associated with exposure to potentially carcinogenic chemicals.
Table 6A lists the toxicity values for all COCs at the site.
SFs are multiplied by the estimated intake of a potential

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

carcinogen to generate an upper-bound estimate of the excess
lifetime cancer risk associated with exposure to the compound at
that intake level. The term "upper bound" reflects the conserva-
tive estimate of the risks calculated from the SF. Use of this
approach makes the underestimation of the risk highly unlikely.
Carcinogenic Risk
For known or suspected carcinogens, EPA considers excess upper
bound individual lifetime cancer risks of between 10^ to 10"6 to
be acceptable. This level indicates that an individual may have
approximately one in ten thousand to one in a million chance of
developing cancer over a 70-year lifetime, under specific
exposure conditions at the site. A summary of the carcinogenic
risk posed by each media at the site is presented below. A
summary of the carcinogenic risks associated with the exposure to
COCs in all media is foxmd in Table 7.
Subsurface Soil/ Surface Water and Sediments
As shown in Table 7, the results of the baseline risk assessment
indicate that under current and future land-use conditions, all
pathways of exposure to subsurface soil, surface water and
sediments are within, or below EPA's acceptable risk range.
Surface Soil
Under future land-use conditions, the risk characterization
revealed that the cancer risk associated with exposure to surface
soil by an adjacent resident is 8 x 10"5 (eight in one hundred
thousand). This risk is at the higher end of EPA's acceptable
risk range. If the site were developed for residential use, the
resulting risk due to exposure to surface soils would increase to
approximately 2.2 x 10"*, which is also at the upper bounds of
EPA's acceptable risk range.
Ground Water

Under future land-use conditions, the risk characterization
revealed that the cancer risk associated with ingestion of
shallow, on-site unfiltered ground water by a resident is
1 x 1CT3, which exceeds EPA's acceptable risk range. This risk is
solely due to elevated levels of arsenic present in the shallow,
unfiltered ground water samples. During development of the
monitoring wells, the shallow aguifer exhibited poor produc-
tivity. As a result, the unfiltered ground water samples were
highly turbid and contained a high percentage of solids. This
may suggest that the levels of arsenic detected in the unfiltered
samples do not represent the condition of the ground water which
would likely be ingested by an individual. Based on filtered
ground water sampling results, the carcinogenic risk to a

                               10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

resident would be 3 x 10"4, which, although at the upper bounds,
is within EPA's acceptable risk range.
Although EPA conservatively evaluated the risk from exposure to
site ground water, it is not a likely future exposure pathway.
As explained above, due to the low permeability of the bedrock
aquifer, which prevents downward migration of the contaminants,
it is expected that only the shallow aquifer has been impacted.
In addition, the shallow site ground water discharges to Mill
Brook. As all potable wells within a mile of the site are over
100 feet deep and are cased in the deep aquifer, it is improbable
that a potable well would be installed in the shallow aquifer on
the site. In addition, the poor productivity of the shallow
aquifer would result in low yielding wells that could not provide
a sufficient potable water supply. Furthermore, most Edison
Township residents depend on public water for their potable water
supply. Based on these site conditions, EPA has concluded that
future exposure to contaminated ground water underlying the site
is highly unlikely.
Non-Carcinogenic Risk
Non-carcinogenic risks were assessed using a hazard index (HI)
approach, which is based on a comparison of expected contaminant
intakes and safe levels of intake. Reference Doses (RfDs),
estimates of daily exposure levels for humans expected to be safe
over a lifetime (including sensitive individuals), were developed
by EPA for indicating the potential for adverse health effects
(see Table 6A). Estimated intakes of chemicals from
environmental media (e.g., the amount of a chemical ingested from
contaminated drinking water) are compared with the RfDs to derive
the hazard quotient for the contaminant in the particular medium.
The HI is obtained by adding the hazard quotients for all
compounds across all media that impact a particular receptor
population.
An HI greater than I/O indicates that the potential exists for
non-carcinogenic health effects to occur as a result of site-
related exposures. The HI provides a useful reference point for
gauging the potential significance of multiple contaminant
exposures within a single medium or across media. A summary of
the non-carcinogenic risks associated with exposure to COCs in
all media at the site is found in Table 8.
Surface Soils, Surface Water and Sediments
As shown in Table 8, all exposure pathways involving ingestion
of, or dermal contact with surface soils, sediments and surface
water yield hazard indices less than 1.0. This indicates that
adverse non-carcinogenic effects are not likely to occur through
these exposure pathways.

                                11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Ground Water
Under future land-use conditions, the non-carcinogenic risk due
to exposure to unfiltered ground water at the site yielded an HI
of 5. This risk is largely due to the presence of arsenic in the
site ground water. As previously discussed, EPA believes that
due to the turbidity and high percentage of solids in the
unfiltered ground water, the levels of arsenic detected may not
represent the actual condition of the ground water which would
likely be ingested by an individual. Site conditions would
likely require that the ground water be filtered prior to
consumption, and as exposure to filtered ground water yields an
HI of 1.0, adverse non-carcinogenic effects are not expected to
occur. In addition, as previously illustrated, exposure to site
ground water is unlikely to occur.
Subsurface Soils
Under future land-use conditions, the non-carcinogenic risk due
to exposure to subsurface soils by a future excavation worker
yielded an HI of 10, which is primarily due to the presence of
arsenic.
As the HI for exposure to subsurface soils is greater than 1.0,
there may be a concern for potential chronic health effects.
However, because the risk is solely due to arsenic, the factors
utilized to calculate the potential risk must be considered. For
example, the non-carcinogenic risk due to exposure to subsurface
soils is based upon the reasonable maximum exposure. This
results in the most conservative exposure case and may
overestimate the risk.
As previously stated, the central tendency, or average risk,
should be considered in the risk management decision. Central
tendency parameters considered for the Renora site include the
following: use of the average concentration of arsenic (71 ppm)
rather than the maximum concentration (721 ppm), which occurs in
only one sample; and an ingestion rate of 100 mg/day rather than
480 mg/day, which accounts for excavation being performed using
heavy equipment, thus limiting direct contact with the subsurface
soil. The use of the central tendency values in the exposure
scenario results in a decrease of the HI to 0.2, which indicates
that adverse non-carcinogenic effects are not likely to occur.
The calculated risk also depends a great deal on a chemical's
toxicity factor. The HI of 10 for arsenic is generated by
comparing the chronic daily intake (GDI) to arsenic's RfD (which
is a measure of arsenic's threshold for causing chronic adverse
health effects). Because the RfD is based on chronic health
effects, it is designed to be used for exposures greater than
seven years in duration. The exposure duration for the
excavation worker (65 days) is considered to be a sub-chronic
                               12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

exposure (2 weeks to 7 years). EPA has generated sub-chronic
RfDs for a number of compounds for use in calculating the risk of
short~term exposure. However, EPA has not derived a sub-chronic
RfD for arsenic, which would be the appropriate toxicity factor
to use in the excavation scenario. Consequently, applying a
chronic RfD, which is typically an order of magnitude greater
than the sub-chronic Rfd, to a sub-chronic exposure scenario may
result in an over-estimation of the potential risk; hence, if a
sub-chronic RfD was available for arsenic, it could potentially
reduce the HI up to one order of magnitude.
Based on EPA's evaluation of the reasonable maximum exposure and
the central tendency risk, EPA does not believe that exposure to
subsurface soils is likely to cause adverse non-carcinogenic
health effects. This belief is further supported by the use of a
conservative toxicity factor for arsenic. In addition, the
elevated arsenic concentrations are located eight to ten feet
below the surface, whereas the depth to the water table at the
site ranges from five to fifteen feet. Future excavation
activities would most likely be confined to areas above the water
table, where the highest concentrations of arsenic would not be
encountered.
Ecological Risk Assessment
A four-step process is utilized for assessing site-related
ecological risks for a reasonable maximum exposure scenario:
Problem Formulation - a qualitative evaluation of contaminant
release, migration, and fate; identification of contaminants of
concern, receptors, exposure pathways, and known ecological
effects of the contaminants; and selection of endpoints for
further study. Exposure Assessment—a quantitative evaluation of
contaminant release, migration, and fate; characterization of
exposure pathways and receptors; and measurement or estimation of
exposure point concentrations. Ecological Effects Assessment—
literature reviews, field studies, and toxicity tests, linking
contaminant concentrations to effects on ecological receptors.
Risk Characterization—measurement or estimation of current and
future adverse effects.
As shown in Table 9, the contaminants of concern identified in
the environmental risk assessment include: tetrachloroethane;
PAHs; dieldrin; heptachlor; arsenic; chromium; and lead. The
ecological risk assessment quantitatively evaluated the exposure
pathways through which ecological receptors could be exposed to
the contaminants of concern. The most probable exposure pathways
for species inhabiting the site include ingestion of contaminated
biota in the food chain and contact with or ingestion of contami-
nants present in surface water and sediments. Surface soils,
which are primarily contaminated with PAHs, also present a poten-
tial exposure medium. Receptor species, such as small mammals
inhabiting the site, could be directly exposed to PAHs in site
                               13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

surface soils through burrowing and grooming activities. Howev-
er, due PAHs' tendency to become strongly associated with organic
matter in the soil, it is unlikely that exposure to these
contaminants through food chain transfer or volatilization would
occur.
Potential risks to ecological receptors from contaminants present
in surface water and sediments were assessed by calculating the
ratio of the medium-specific average and maximum contaminant
concentrations to the criteria. Criteria utilized for surface
water and sediment risk calculations are the Federal Ambient
Water Quality Criteria (FAWQC) and National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) values, respectively. If the
resulting ratio or risk index is greater than 1.0, the biota may
be at risk of an adverse effect from that contaminant. A total
risk index was calculated for surface water and sediments by sum-
ming chemical-specific risk indices. It follows that a total
risk index greater than 1.0 indicates that exposure to all
contaminants of ecological concern within that medium may pose a
risk to organisms.
As shown in Table 10, the results of the ecological risk
assessment indicate that the average and maximum total acute risk
indices for surface water are 2.0 and 2.3, respectively. This
risk is driven by chromium, which is the only contaminant with a
risk index greater than 1.0. These results do not take into
account that the FAWQC used in the comparison were developed for
hexavalent chromium, which is considerably more toxic than
trivalent chromium.
As shown in Table 11, the average and maximum total risk indices
for sediments are 19 and 33, respectively. This risk is driven
by pesticides. The elevated levels of these pesticides may have
adverse impacts on sensitive benthic organisms inhabiting Mill
Brook; however, these pesticides are not site-related. In
addition, average and maximum concentrations of PAHs and lead
detected are slightly above levels reported to adversely impact
sensitive benthic organisms. However, in January 1993, EPA
conducted a bioassessment of Mill Brook. The results of this
assessment indicated that although the site was determined to
have a moderate impact on water quality, no adverse effects in
the macroinvertebrate community were observed between upstream
and downstream locations.
Field visits have indicated that the Renora site and adjacent
portion of Mill Brook provide a habitat for a variety of species
including birds, reptiles and small mammals. Due to the shallow
depth of the brook during low flow periods, it is unlikely that
fish would permanently inhabit that portion of the brook adjacent
to the Renora site. However, fish may migrate upstream and
utilize this portion of the stream as a spawning area. According
to the Fish and Wildlife Services, no records presently exist for

                               14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

rare species or natural communities at the site.
Uncertainties
The procedures and inputs used to assess risks in this
evaluation, as in all such assessments, are subject to a wide
variety of uncertainties.  In general, the main sources of
uncertainty include:
     •    environmental chemistry sampling and analysis
     •    environmental parameter measurement
     •    fate and transport modeling
     •    exposure parameter estimation
     •    toxicological data.
Uncertainty in environmental sampling at the site arises in part
from the limited number of samples collected during the Phase II
FS field investigation. In addition, environmental chemistry-
analysis error may stem from errors inherent in the analytical
methods and characteristics of the matrix being sampled. Thus,
the amount of sampling data rejected during data qualification
may also serve to increase uncertainty by reducing the amount of
data available to characterize the site.
Uncertainties in the exposure assessment are related to estimates
of how often an individual would actually come in contact with
the chemicals of concern, the period of time over which such
exposure would occur, and in the models used to estimate the
concentrations of the chemicals of concern at the point of
exposure. For example, the ground water ingestion scenario is
likely to overestimate risk because it assumes that private wells
installed on or in the immediate vicinity of the site would
generate a sufficient potable water supply and that maximum
concentrations detected in the on-site monitoring wells would be
found in private wells. In addition, the excavation worker
scenario for exposure to subsurface soils may also overestimate
risk because it conservatively assumes 65 days of exposure to the
maximum detected concentration of arsenic, which is found in only
one location, and ingestion of 480 mg/day of soil at this
location. These conservative assumptions may result in an
overestimation of site risk.
Uncertainties in toxicological data occur in extrapolating both
from animals to humans and from high to low doses of exposure, as
well as from the difficulties in assessing the toxicity of a
mixture of chemicals. These uncertainties are addressed by
making conservative assumptions concerning risk and exposure
parameters throughout the assessment. As a result, the Risk

                                15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Assessment provides upper-bound estimates of the risks to
populations near the site, and is highly unlikely to
underestimate actual risks related to the site.
More specific information concerning public health risks,
including a quantitative evaluation of the degree of risk
associated with various exposure pathways, is presented in the
Risk Assessment report.
RISK ASSESSMENT SUMMARY
The risks associated with all media sampled at the site were
quantitatively assessed for human health and the ecological
environment. Results for the human health risk assessment
indicated that Mill Brook surface water and sediments do not pose
an unacceptable risk of carcinogenic or non-carcinogenic health
effects and, therefore, do not require remediation. In addition,
because ground water use at the site was determined to be highly
unlikely, it was eliminated as a pathway of exposure and does not
require remediation. The subsurface soils do not pose a risk of
carcinogenic or non-carcinogenic health effects above EPA's
acceptable risk levels and do not require remediation.
The carcinogenic risk posed by potential exposure to the surface
soils at the site was determined to be at the high end of EPA's
acceptable risk range. Due to the site's proximity to
residential development and the likelihood that it will be
developed for use in the future, exposure to contaminated surface
soil at the site would pose a potential health threat to human
health. Therefore, the surface soils at the site are considered
the only pathway of concern and will require remediation.
The ecological risk assessment determined that the levels of
contaminants detected in the surface water and sediments may
adversely impact sensitive benthic organisms. Therefore,
remediation of the surface soils will also benefit the
environment by limiting surface runoff of contaminants to Mill
Brook.
Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from this
site, if not addressed by implementing the response action
selected in the amended ROD, may present an imminent and
substantial endangerment to the public health, welfare, or the
environment.
REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVE
Remedial action objectives are specific goals to protect human
health and the environment; they specify the contaminant(s) of
concern, the exposure route(s), receptor(s), and acceptable
contaminant level(s) for each exposure route. These objectives
are based on available information and standards such as
                               16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements (ARARs) and
      risk-based levels established in the risk assessment.
      The following remedial action objectives were established for the
      ROD Amendment:
           • To prevent direct contact with and ingestion of
             contaminated surface soils; and
           • To prevent runoff of contaminants to Mill Brook.
      DESCRIPTION OF ALTERNATIVES
      CERCLA §121(b)(l), 42 U.S.C. §9621(b)(l), mandates that a
      remedial action must be protective of human health and the
      environment, cost effective, and utilize permanent solutions and
      alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery
      technologies to the maximum extent practicable. Section
      12l(b)(l) also establishes a preference for remedial actions
      which employ, as a principal element, treatment to permanently
      and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity or mobility of the
      hazardous substances, pollutants and contaminants at a site.
      CERCLA §121(d), 42 U.S.C. §9621(d), further specifies that a
      remedial action must attain a level or standard of control of the
      hazardous substances, pollutants and contaminants, which at least
      attains ARARs under federal and state laws, unless a waiver can
      be justified pursuant to CERCLA §121(d)(4), 42 U.S.C.
      §9621(d)(4).
(ft   This amended ROD evaluates in detail, four remedial alternatives
      for addressing the contamination associated with the Renora site.
      The time to implement each remedial alternative reflects the time
      required to design and construct or implement the remedy, but may
      not include the time to negotiate with the responsible parties,
      or procure contracts for design and construction. The costs
      presented for each alternative include capital costs and
      operation and maintenance (O&M) costs over a thirty year period.
      For comparison purposes, the estimated present worth was
      calculated over a thirty year period using a discount rate of 5%
      to determine costs in 1994 dollars. In addition, a contingency
      of 20% of the total capital and O&M costs is included in the
      estimated present worth.
      The remedial alternatives are:
      Alternative 1: No Further Action
      Estimated Capital Cost: $ 2,500
      Estimated O&M Cost: $ 55,640
      Estimated Present Worth Cost: $ 69,768
      Estimated Implementation Period: 0 years

                                       17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The Superfund program requires that the no-action alternative be
considered as a baseline for comparison to other alternatives.
Under this alternative, EPA would take no further action to
prevent exposure to contaminated surface soils at the site.
Capital costs shown above reflect the funds required to properly
close the existing monitoring wells. Long-term monitoring,
including an annual site inspection, would be conducted to deter-
mine if site conditions have deteriorated.
Because this alternative would result in contaminants remaining
on the site, CERCLA requires that the site be reviewed every five
years. If justified by the review, remedial actions may be
implemented to remove or treat the wastes.
Details of the costs associated with Alternative 1 are shown in
Table 12.
Alternative 2: Asphalt Cap/Access Restrictions
Estimated Capital Cost: $ 189,210
Estimated 0 & M Cost:   $ 198,850
Estimated Present Worth Cost: $ 465,672
Estimated Implementation Period: 1 year
Alternative 2 provides for the placement of an asphalt cap over
the site. The conceptual design for the asphalt cap includes
storm water management controls, and the construction of an
asphalt cap over the entire site. O&M includes annual site
inspections, repairs to the perimeter fence and cap as necessary,
and two cap resurfacings after fifteen and thirty years. Details
of the costs associated with Alternative 2 are shown in Table 13.
Alternative 2 provides for restricted access to the site through
the long-term maintenance of the existing perimeter fence.
Because Alternative 2 would result in contaminants remaining on
the site, CERCLA requires that the site be reviewed every five
years. If justified by the review, remedial actions may be
implemented to remove or treat the wastes.
A summary of the Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate
Requirements associated with Alternative 2 is provided in the
"Summary of Comparative Analysis of Alternatives", below.
Alternative 3:   PML Clay Cap/Access Restriction
Estimated Capital Cost: $ 456,741
Estimated O&M Cost:     $ 138,638
Estimated Present Worth Cost: $ 714,455
Estimated Implementation Period: 1 year
Alternative 3 provides for placement of a flexible membrane liner
                                18

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

(FML)/clay cap over the entire site. The conceptual design for
the FML/clay cap includes provision of storm water management
controls, the placement of a FML/clay cap over the site, and
placement of two feet of vegetative cover over the site as the
final layer. O&M includes annual site inspections, repairs to
the perimeter fence and cap as necessary, and maintenance of the
vegetative cover over thirty years. Details of the costs
associated with Alternative 3 are shown in Table 14.
As in Alternative 2, this alternative provides for restricted
access to the site through long-term maintenance of the existing
perimeter fence.
Because Alternative 3 would result in contaminants remaining on
the site, CERCLA requires that the site be reviewed every five
years. If justified by the review, remedial actions may be
implemented to remove or treat the wastes.
A summary of the ARARs associated with Alternative 2 is provided
in the "Summary of Comparative Analysis of Alternatives", below.

Alternative 4:   Excavation/Off-Site Disposal
Estimated Capital Cost: $ 2,344,050
Estimated O&M Cost:     $0
Estimated Present Worth Cost: $ 2,812,860
Estimated Implementation Period: 1.3 years

Alternative 4 includes excavation and off-site disposal of the
top two feet of contaminated surface soil (the pathway of
concern) and any debris that may be encountered. The volume of
soil to be excavated is estimated to be 3,900 cubic yards.
Following the excavation, the site would be backfilled with
certified clean fill. No post-excavation sampling would be
required as the entire pathway of concern would be eliminated.
This alternative does not require long-term maintenance of the
perimeter fence; however, the existing perimeter fence would
remain in place. As the contaminated surface soils of concern
will be removed and replaced with certified clean fill, there
will be no O&M costs associated with this alternative.

Because one surface soil sample exceeded the TCLP analysis for
lead and the soil contains elevated levels of semi-VOCs, the soil
may not be accepted for disposal at a non-hazardous disposal
facility. This determination will be made prior to the off-site
disposal of the contaminated surface soils; treatment will be
performed as necessary and may increase the cost of this
alternative. Concrete debris and scrap metal, if encountered in
the surface soils, may be transported to a recycling facility for
subsequent re-use. Details of the costs associated with
Alternative 4 are shown in Table 15.

                                19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

A five-year review of the remedial action may not be required
because this alternative will not result in hazardous substances
remaining on the site above health-based levels.
A summary of the ARARs associated with Alternative 2 is provided
in the "Summary of Comparative Analysis of Alternatives", below.
SUMMARY OF THE COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES
In selecting a remedy, EPA considered the factors set out in
CERCLA §121, 42 U.S.C. §9621, by conducting a detailed analysis
of the viable remedial alternatives pursuant to the NCP, 40 CFR
§300.430(e)(9) and OSWER Directive 9355.3-01. The detailed
analysis consisted of an assessment of the individual
alternatives against each of nine evaluation criteria and a
comparative analysis focusing upon the relative performance of
each alternative against those criteria.
The following "threshold" criteria must be satisfied by any
alternative in order to be eligible for selection:
1.   Overall protection of human health and the environment
     addresses whether or not a remedy provides adequate
     protection and describes how risks posed through each
     exposure pathway (based on a reasonable maximum exposure
     scenario) are eliminated, reduced, or controlled through
     treatment, engineering controls, or institutional controls.
2.   Compliance with ARARs addresses whether or not a remedy
     would meet all of the applicable (legally enforceable), or
     relevant and appropriate (requirements that pertain to
     situations sufficiently similar to those encountered at a
     Superfund site such that their use is well suited to the
     site) requirements of federal and state environmental
     statutes and requirements or provide grounds for invoking a
     waiver.
The following "primary balancing" criteria are used to make
comparisons and to identify the major trade-offs between
alternatives:
3.   Long-term effectiveness and permanence refers to the ability
     of a remedy to maintain reliable protection of human health
     and the environment over time, once cleanup goals have been
     met. It also addresses the magnitude and effectiveness of
     the measures that may be required to manage the risk posed
     by treatment residuals and/or untreated wastes.
4.   .Reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume via treatment
     refers to a remedial technology's expected ability to reduce
     the toxicity, mobility or volume of hazardous substances,
     pollutants or contaminants at the site.
                               20

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

5.   Short-term effectiveness addresses the period of time needed
     to achieve protection and any adverse impacts on human
     health and the environment that may be posed during the
     construction and implementation periods until cleanup goals
     are achieved.
6.   Implement ability refers to the technical and administrative
     feasibility of a remedy, including the availability of
     materials and services needed.
7.   Cost includes estimated capital and operation and
     maintenance costs, and the present-worth costs.
The following "modifying" criteria are considered fully after the
formal public comment period on the Proposed Plan is complete:
8.   State acceptance indicates whether, based on its review of
     the Phase II FS report and the Proposed Plan, the State
     supports, opposes, and/or has identified any reservations
     with the preferred alternative.
9.   Community acceptance refers to the public's general response
     to the alternatives described in the Proposed Plan and the
     Phase II FS report. Factors of community acceptance to be
     discussed include support, reservation, and opposition by
     the community.
A comparative analysis of the remedial alternatives based upon
the evaluation criteria noted above follows.
Threshold Criteria
Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment
As Alternative 1, No Further Action, does not include any action
to prevent direct contact with contaminated surface soils or run-
off into Mill Brook, it is not considered to be protective of
human health and the environment. Because no remedial activities
would be implemented under this alternative, the risks posed to
human health and the environment would be the same as the risks
identified in the baseline risk assessment.
Under Alternative 2, an asphalt cap would be placed over the site
to prevent direct contact with and ingestion of contaminated
surface soils and thus, would be protective of human health and
environment. The asphalt cap also would limit off-site migration
of contaminants that may occur through infiltration and storm
water runoff. The perimeter fence would restrict unauthorized
entry to the site.
As with Alternative 2, Alternative 3, which includes placement of
an FML/clay layer over the site, provides protection of human
                               21

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

health and the environment by preventing direct contact with and
ingestion of contaminated surface soils. The FML/clay cap would
also limit off-site migration of contaminants and the perimeter
fence would restrict unauthorized entry to the site.
Alternative 4 provides a greater degree of protection to human
health and the environment than Alternatives 2 and 3 because it
provides for the removal of the contaminated surface soils and
replacement with clean fill. By eliminating the pathway of
concern, Alternative 4 would address the risks found to be
unacceptable by EPA. In addition, the disposal facility utilized
under Alternative 4 would be properly permitted and operated with
adequate environmental protection measures, making this
alternative the only permanent remedy for the site.
Compliance with Applicable Relevant and Appropriate Requirements
ARARs are those federal or state environmental and public health
regulations that apply to remedial activities at the site. The
technologies and methods proposed for use under the surface soil
remedial alternatives would be designed and implemented to
satisfy all corresponding ARARs, as described below. All ARARs
associated with remediation of the site are listed in Table 16.
Chemical-Specific ARARs
Chemical-specific ARARs are health- or environmentally-based
numerical values limiting the amount of a contaminant that may be
discharged to, or allowed to remain in the environmental media.
The remedial objective of the proposed alternatives is to address
contaminated surface soils at the site. Therefore, federal risk-
based soil standards were selected as the chemical-specific
cleanup standards for the site.
Alternative 1 is not expected to attain chemical-specific ARARs
in the surface soils as it does not involve active remediation.
Alternatives 2 and 3, which both involve placement of a surface
cap over the entire site, are subject to the same chemical-
specific ARARs. Both alternatives provide a physical barrier
that would protect human health and the environment by preventing
direct contact and ingestion of contaminants present in surface
soil. As such, Alternatives 2 and 3 would be expected to address
the federal chemical-specific cleanup standards as long as the
integrity of the surface caps is maintained.
Alternative 4 is expected to achieve the federal chemical-
specific cleanup standards for soil remediation as all surficial
contamination of concern will be removed and disposed of off
site.

                               22

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Action-Specific ARARs
Action-specific ARARs are either technology or activity based
limitations which apply to remedial actions.
Action-specific ARARs are not applicable to Alternative 1 because
it does not involve active remediation.
The action-specific ARARs associated with Alternatives 2 and 3
include the following: National Ambient Air Quality Standards,
40 CFR 50 for dust and air emission control during construction
activities; New Jersey Air Pollution Act N.J.A.C. &;27-l et seq.
for dust and air emission control during construction activities;
Occupational Safety and Health Act, 29 CFR Parts 1904, 1910 and
1926 to ensure the safety of workers during construction
activities; and RCRA, 40 CFR 264.310(a), which applies only to
Alternative 3, to ensure the cap satisfies performance standards.
Alternatives 2 and 3 are expected to achieve all ARARs listed
above through air monitoring during construction activities at
the site, providing workers with proper health and safety
training and appropriate safety equipment during construction
activities and by ensuring that the FML/clay cap satisfies RCRA
performance standards.
In addition to those action-specific ARARs associated with
Alternatives 2 and 3 listed above, the following ARARs would be
associated with Alternative 4 and the transport and off-site
disposal of hazardous waste: RCRA, 40 CFR Parts 261, 264 and 270
for the removal, transport and disposal of hazardous waste;
Department of Transportation, 40 CFR Parts 107 and 171-179 for
transport of hazardous waste; New Jersey Solid and Hazardous
Waste Management Regulations, N.J.S.A. 13:E-1; New Jersey Solid
Waste Management Act, N.J.A.C. 26-6.2; and New Jersey
Interdistrict and Intradistrict Solid Waste Flows, N.J.A.C.:26-
6.2. The New Jersey regulations listed apply to removal and off-
site disposal of hazardous waste.
Alternative 4 is expected to achieve associated ARARs through
proper handling and shipment of the contaminated surface soil to
an EPA-approved disposal facility.
In addition, because one sample exceeded the TCLP limit for lead,
it is possible that RCRA land disposal restriction requirements
would be applicable to Alternative 4 and the excavated soil would
have to meet treatment standards before being disposed of in a
hazardous waste landfill. This will be determined prior to the
off-site disposal of the excavated soil.
Location-Specific ARARs
Location-specific ARARs restrict activities or limit
                               23

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

concentrations of contaminants because the site is in a special
location such as a floodplain, wetland or historical area.
Location-specific ARARs are not applicable to Alternative 1
because it does not involve active remediation.
The location specific ARARs associated with Alternatives 2, 3 and
4 include the Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act, 16 U.S.C. 661
et sea.. and Executive Order 11988 (40 CFR 6, Appendix A),
Floodplain Management Act, as the site is located in the 500-year
floodplain.
Alternatives 2, 3 and 4 are expected to achieve the location-
specific ARARs listed above. Compliance with the federal
Floodplain Management Act will be achieved by ensuring that the
selected remedial action at the site will not affect the natural
and beneficial values served by the floodplain.
Primary Balancing Criteria
Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence
Alternative 1 is not considered to be effective over the long
term as it would not remove or contain contaminants in the
surface soils. Therefore, Alternative 1 would not prevent direct
contact with, or ingestion of contaminated surface soils. In
addition, contamination may continue to migrate off site through
infiltration and surface water runoff. As required by CERCLA, a
five-year review is required to evaluate site conditions. If
justified by the review, remedial actions may be required to
address the contaminated surface soils.
Alternative 2 is expected to eliminate exposure to contaminants
of concern over the long term, provided that the asphalt cap is
properly maintained. To ensure the long-term reliability of the
asphalt cap, it will require periodic maintenance, including
patching of cracks and resurfacing. Annual inspections would be
conducted to examine the condition of the cap and determine if
repairs are necessary.
The asphalt cap has a life expectancy of approximately 15 years,
at which time resurfacing would be required. The life expectancy
of the cap depends upon such factors as usage and weathering. If
warranted, the asphalt cap would be resurfaced prior to the 15-
year life expectancy. The existing perimeter fence would be
maintained to restrict access to the site. This would limit
contact with contaminated surface soil if it is exposed before
the cap can be replaced or repaired.
Because Alternative 2 would result in contaminants remaining on
the site, CERCLA requires that the site be reviewed every five
years. If justified by the review, remedial actions may be
                               24

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

implemented to remove or treat the wastes.
As with Alternative 2, the long-term effectiveness of Alternative
3 is expected to be effective in eliminating exposure to contami-
nants of concern over the long term, provided that the FML/clay
cap is properly maintained. To ensure the long-term reliability
of the FML/clay cap, it will require periodic maintenance,
including mowing and fertilization of the vegetative cover.
Annual inspections would be conducted to examine the condition of
the cap and determine if restoration of the vegetative cover is
necessary.
The FML/clay cap has a life expectancy of 30 or more years. The
existing perimeter fence would be maintained to restrict access
to the site and limit contact with contaminated surface soil if
it is exposed before the cap can be repaired.
As with Alternative 2, because Alternative 3 would result in
contaminants remaining on the site, CERCLA requires that the site
be reviewed every five years. If justified by the review,
remedial actions may be implemented to remove or treat the
wastes.
As Alternative 4 involves the complete removal of the contaminat-
ed surface soil, it is the most effective alternative over the
long term. Because there would be no possibility of risk due to
exposure to contaminated surface soil in the future, no mainte-
nance would be required; however, the perimeter fence would
remain in place.
Reduction of Toxicitv. Mobility, and Volume
Alternative 1 would not involve any containment, removal, or
treatment of contaminated surface soil. Therefore, this
alternative would not result in any reduction of toxicity,
mobility or volume. Contaminants would remain on the site and
continue to migrate off site via infiltration and storm water
runoff.
Reduction of the toxicity, mobility, and volume of the
contaminants in the surface soil is not applicable to
Alternatives 2, 3 and 4 because these alternatives do not include
treatment of the contaminated surface soil.
As previously discussed, the soil excavated under Alternative 4
may require treatment before it is disposed of in an off-site
landfill. The type of treatment utilized would be selected prior
to disposal. Such treatment may result in a reduction of the
toxicity and mobility of contamination.



                               25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Short-Term Effectiveness;
As there are no remedial activities being implemented under
Alternative 1, there would be no additional risks posed to human
health and/or the environment in the short term.
The time required to implement Alternatives 2 and 3 is
approximately 1 year. No additional risks to human health and
the environment are expected as a result of implementing these
alternatives. Under both alternatives, worker protection may be
required to prevent contact with contaminated surface soils
during on-site activities. Health and safety training of workers
would be required and workers would be provided with protective
equipment during construction and O&M activities.
The time required to implement Alternative 4 is approximately 16
months. Due to the large amounts of soil being handled during
soil excavation activities, potential risks to on-site workers
resulting from implementation of Alternative 4 are expected to be
slightly higher than for Alternatives 2 and 3. Worker protection
would be required to prevent direct contact with contaminated
surface soil during excavation activities. If necessary, dust
control measures would also be implemented during excavation
activities. In addition, due to the high volume of traffic
expected during soil excavation activities, measures would be
taken to ensure that appropriate traffic controls are
implemented. As with Alternatives 2 and 3, workers would be
trained in health and safety and protective equipment would be
provided during construction activities.
Implementability
There are no implementability issues concerned with Alternative 1
since no remedial action would be taken. Limited resources would
be required to conduct long-term monitoring and the required
five-year review.
There are no implentability concerns posed by Alternatives 2 and
3, as they utilize conventional construction practice and
equipment. Materials required for both the asphalt and FML/clay
caps are readily available. Of the two capping alternatives,
Alternative 2 would be more easily implemented than Alternative
3.
Alternative 4 may be more difficult to implement than
Alternatives 2 and 3 due to the large volume of material being
excavated and the associated handling and segregation
requirements. However, Alternative 4 would utilize conventional
construction practices and equipment that is readily available.



                               26

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Cost
The only capital cost associated with Alternative 1 is $2,500
required to conduct proper closure of the monitoring wells. The
total capital and O&M cost, which includes annual and five-year
inspections, is estimated to be $69,768 over a thirty-year
period.
The present worth cost for Alternative 2, which is the least
expensive alternative, is estimated to be $465,672 over a thirty
year period. The present worth cost for Alternative 3 is higher
than Alternative 2 and is estimated to be $714,455 over a thirty
year period. The total present worth cost for Alternative 4 is
estimated to be $2,812,860. Although Alternative 4 is the most
costly alternative, it provides the greatest protection of human
health and the environment and is the only permanent solution to
site contamination.
Modifying Criteria
State Acceptance
The State of New Jersey can not concur with the selected remedy
unless intstitutional controls are established.
Community Acceptance
EPA solicited comment from the community on the proposed remedial
alternatives for the surface soil contamination at the site. The
attached responsiveness summary addresses all verbal comments
received at the public meeting and written comments received
during the public comment period.
SELECTED REMEDY
After reviewing the alternatives and public comments, EPA and
NJDEP have determined that Alternative 4 is the appropriate
remedy for the site, because it best satisfies the requirements
of CERCLA §121, 42 U.S.C. §9621, and the NCP's nine evaluation
criteria for remedial alternatives, 40 CFR §300.430(e)(9).
The major components of the modified remedy are as follows:
       1.   Excavation and off-site disposal of the top two feet of
            contaminated surface soil and any debris at an EPA
            approved landfill.
       2.   Backfill of the site with certified clean fill.




                                 27

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

As previously noted, CERCLA §121(b)(l), 42 U.S.C. §9621(b)(l),
mandates that a remedial action must be protective of human
health and the environment, cost effective, and utilize permanent
solutions and alternative treatment technologies or resource
recovery technologies to the maximum extent practicable. Section
121(b)(l) also establishes a preference for remedial actions
which employ treatment to permanently and significantly reduce
the volume, toxicity, or mobility of the hazardous substances,
pollutants, or contaminants at a site. CERCLA §121(d), 42 U.S.C.
§9621(d), further specifies that a remedial action must attain a
degree of cleanup that satisfies ARARs under federal and state
laws, unless a waiver can be justified pursuant to CERCLA
§121(d)(4), 42 U.S.C. §9621(d)(4).
For the reasons discussed below, EPA has determined that the
selected remedy for the Renora site meets the requirements of
CERCLA §121, 42 U.S.C. §9621.
Protection of Human Health and the Environment
Of the four alternatives evaluated, the selected remedy for
contaminated surface soil provides the greatest protection of
human health and the environment by removing the contaminated
surface soils; the pathway of concern. Alternatives 2 and 3 may
experience breaches in the caps resulting in exposure to
contaminated surface soil. The selected remedy eliminates the
risks associated with possibility of future exposure through
removal of the pathway of concern.
Compliance with ARARs
The selected remedy will be designed to meet all chemical-
specific, action-specific, and location-specific ARARs discussed
under the "Summary of Comparative Analysis of Alternatives",
above.
Cost Effectiveness
The cost effectiveness of an alternative is determined by
weighing the cost against the alternative's ability to achieve
ARARs and remedial action objectives. The selected remedy is
cost effective as it has been determined to provide the greatest
overall effectiveness in proportion to its cost. Although
Alternatives 2 and 3 achieve ARARs and remedial action objectives
and are less costly than the selected remedy, neither alternative
completely eliminates the potential for exposure to contaminated
surface soil. Furthermore, there are no O&M costs associated
with the selected remedy, as opposed to Alternatives 2 and 3
which would require lifetime maintenance.

                               28

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment
Technologies to the Maximum Extent Practicable
The selected remedy utilizes permanent solutions and treatment
technologies to the maximum extent practicable and provides the
best balance of trade-offs with respect to the nine evaluation
criteria previously discussed. Of the three action alternatives
considered to address the contaminated surface soils at the site,
the selected remedy is the only permanent remedy since the
contaminated surface soil will be completely removed and disposed
of off site. In addition, the complete removal of the
contaminated surface soils will provide a greater degree of
flexibility for future development of the site. Furthermore,
unlike Alternatives 2 and 3, the selected remedy does not rely
upon long-term maintenance to be protective of human health and
the environment.
Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element
As previously described under the "Site History and Enforcement
Activities", bioremediation and solidification/stabilization
treatability studies were conducted on the PAH-contaminated
soils; however, neither treatment technology was successful in,
treating the PAH-contamination.  In addition, as other treatment
technologies available for the Renora site would not afford a
greater overall benefit, EPA's selected surface soil remedy does
not presently provide for treatment of contaminated surface
soils.
DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES
The Proposed Plan for the Renora site was released for public
comment on July 20, 1994. The Proposed Plan identified
Alternative 4 as the preferred remedy for the site. EPA has
reviewed all written and verbal comments submitted during the
public comment period. Upon review of these comments, EPA has
determined that no significant changes to the remedy, as it was
originally defined in the Proposed Plan, were necessary.




                               29

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX I

 FIGURES

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

BCM Project No. 00-4375-10                Figure 1
                              i      Site Location
                1500 FT      NORTH

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       NEW JERSEY TURNPIKE




                               • SlUOr AREA BOUNDARY (FENCE   l«f|

                          -—     CltMEHIIPnoPEHIY'ilNE




BCMPio|«cl Ho 00 <1H 10

                                                                     FIGURE 2 Property Layout

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                                                         RwienSte   >




                                                                                                       TEST PIT        T TESTaORMQ

                                                                                                       Borac        ™™»WBI TABLE

                          Black and Drown MlwMddad        p^i^ R.O u^ m „«) r<v>|
                          organic lUts
                          Black arftne dl mnd i«»t        f "•' 'I 0

                                                    REhORASTE
                                                  (O«m«no Propwty)

        m



                                                                                                                         -i.W WAT°ER TABLE




                                                                                                                                           STA1.E
                                                                                                                                   0                IB

                  NOTE. D«aOtt*r»d tram BCME«*»mlncj1=ir>!f
                                !«, 19*7 Bid UpOi»d •* TMI Banng Oma tan BCW Engraam / Ripon ol 3vnc<kig
                              r R«m Sd» RxMCiuion / JUM 1892.



    •       \




        • *^*xm>??.

A   IO<.TISTBO*MILOCATaa
    «O8.TtST»OIWC»a«CTC
    LOC*TO«»TOlOe»T»0«.5
    «I«UCMTf»»CWEU.lCCATlCMS   .,




                                                           :        ...         . .11   !       •S^—.— -.         •••!         •
                                    0              \
                                                           ^           .'"A ': ' *»»**«•*»»r cvcMCT                \     A*            *
                                                               "          "•'




                                                                                                                   FIGURE 3 Site Stratigraphy

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                      IICN 4trc*co oumma
                                                         CDI10N aim    DtVfLOfUfHT         V




 A     SOIt TEST BORING LOCATIONS
   \   SOIL TEST BOHINQ INSPECTION
»-     LOCATIONS TO LOCATE OH. SEEP * \
       NEWMONITOHINQ WELL LOCATIONS
       MONITORING WELL (EXISTING)

 O PREVIOUS SOIL SAMPLING LOCATIONS
  | STREAM SEDIMENT SAMPLING
    LOCATIONS
 ® TEST PIT LOCATION




                 .            ,....u
  I >ii->i w »<ir n ^ u Sn5!. ii ilS.TIIII^.
  •». I ••IIHI IM i~, !.., m, iiiil • • ^*"
  itlili I. <l: lii.m. ... ' ™" "M'.ll ».




                             BCM Engineers Inc.     \\
                       BCM Project No. 00-4376-09                                              Soil Sample/ Monitoring
                                                                                                    Well Location Map

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  4 j^-   hdlcilni location ol poleiilM dthiiVig v/llH w«l   FIGURE 5   Locallon of Potential Drinking Water Wells
SOOOFI   NUI1IH

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX II
  TABLES

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                          TABLE 1                                                  pagel
                                                      firm n**t* Sampto Andytiod
                                                                                  Mrf^M
                                                                                  •On, ^^JM^I^M
                                                                                        BMOn, ^^^^   ««y
                                                                                                     M
                                                                                                fMV «H

                                       SamptoD:                                                             fWW               RWO-AD
                     Enstvco u&bocBtofy Svnpto NO. i C20974-OQQ6                  3208744006             020874-0005         020874<D05
                                   SfunpBnQ Octal t       4/1/az                    4/1/92                 4/1/82
                                                        UnfutMo
votcw UTQVWC uornpounof rJQ/1/
                                                               &m                                            AA
     cnMOvnvw                                                  NO
                                                                                      AfM
                                                                                      NT                     29                 •vfT
                                                                                                                                NT
     2-buttnom                                                 NO                     NT                      2                 NT
     totum                                                     NO                     NT                     NO                 NT
50rTM-VOlCBtt UQWMCB lampOUItUI (UQ/IJ
                                                               §>m
                                                               NO                     kfr
                                                                                      NT                     un
                                                                                                             NO                 kfT
                                                                                                                                NT

     „****«.                                                   NO                     NT                    ND                  NT
                                                               ur\
                                                               ND                     kfT
                                                                                      NT                     km
                                                                                                             NO                 kfT
                                                                                                                                NT
     2^ni<^iipWh«lww
                                                               NO                     NT                       2       J        NT
     tfbonzofunn                                               ND                     NT                    NO                  NT
     ftuorww                                                   NO                     NT                     1          J       NT
     — i.     -                                                km           lit       __                    k_         111      fen*
                                                               NO           UJ        NT                    NO         UJ        Nl

     vttttttOKm                                                NO                     NT                    ND                  NT
     CBrtMZOto                                                 NO                     NT                   .NO                  NT
      _       ^^                           """                        *     i
     flUWtn4M                                                   2           J        "fen*
                                                                                      NT
                                                                                                            fc-t^S,
                                                                                                            NO                  fen*
                                                                                                                                Nl

     pymw                                                       2           J         NT                    NO                  NT
     Di>(2-«lhyln«xy<)pMhal<t»                                 NO                     NT                    NO                  NT
ToW Poiymmiiie-Hydrocan^ons pAHt] (ug/I)                        4                     xb/."                    3                NO- "



     Aiwric                                                48.1             J        1&5                               R                   R
     Cadmium                                                   NO                     ND                     11        J        ND
     Chromium                                                  14.7         J         NO                    28.4       J        NO
     U»d                                                   3S£              J         ND                    IX         J        NO
     Zinc                                                      176          J        [183]                  831        J        31 £


Omrnum (+6) (ug/I)                                             NO                     NT                   0026                 NT


Horn:
    ND:NotOMcttd

                                                        •N
                                                        irfU
    UJ ; Compound Not DttBCtsdt Ou^fltrtstjoo Unvt cstmiatBd
      . LJwTuuvo \MtKmnuuoon
                                                    •rtrmnt
    R : D«2i Point Ftei*»ct»d Bv Quafitv Anurano* Dao
SOUTH : BCM EnginMfi he. (BCM ProjKt No. 00-O78-09)




                   NOTE: These tables have been revised in accordance with QA/QC review results, 7/30/92.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       TABLE 1 - CONTINUED                                               pages
                                                    vrounowun- aampw Miatyocv mouB
                                        ~-     Cn
                                                               aj n^MSogaiion, csflOn, iw>«jray
                                                                                      K^^   ^u^^..




                                         SamptolO:       RW-6              RW^AD            .    RW-7                RW-7^D
                       ERMCO Laboratory Samplt No. : 020974-0004         0209740004             020974-0002        020B74OOQ2
                                    Sampling Date:     4/1/82              4/1/82                 4/1/82              V1/92
                                        Comments :
Voiatfe Organic Compounds (ug/1)
       GnlOfOdnVW                                         NO                 NT                      NO       UJ      NT
      2-butanorw                                          NO                 NT                      NO               NT
      tokMn*                                              NO                 NT                      NO               NT
S*mi-Voia43> Organici Compounds (ug^)
      4-rrMtnyipMnot
       f fn arfii rfnhanrd
                                                           2        J        NT                      NO               NT
       naphttialsns                                       NO                 NT                       3       J       NT
      2-msthylnapnthalsm                                ' NO                 NT                       6 '     J       NT
      aoanaprtthtn*                                       NO                 NT                      3D               NT
      dibsflzoturan                                       NO                 NT                      11               NT
      fluoraiM                                            NO                 NT                      16               NT
      —pnsnaiiuusiM
        *- — ii                                           NO       UJ        NT                      10               NT
     _- |»t ii —.^llm
                                                          NO                 NT                      3        J       NT
      carbazoto                                           NO                 NT                       1       J       NT
      Tiuorardhttnc                                       NO                 NT                      4        J       NT
      pyran*                                              NO                 NT                      2        J       NT
      bi«(2-«thyth«xyf)phthalatB                          NO                 NT                      3                NT
Total Pofyaromatic Hydrocarbons [PAHs] (ug/I)             2                  NO                      45               NO


"""^JSl                                                            R                    R            92£      J       82L2
    Gftdrtuutn                                           NO                  NO                      NO                NO
    CnrofTWjfn                                          1&2        J        NO                       NO                NO
    Ls«d                                                4Z5        J        NO                                R        NO
   Zinc                                                  90        J        363                      45J      J      [14.7]

Chromium (+6) (ug/I)                                   0411                  NT                      NO               NT

Notts:
     NO i
     NT:NotT*st*d
     [ ]: Concentration Ovtocttd B«hw««n OL and CRQL
     UJ: Compound Not DBttcad. Ouantittticin Limit Es«m«ttd
     J: LAtiiiiAtsd ConowiUAlion
     R: Dtta Point Raj«ettd By QuaRty Assuranot Ocpaftnwnt
Source : BCM Engram he. (BCM Proj^a No. (XM376-09)




               NOTE: These tables have been revised in accordance with QA/QC review results, 7/30/92.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    TABLE 1 .- CONTINUED                                     page 3
                                                 GroundwaiBr Sample Analytical Results
                                                xuaad RemecSa)

                                      Sample ID:      Kln^r ^             f^rf'f^f^m^^    Trip Blank    field Bank
                -   Emeco Laboratory Sample No. :   020974-0003          020974-0003     0209744007    020074-0001
                                  Sampung Dajta *     4/1/92                4/1/82         4/1/B2          4/1/82
                                     Comments i      Unfilteied            Rllered        UnfBtvfVQ       Unnnsrtcj

     cruuoeinane                                       ND           UJ        NT             ND            ND
     2-butanone                                        ND           J         NT             ND            ND
     toluene                                            1           J         NT             NO            ND
Ssmi-Volafito Organiea Compounds (ug/l)
       •metnyipnenoi                                    NO      .            NT              NT            ND
     naphthalene                                         4          J        NT              NT            ND
     2-rnetrrytnaphthalene                               7          J        NT              NT            NO
     aeenaphthene                                       20                   NT              NT            ND
     diDenzofuran                                       11                   NT              NT            ND
     fluorene                                           16                   NT              NT            ND
     plttfleUlffUIJM                                    11                   NT              NT            NO
      antnracene                                                             m
                                                                             fcfT

      carbajoM                                          1                    NT             NT             NO
      fluoranthene                                      4           J        NT             NT             NO
      pyrene                                            2           J        NT             NT             ND
      bi*(2-etnylhexyOprrtnalat»                       ND                    NT             NT             NO
Total PotyaromatJc Hydrocarbons [PAHs] (ug/l)          49                    ND             ND             ND

      ("8/1)  '
     Arsenic                              •            9&5          J       823             NT            ND
     Cadmium                                           NO                    NO             NT            ND
     Chromium                     •                    ND                   NO              NT            NO
     Lead                                                           R        ND             NT            4.9
     Zne                                              [134]         J        ND             NT

Chromium (+6) (ug/I)                                   NO                    NT             NT            NO

Notas:
     •: FMd Dupteato Sample
     ND:NotDMctad
     NT:NotT«stod •
     []: Coneamration D»t»ct»d DalianffX.andCRQL
     UJ: Compound Not P»(acted. Ouantitation Limit Estimated
     J: Estim«t»d Concentration
     R: Data Point Rejected By QuaEty Assurance Department
Source: BCM Engineers he. (BCM Project No. OOU376O9)




        NOTE: These tables have been revised in accordance with QA/QC review results, 7/30/92.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              TABLE 1 -CONTINUED                   page 4
                                              Greundwctor Sampto Araiytiai *****


                                 Sampto E) : FMd BUnk
                 EnMco Ubontory Swnpto No. : 020S74O001
                             SwnpBngtetn:      4/1/92

VolBfi* Organic Corr
     cMorectfttM                                   NT
     2-buttnon*                                    NT
      tOfaMftt                                     NT
                             ndt frjg/1)
                                                   NT
                                                   NT
                                                   NT
                                                   NT
                                                   NT
                                                   NT
                                                   NT
                                                   NT
                                                   NT
                                                   NT
      pyrww                                        NT
      bis (2^t                                     NT
Total Po*y«rom«tjc Hydrocavbonc [PAHs]             NT-


     ArMnic                                       NO
     Cadmwm                                       NO
                                                  NO
                                                  NO
     Znc                                          Pi]

Chromium (+6) (ug/1)                               NT

Notes i
     nD I
     NT:NotT«s»d
     I]: Concentration Detected 6«tw^n CXind CROC
Source : BCM Enqin*«f3 he. (6CM Project No. 0X376-09)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                       TABLE-2
                                                          Sea Baring and TaatPttAiaJyticBl
                                                                                 anon. imaui. iaja»a« JR»Y
                                       SarnplalD:        TB*1-2          TB*«/k             TB-B-1-1C        TB44-2                        T&446
                    Enaaco Laboratory Sam                                        m         020563-Qg•a     020563-0004

                                     SamperigOata:       3/11/32            3/11/92             3/11/92                      3/11/92       3/11/92
                                                                                                                                .*
                                        Con"i merits '         fi*4d          DuofiotB
VbiatOa Organic Compound* (ug/kg)
                                                           13          U      12          U        NT                          11      U     NT
     aotton*                                               ND                 33                   NT        .                 11      J    NT
                                                           ND                 ND                   NT                          NO           NT
     2-butanont                                            NO                  5         J         NT                          ND            NT
                                                           ND                 ND                   NT                          ND            NT
                                                           NO                 ND                   NT                          NO            NT
                                                           ND                 ND                   NT                          ND            NT
     wu Kfuorovtrwn*                                       ND                 ND                   NT                          ND            NT
     totucne                                               ND                 ND                   NT                          11      U     NT
        lyfbaroana                                         ND                 ND                   NT                          ND            NT
     xytana (total)                                        ND                  2          J        NT                           1      J     NT
                                             B)
     < imtriyipfwtoi                                       ND          UJ     ND         UJ        ND                          ND           1400     J
                                                           ND          UJ     NO         UJ        ND                          ND           1100     J
     naprrthaJana                                          ND                 ND         UJ        ND                          ND            ND      UJ
     2-matftylnapmhaJana                          :_       ND      - UJ             ". UJ          ND                 "TL •NO                ND      UJ
                                                          260          J      NO       UJ          ND                          190     J     ND      UJ
     aoanapmnana                                          280          J      NO       UJ          ND                          ND            ND      UJ
     dibaruofufan                                         250          J      ND       UJ          ND                          ND            ND      UJ
    fivorana                                              600          J      ND       UJ          ND                          ND            NO      UJ
     prtanantfuana                                        3400         J      970         J       3400            J           900      J     NO      UJ
     antfiraoana                                           840         J      280         J        880            J           240      J     ND      UJ
     carbazoia                                             ND          UJ     ND         UJ        ND                          ND            ND      UJ
     tUioranthana                                         4000         J     1600         J       5700            J           1400     J    600      J
     pyrana                                               4300         J     1800         J       6700                        1500     J    650      J
     butytbenzyfprrthaiatB                                1100         J      NO         UJ        ND                         ND             ND      UJ
     banzo (a)anthracana                                  1700         J      670         J       2400            J           MO       J     ND      UJ
     ehrysana                                             1700         J      690         J       3700            J           680      J    390      J
     bis(2-athylh«xyOphthaiata                            2100         UJ    2000        UJ        ND                         ND            ND       UJ
                                                           ND          UJ     ND         UJ        ND                          ND            ND      UJ
     banzo (b)fiuoranthana                                2300         J      980         J                                   1100     J    550       J
     banzo(k)fluorantrwna                                  920         J      400         J       1700            J           470      J     ND      UJ
     banzo(a)pyrana                                       1700         J      740         J       2900            J           820      J     ND      UJ
     ndano (1 i?,fl-r*'f)r,rjffini                         680         J      300         J       1300            J           440      J     ND      UJ
     fiifMftWa t\\mt*thtmr^vim                             NO          UJ     ND         UJ        ND                          NO            ND      UJ
                                                           360         J      ND         UJ        720            J           250      J     ND      UJ
                                             uo/ko}       rrftin             8410                 34200                       8440         2190
Matali {rng^cg)
                                                           4.9                73          J        721                          72 .       15-9
     Gadnuurn                                             PJ7]                NO                                              [0.79]        ND
                                                                       J                  J        708                         21.1         17£
     Laad                                                 506                47.9                  336                         47.5        59.6
     Zne                                                  110                74.1                  553                         86.4          105


                                                           540               670                   1900                        y*$Q          ott

     ND : Not Dataetad                                                                   UJ: Compound Not OvtKi ad. Ojartrtattoo Lirnrt Estimatad
     NT:NotTastad                                                                        U : Compound Not Detect
                                             ) IDLand CROC                                   Required For Quantttaton
                                                                                         1 • f»_*»—- _-a ^       . -.*—.--

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            TABLE 2 -..CONTINUED
                                                                                                                                                               page 2
                                                           Sofl Boring «nd Tatt PHAnaJyfeal Rraute
                                                                                                               •On* Wa»W«*m**f
                                       Sample ID : TWW-2                             TB-W-2RE                   TB43-6            T&W-8                 TB-4M-2
                     Bveco Laboratory Sample No.: CC052&OOoa                   K,Srtat*>ft-ftOrt^OC
                                                                                                 nb       tt                                if         t
                                                                                                                                                       120528-000 1
                                                     %iai««««ev' ^w^i^*                                   I                                                          c;
                                  Satmpfing DBIB i      3/10/92                      3/30/92                    3/10/92           3/10/92                  3/10/92
                                                                                 |             n
Voictiit Organic Compounds tug/kg)
     irwthytofw chioftdc                                    3              J                          R              2      J      NO                         2           J
     •Cat tOfM                                             NO                                         R             1X             23            U           120
     CaUwOfl QrtUrfiOP                                     NO                                         R             NO             NO                        NO
     2-butanon*                                            NO                                         R             15             NO                        23
      1,1,1-tticnloroethane                                NO                                         R             NO             NO                        NO
     beruene                                               NO                                         R             NO             NO                        NO
     2-haxanoiM                                            NO             UJ                          R             NO             NO                        NO
     •uauuuiueinene                                         «A
                                                            10
                                                                                                                                   wn
                                                                                                                                   nu                       Mft
                                                                                                                                                            NU

     toluene                                                 1             J                          R              2      J      NO                        2            J
       . ,.                                                wn
                                                           nL/            I LI
                                                                          UU                                        ton
                                                                                                                    vw             wn
                                                                                                                                   nu                       un
                                                                                                                                                            NU

    xytene (total)                                         NO             UJ                          R             NO             NO                        4            J
Semi ViMttne organic* uompuuimi fug/Rg)
                                                           NO             UJ            NT                          NO     UJ      NO            UJ         NO            UJ
    2,4-dimetnytpnenol                                     NO             UJ            NT                          NO     UJ      NO            UJ          82           J
    naphthalene                                            NO             UJ            NT                          NO     UJ      NO            UJ         490           J
    2-metnyinaphthaJene                                    NO             UJ            NT                          NO     UJ      NO            UJ         300           J
    acenaphthyiene                                         NO             UJ            NT                          NO     UJ      NO            UJ         140           J
              hrti                                        41ft
                                                          * IW        _               - MT
                                                                                        Pi 1                   •    NO
                                                                                                                    nw
                                                                                                                           & »•    .nu
                                                                                                                                    wn           IIJ
                                                                                                                                                 Uw         sin
                                                                                                                                                            *^^v          J
                                                                                                                                                                          w
      tfbenzofcran                                        300             -J          "NT                           NO     UJ—.     NO           UJ         330           J
     ftuorane                                             510              J           NT                           NO     UJ      NO            UJ         430           J
     phenanthrene                                        4500              J           NT                           660     J      NO            UJ        2500           J
     anthracene                                          1700              J           NT                           NO     UJ      NO            UJ         870           J
     carbazole                                            390              J           NT                           NO     UJ      NO            UJ         340           J
     fcjorantnene                                        7600              J           NT                          1000     J      NO            UJ        2900           J
     pyrene                                              5800              J           NT                           870     J      NO            UJ        2700           J
     bufytbertzytphtnaiata                                 NO             UJ           NT                           NO     UJ      NO            UJ          NO           UJ
     benzo (a) anthracene                                3300              J           NT                           420     J      NO            UJ         1500          J
     cnryserM                                            2900              J           NT                           440     J      NO            UJ         1300          J
      bb(2-«thytnexy()pnthaiata                            NO             UJ           NT                           NO     UJ      NO            UJ          NO           UJ
     di-rvccrytphthalate                                   NO             UJ           NT                           NO     UJ      NO            UJ          NO           UJ
      benzo (b)ftuoranthene                              5000              J           NT                           720     J      NO            UJ        2300           J
      benzo (k)fluorarnhene                                NO             UJ           NT                           NO     UJ      NO            UJ          NO           UJ
      benzo (a)pyrene                                    3700              J           NT                           460     J      NO            UJ         1600          J
      Meno (1 ,24-ad)pyrene                              1800              J           NT                           230     J      NO            UJ          810          J
      dfcenz(aji)anthracene                                NO             UJ           NT                           NO     UJ      NO            UJ          NO           UJ
      benz8(Q,ri,i>perytene                              1400              J           NT                           NO     UJ      NO            UJ         560           J
Total Poryaromatic Hydrocarbons [PAHs] (ug/kg)          39010                          NT                          4800             0                      19060


    Anenic                                                 3S              J            NT                          9.7    J       4.4           J          3£            J
    Cadmium                                                3J              J            NT                         [1.1]   J       1.3           J          1.2           J
                                                                           R            NT                                 R                     R                        R
    Chromium
    Lead                                                  210              J            NT                         97.3    J        SB                       95           J
    2nc                                                   2T7              J            NT                         63.1    J       45.7          J          91.4          J


Tots rvtreteum H^recsTDORS trng/kp)                     27000                           NT                         2100            NO                       4100


     NO : Not Dtt»o»d
     KT:NotT«st»d
     []: Conctntn£on D«tK*»d B«tw««n O. and
     U : Compound Not D»t»et»d, Concentration Iteouind for Gtianlilaiion
     UJ : Compound Not Dvtactrt. Quantitation Limit Estimated

    R : Data Point R*j*ct»cl By Quality Aauranca Oapant
Soutoi : BCM Engin^a he. (BCM Project No, 00-437&09)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           TABLE 2 -.CONTINUED
                                                                                                                          page 3
                                                 So3 BoiinQ ttnd TMt ftt Aiwybdl HMuto
                                          Reno« Focused Remedial hvesticstion. Edison. New Jaraey
                                    SamplelO: TBBM                T844-2           TB-JW-2RE        TB-ft.6-2
                                                                020528-000 5    1
                                                                                               i   020507-0004       020SOS0001
                                                                B2Q527-O01I3
                               Sampling Data : 3/10/92            3/10/92          '3/10/92          3/9/92            3/9/92
                                   Conun0n& *                                     Da iAUaction
Volatile Organic Compound* (ug/kg)
      metnyiem chloride                           2        J          2      J                   R     ND                NT
      acetone                                     11       U         42      U                   R     47                NT
      carbon ojaurrae                            ND                   3      J                   R     NO                NT
                                                 ND                   8      J                   R     ND                NT
                                                 ND                 NO                           R     NO               -NT
                                                   1       J        NO                           R     ND                NT
      2-hexanone                                 NO                 ND       UJ                  R     ND                NT
                                                                    ND                           R     NO                NT
      tobMTtt                                     2        J          3      J                   R     NO                NT
                                                 ND                   2      J                   R     ND                NT
                                                 ND                   8      J                   R     ND                NT

                                                   NO        UJ       ND      UJ     NT               ND                NT
    z,44inwmyipn0noi                               NO        UJ       ND      UJ     NT               ND                NT
                                                   230       J       900      J      NT              3000        J      NT
                                                   ND        UJ       ND      UJ     NT               ND                NT
    •OBfupmnyiene                                  640       J       2300      J     NT               ND                NT
                                                                             '.J     NT                          J      NT
                                                   350       J        870      J     NT               5900       J      NT
    fluorene                                       860       J       1700      J     NT               8400       J      NT
                                                  4400       J      15000      J     NT              34000              NT
                                                  1900       J       5100      J     NT              11000       J      NT
                                                   630       J       1100      J     NT               5500       J      NT
                                                  6900       J      25000      J     NT              29000              NT
    pyafa                                         6200       J      21000      J     NT              Yffff'             NT
    butyipafuyiphthalatu                            NO       UJ       ND      UJ     NT                ND               NT
                                                  3900       J      12000     J      NT              11000       J      NT
    chryaena                                      3400       J      11000     J      NT              11000       J      NT
    bia(2-ethylriexy<)phtrkaicte                    NO       UJ      7600     UJ     NT                ND               NT
                                                    NO       UJ       ND      UJ     NT                ND               NT
                                                   5500      J       17000    J      NT              15000       J      NT
                                                   1400      J        ND      UJ     NT               4300       J      NT
                                                  3900       J       14000    J      NT              11000       J      NT
                                                   1600      J       6500     J      NT               5100       J      NT
                                                    NO       UJ       ND      UJ     NT                ND               NT
                                                   1000       J      4600     J      NT               4400       J      NT
Total Poryaromatc Hydrocarbons [PAHs] (ug/kg)     43020             138500           NT              179600             NT


     Araanic                                        33        J       3.7     J      NT               1OO        J       NT
                                                   [1.1]      J               J      NT                          J       NT
     Chromium                                                 R               R      NT                          R       NT
                                                   103        J      165      J      NT               102        J       NT
     Laad
                                                   70.4       J      230      J      NT               127        J       NT
     Znc

                                                   9400              8000            NT               3400 '     J      810
Notes:
     ND: Not Detected
     NT:NotT«ted
     []: Concentration Detected Betw»«n IDL and CRQL
     U : Compound Not Detected, Concentration Required for Cwantttation
     UJ : Compound Not Dvteeted. Quantitation Limit Estimated
     J:
     R : Data Point Rejected By OuaDty Assuranot Oapaitmtnt
Sourot : BCM Enginawx Inc. (BCM Project No. 00-4376-09)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   TABLE 2 - CONTINUED
                                                                                                                                                          page 4
                                                            Sofl Boring and Te»t« Analytical Ftoeute
                                                   noneirm rocusoc3 FBmeoiai nvesaga&on. tflaon. new .•ney
                                             Sample ID:                          TB44-1O5           TB-B-7-2              TB-fl-7-8                 TB-B.7-8A,
                          Enseco Laboratory Sample No. :            3t>         020507-0006       020507-000                                                     I

                                                        i^osoo!                                                ?        pannnc-fjfXrt            ftJf>*Yy^_fvr\^r
                                        SampfingOatt:      3/9/92                 3/9/92            3/9/92                3/9/92                     3/9/92
                                                                                                                                                 Field Duolicste
Volatile Organic Compounds (ug/kg)
      rnetnyiene cnlonde                                    NT                      NT                NO                    NT                         NT
      acetone                                               NT                      NT                NO                    NT                         NT
                                                            NT                      NT                NO                    NT                         NT
     2-butanone                                             NT                      NT                NO                    NT                         NT
     1,1,HrictUoroethane                                    NT                      NT                8            J        NT                         NT
     benzene                                                NT                      NT               NO                     NT                         NT
     2-hexanooe                                             NT                      NT               NO            UJ       NT                         NT
                                                            MT
                                                            ni
                                                            NT                      NT                1            J        NT                         NT
                                                            NT                      NT               NO            UJ       NT                         NT
    xytene (total)                                          NT                      NT                2            J        NT                         NT
Sami-Volatiie Organic* Compounds <ug/kg)
    4 iiMthylptwftOi                                        NO                      NO               NO                     NO                         NO
    2,4vii i »?jti lytpn^noi                                NO                      NO               NO                     NO          \               NO
    naphthalene                                             140            J        150       J       86           J        NO                         NO
    2*ii M th yJnapntnswfw                                  230            J        130       J      NO                     NO                         NO
    acvrupfttfiywot                                         390            J        230       J      240           J        NO                         NO
    aoenapnthene                                            200            J        150       J      NO                     NO                         NO
     Oro^f i j 1 1 • I u f ai n                   ._        110            J       -NO               NO                     NO                         NO
    fuomne "-                                               320           '-J       240       J      83            j """- — NO                         NO
    pnenantnrene                                           2500                    1400               630          J        NO                         48            J
    anthracene                                              750            J        410       J      480           J        NO                         NO
    carbazoie                                               330            J        140       J        99          J        NO                         NO
    ftjowittmt                                             3900                   2300               1800                   63              J          94            J
    pyrene                                                 4700                   2500               2000          J        64              J          89            J
    butylbenzytpnthaiate                                    NO                      NO                NO                    NO                         NO
    benzo(a>anthracene                                     2000                    1000       J      1000                   NO                        45             J
    chrytene                                               2500                    1300              1200                   NO                        56             J
    b«s(2-etnyihexyf)phthaJat»                              860            J       830        J      750           U        400             U         290            J
    di-n-oetytoritnalatB                                     17            J        NO                NO                    NO                        NO
    .           . . _
    DtnZD(D/nUUI AJ 1U Ml M                                3500                    1600              1900                    55             J         82             J
      Dtnzo (V /fwGrf Antfwno                              1100            J       580        J      630           J        NO              UJ         NO            UJ
      b6nzo(a)pyr0rt6                                      9sre\                  1200              1300                    NO                         54            J
      Meno(1^3<d)pyrene                                     1100                   670        J      550           J        NO                         NO
      Gibers <aj))amhracene                                 380            J       230        J      200           J        NO                         NO
      btfizo(Q,n,j)i<p>}fyi0no                              970            J       600        J      470           J        NO                         NO
Total Poryaromatic Hydrocarbons [PAHs] (ug/kg)             27210                  14830             12668                   182                        468
Mrtab (mg/kg)
      Anenic                                               400             J       9&8        J      3J5           J       PJ3]             J        [2-1]           J
      Cadmium                                               4.3            J       3.1        J      U             J        1.4             J          1*            J
      Cnrorruum                                                            R                  R                    R                        R                        R
      Lead                                                 352             J       271        J      50.0                  1&2                        13.4
      Znc                                                  219             J       249        J      63£           J       49.2             J        39.4            J


Tot&j Potrowum                                              140                    150               1500                   140                        160
Notts:
    ND r Not DvtKtBO
    NT:NotT**t*d
    [ ] : Concentration Detected Betw»«n IDL and CRQL
    U : Compound Not Dtteeted, Concentration R»qu»n»d for Cuanttation
    UJ : Compound Not Oet»c»d, Ouartttation Urnit Estimated

     R : Data Point Rejected By Quality Assurance Department
Source : BCM Engineers he. (BCM Project No. 00-4376-OS)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    TABLE 2 — CONTINUED                                                   pages
                                                  8oO Boring md Tot Pit Anatyttall
                                              R!mora Focused RwnedU kMstiaalian. Ediaon. New Jeraey
                                       Sample ID : TB-W-2          TB4*6              TB-M-10         TB*»-2
                    Enaooo Laboratory Sample No. : 020S284007                       1MAMA^nn a      i
                                                                 (         IB)
                                                                                                              6     0205S34006RE
                                                   0205274011    (1206274012         0205274013
                                   Sampling Data : 3/10/92         3/10/92            3/10/82         3/11/82          3/11/92
                                      Comments                                                                       Re-extraction
Volatile Organic Compound* (ug/kg)
                                                         3     J       2        J          3     J        11     U                 R
      acetone                                           83     U       48       U        160     B       110                       R
      oarbon oSautMe                                    ND            ND                  ND               1     J                 R
     2*utanone                                           8     J       10       J         49              17                       R
                                                        ND
                                                        Uf\                              un               &m
                                                                                                          ND    • •i
                                                                      ND
                                                                       •LfPK
                                                                                         ND                     UJ
      benzene                                          ND             ND                 ND                2     J                 R
     2-hexanone                                        ND             ND                   2     J        ND    UJ                 R
     tetrachtoroethene                                 ND             ND                 ND              ND     UJ                 R
     toluene                                             2     J      ND                 ND               11    UJ                 R
         lyloenzene                                                   evm
                                                                      ND
     xytene (totaJ)                                    ND             ND                 ND               11     J                 R
Sami-Voiatae Organice Oompounda (ug/kg)
                                                       ND     UJ      ND       UJ        ND     UJ       ND              NT
                                                       km
                                                       NLJ                     1 LI
                                                                               Uw               in
                                                                                                UJ                       •JT
                                                                                                                         NT
      naphthalene                                      ND     UJ      130       J        ND     UJ       ND              NT
      2-methytnaphthaiene                              ND     UJ      180      J         ND     UJ       ND              NT
      eoonephtriylene                                  ND     UJ      120      J        290      J       ND              NT
      acenapnthene                                     ND     UJ      170      J         ND     UJ       ND              NT
     o*ioonzofuran                                     ND     UJ      110      J         ND     UJ       ND              NT
     ftuorene                                          640    J      240       J         ND     UJ       ND              NT
     phananthrane                                     2300     J    1000       J        2100     J     3100     J        NT
     •ntfuaoane                                        900     J      310       J        670     J       ND              NT
     oarbazo**                                         ND     UJ      83       J         ND     UJ       ND              NT
     fiuofanlherie                                    3/00     J     1200      J        3800     J      •torn   J        NT
     pyrene                                           3000     J     1100      J        3400     J      4100    J        NT
     butylbenrylphthalate                              ND     UJ      ND       UJ        ND     UJ       ND              NT
     benzo(a)anthraoene                                ND     UJ     870       J        1700     J      11600   J        NT
     cfuyteite                                        1700     J     610       J        2000     J      1900    J        NT
     bis(2-ethy(hexyl)phthalata                        ND     UJ     790       UJ      2400     UJ       ND              NT
     dHn-octylphthaiate                                ND     UJ      ND       UJ        ND     UJ       ND              NT
     be nzo (b )fl uorantrtene                        2200     J     890       J        2600     J • ND                  NT
     benzo(k)fluoranthene                              ND     UJ      ND       UJ        ND     UJ       ND     UJ       NT
     berizo(a)pyrene                                  1600    J      610       J        1600     J      1600    J        NT
      inoeno( * ^^^djpyrene                            670    J      260       J        720      J       ND              NT
      diberu(a,h)eiiituaoene                           ND     UJ      ND       UJ        ND     UJ       ND              NT
      benzo(g,hj}-peryien«                            420     J       140      J        480      J       ND              NT
Total Polyaromatic Hydrocarbons [PAH*] (ug/kg)       17030          7613               19330           15590             NT
Mataia (mg/kg)
      Araanie                                          TjO    J      124)      J         168    J        4.3             NT
      Cadmium                                         fl-IJ   J       U        J         2.1    J        ND              NT
      Chromium                                                R                R                R       16.4             NT
      Lead                                            86JB          1010       J         191    J       494              NT
     Zinc                                             46V3    J     1720       J         162    J       WJ               NT

lotai piuuMium n^rocaroons (ms/kfl)               1800             330              1000              4200              NT

    ND: Not Dataciad
    NT:NotTa*ttd
    [ ]: Concentration Datactod Batwaan DLand CRQL
    B: Compound Datectad in Assoeialad Blank
    U: Compound Not Datactad. Concentration Required for Ouantrtabon
    UJ: Compound Not Detected. Quantitation Umh Eatimated
    J: Ertimated Concentration
    R: Data Point Rejected By Quality Assurance Department
Source: BCM Engineer! he. (BCM Project No. 0X37649)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                              TABLE 2 -           CONTINUED
                                                                                                                                                            page 6
                                                                              SoB Boring and Twt« Analytical Rrauto
                                                                                                           on, tTllf *V rOPw«JVIwy
                                                        Sample ID : TB-U*€                    TP-1 1-1-5        RELD BLANK           TF8P BLANK       FELD BLANK
                                     Enaaco Laboratory Sampie No. * YfyffSB^~oon7            020674-0001                             UetiuoO /^D006   0205284010
                                                                                                                QTWjf-Oflfift                         020527-0014
                               SampOngDatt :                                 3/11/92          3/18/82              3/9/B2               3/S/92          3/10/92
                                   Oonvrwnts                                                                        «a/i                 00 /I            uo/1
Voiatito Organic Compounds (ug/kg)
       ri'Mtnyttn*) cnJonov                                                   fcn*               •**S                km                   km
                                                                              NT                 12                  Nu                   NO              ND
      •tovtooo                                                                NT                 39                  NO                   NO              NO        UJ
      cArtxxi <teu)fids                                                       NT                 NO                  NO                   NO              ND
      2-but>noM                                                               WT                 NO                  ND                   NO              ND
       1,1,1-trichtoro«th.m                                                   NT                 NO                  NO                   NO              NO
      DvfTZvfw
      hi m fi -t m 1 1 •
                                                                              NT                  1        JN        NO                   NO              ND
      2<^Mxsnofw                                                              NT                 NO                  ND                  NO               ND        UJ
      l>l/«uj itocuvthtrw                                                     NT
                                                                              •LfT               km
                                                                                                 NU                  km
                                                                                                                     NU                  km
                                                                                                                                         NU               km
                                                                                                                                                          ND
      tOhMTM                                                                  NT                 2          J        NO                  NO               NO
      AthyuMnzvns                                                             kfr
                                                                              NT                                     kin
                                                                                                                     NU                  un
                                                                                                                                         NU               kin
                                                                                                                                                          NU
      xyten* <totil)                                                          NT                 12                  NO                  NO               NO
Savnt-Voiatfo Organic* Compounds (ug/kg)
      4' mtthyiphtfiof                                                        ND                 ND                 ND          UJ       NT              ND         UJ
      2,4-dirmmytphenot                                                       NO                2500                ND          UJ       NT              ND         UJ
      fiftphtftttetw                                                          ND                370         J       NO          UJ       NT              ND         UJ
      2-rrwthytnaphthAten.>                                                  1400        J      340         J       ND          UJ       NT              ND         UJ
                         ,
      •otnspntnywn*                                                           980        J      1000        J       ND                   NT              ND         UJ
             ftOVfttpRffWfM                                                  3900        J      860         J       NO                   NT              ND         UJ
            diovnzofunn                                                      2300        J      640         J       ND                   NT              ND         UJ
            fli mr» M •
            •UJDrVnV                                              •   •-__
                                                                        —    4100      - J      1500        J       NO           :.-_   NT               ND         UJ
              ,_
               t
      pMnaniniwM                                                             12000              8800                ND                   NT              ND         UJ
      •VTttttBOBDt                                                           9500               2900                NO                   NT              ND         UJ
      cvbczote                                                                990        J     1000         J       ND                   NT              ND         UJ
      mJOCVlttWM                               •                             20000             11000                NO                   NT              ND         UJ
      pyrene                                                                 16000             10000                NO                   NT              ND         UJ
      pirtyfp^n^npnttuftt*                                                    NO                NO                  NO                   NT              ND         UJ
      ._         ...                                                                                                ND                   NT              ND         UJ
      Dtnzo ^ft)antnnoBrM                                                    7000        J      5600
      cn^v*w                                                                 7600        J      4700                NO                   NT              NO         UJ
      bis(2-«thylrMxy[)prithalata                                             NO                NO                  ND                   NT              ND         UJ
      cTt-n-octylpnthaiate                                                    NO                NO                  ND                   NT              ND         UJ
      berizo^)fiuu<ajil}iene                                                 8400               6500                ND                   NT              NO         UJ
      benzo (k)fiuoranthene                                                  3400        J      2200                NO                   NT              ND         UJ
      benzo (a)pyrene                                                        6600        J      5000                ND                   NT              ND         UJ
      indeno(1 ,2£«d)pyrene                                                  3500        J      1900                ND                   NT              ND         UJ
      dibenz(aji)anthraoene                                                   NO                290         J       ND                   NT              ND         UJ
      benzo (g,hj)-perylene                                                  2300        J      960         J       NO                   NT              ND         UJ
Total Poryaromatic Hydrocarbons [PAHs] (ug/kg)                               90070             64920                 0                   NT               0
Mataia (mg/kg)
      Arsenic                                                                U                   3J         J       ND                   NT               ND
      Cadmium                                                                NO                  NO        UJ       NO          UJ       NT               ND        UJ
      Chromium                                                               12£                184        J        NO                   NT              [«J
      Lead                                                                   34.7               36.4       J        NO                   NT               ND
      Znc                                                                    48.4               118        J        [6.1]                NT              t&2]

W   A _ f   ^ 1    1   l _   1   t    f    i l l


                                                   6100
                                                   i f    ^   1
                                                                     2700                                           ND                   NT              NO
Notts:
    NO : Not Detected
    NT: Not Tested
    [ ] : Concentration Detected Detv»een PL. and CRQL.
    U : Compound Not Detected, Concentration Required tor Cuantitation
    UJ : Compound Not Detected, Quantitation Limit Estimated
             1 • C_K-~.4~4 r>.,^           -, ,!,.!- ^.


     JN: Compound Presumptively Present Estimated Cono«ntr«lion
Source : BCM Engineers Inc. (BCM Project No. OMS7&O9)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              TABLE 2 .^.CONTINUED
                                                                                                                                    page?
                                                           Sofl Borfeg and Tnt« AnaJytad I
                                                     noneimraeusKi lemeciiw • ivuuyuim i« _ "™. . MW «n•wy
                                              SamptoD: TRIP BLANK        TRIP BLANK        FIELD BLANK; flELD BLANK          TRIP BLANK
                           Enaaco Laboratory Sampto No. :02052M011                                         0206744002        0206744003

                                        SampfingOata:    3/10/92           3/11/92           3/11/92        3/18/92           3/17/32

Volatte Organic Compounda (ufl/l)
     niathytam chtorida                                                R                 R   ' NO              2        J8                 R
     aeatona                                                           R                 R      NO     UJ     NO                    2     JB
     carbon oautfid*                                                   R                 R      NO             NO                          R
     2-bctancm                                                         R                 R      NO             NO       UJ                 R
                                                                       R                 R      NO             NO               -          R
    b*o*w                                                              R                 R      NO             NO                          R
    2-haxanom                                                          R                 R      NO     UJ     NO                           R
    •uacnmuauMiM                                                       R                 R     NO             NO                           R
    totoana                                                            R                 R      NO            NO                           R
        ••    ft                                                       R                 R      NO            NO                           R
                                                                       R                 R      NO            NO                           R

    4-metftytphanol                                         NT               NT                NO             NO                NT
     n t rf"«Bia* d»«*-          ^'
                                                            NT               NT                NO             NO                NT
    ntpftthiterw                                            NT               NT                NO             NO                NT
    T     ih  rf h il f
    a,,.4uiyinapmnaiena                                    •tJT
                                                            ni               MTI
                                                                             n                 wn
                                                                                               mv             un
                                                                                                              rtLJ              MTi
                                                                                                                                n
                                                            WT
                                                            nI               MT
                                                                             ni                Kin
                                                                                               *w             MT\
                                                                                                              ntj               MT
                                                                                                                                ni
    ^ftMhtti«w*                                             MT
                                                            PI i             MT
                                                                             m                 ND
                                                                                               nw             wn
                                                                                                              f^U               NT
    (fibannfean                                           NT                .NT                NO               NO              NT
    ftuomna -                                      V      NT       \         NT      -         NO        -^l. NO                NT
    f^^kf^atfltfUVfM                                      NT                 NT                NO               NO              NT
                                                          NT                 NT                NO               NO              NT
    stfbrn+r                                              NT                 NT                NO               NO              NT
    «•-- 'anflvKt*                                        NT                 NT                NO               NO              NT
                                                        • NT                 NT                NO               NO              NT
    pyrafM
    butytbatgylphthaiate                                  NT                 NT                NO               NO              NT
    .        ! p-i/gj^Bjp.jli-
    ^itajanmrawne                                           WT
                                                            ni i             NT
                                                                             ni                NO
                                                                                               rvw            . NO              NT
                                                            NT               NT                NO               NO              NT
    bis(2-«tfiylhmyl)phthalatt                              NT               NT                520              NO      UJ      NT
    tf-rv-octyiphthalatt                                    NT               NT                NO      UJ       NO      UJ      NT
           . ._                                                              NT                NO                               NT
                                                            NT
                                                            r% 1                               I*W              NO
      b«nzo(k)fiuoranttMna                                  NT               NT                NO               NO              NT
      banzo(a)pyrarw                                        NT               NT                NO               NO              NT
     M«no(1 £3<d)pymna                                      NT               NT                NO               NO              NT
     dibenz(aji)anttvaeane                                  NT               NT                NO               NO              NT
      benzo^J>j>p«ryl«ne                                    NT               NT                NO               NO              NT
Total Po)yarom«ic Hydrocarbons [PAHs] (ug/kg)               NT               NT                 0                0              NT


     Ammic                                                  NT               NT                 NO             NO               NT
     Cadmium                                                NT               NT                 NO             NO               NT
     Chfomnnn                                               NT               NT                 NO             NO               NT
     [jyj                                                   NT               NT                 NO             NO               NT
     Znc                                                    NT               NT               [10-7]         [10.7]             NT


                                                            NT               NT                NO              NO               NT
Note*:
     ND-.NatOatocted
     NT:NctT«stad
     (]! Conctntrxbon D                iDLsndCROL
     UJ: Compound Not D»t»ct»d. QuantitHion Limit Estimated
     J; EstinutDd Cooo*
     JB: Compound Detetxj in A»soci»»d BUnk. Cunofitrition
     R: Octa Point Rejected By OuaDty Assunnot Otptrtmcnt
Source : BCM Engine«f8 he. (BCM Protect No. 00-4376-09)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                 TABLE 3
                                                                                                                                           pagel
                                                  MB Brook Suite* Water Analytical
                                                                      ngiTinn, eai«arv,WB<rjeraey
                                                      SS-1-SW            SS-^SWWUD               SS-2-SW                      SS-2-SW^kD .
                     Eraaco Laboratory Sampto No. ::                                           0205764)004
                                    Samphng Date "     3/12/92             3/12/92               3/12/92                        3/12^2
                                                                                                                                Rtered
Volatile Organic Compound* (ug/l)
       melrrytene chloride                               ND                      NT                           ND                   NT
       acetone                                           NO         UJ           NT                           ND       UJ          NT
             ii
          «juoro*nw«                                     •vm
                                                         Nv                      UT
                                                                                 ni                           wn
                                                                                                              nu                   klT
                                                                                                                                   Nl
Semt-Vaiatde Organs Compounds (ug^)
             . .
     acenapntrieiM                                       ND                      NT                           NO                   NT
     dfcenzofuran                                        ND                      NT                           ND                   NT
     ftuorene                                            ND                      NT                           ND                   NT
     pnenariftrene                                       ND                      NT                           ND                   NT
     anthracene                                          ND                      NT                           ND                   NT
     carbazoto                                           ND                      NT                           ND                   NT
     ftuorantnene                                        ND                      NT                           ND                   NT
     pyrene                                              ND                      NT                           ND                   NT
     butylbeftzytphthaiate                               ND                      NT                           ND                   NT
     benzs(a)amhrao»rw                                   NO                      NT                           NO                   NT
     chrysene                                            ND                      NT                           NO                   NT
     bic(2-ethyDMxy()phlhalate                           52                      NT                           10        U          NT
                                                         ND ~-                   NT                           ND"=-                NT
     ben2o(V)flijofanthene                               NO                      NT                           ND       UJ          NT
     befuo<a)pyrene                                      NO                      NT                           NO                   NT
     lndeno(1,2J-cd)pyreoe                               ND                      NT                           NO                   NT
     rflh   (   hi   *fc                                 Km
                                                         nlf                     NT
                                                                                 ni                           Kin
                                                                                                              raw                  NT
      bwBoteJiJHMrytoiw                                  ND                      NT                           NO                   NT
Total PotymromaSc Hydrocarbons [PAHs] (ug/l)              0                      NT                            0                   NT
Pe*»de»/Herbieide*/PC8a (ug/l)
      alpna-BHC                                         0053                     NT                      CXO48          J          NT
      beta-BHC                                           ND                      NT                       ND                       NT
      delta-BHC                                        0.034        J            NT                      0032          JN          NT
      indane                                           0.014        J            NT                                     R          NT
     iMptSCiuOf                                          ND                      NT                           ND                   NT
     dieWrm                                              ND                      NT                           ND                   NT
     4.4--ODE                                            ND                      NT                           NO                   NT
     4.4--DDD                                            ND                      NT                           NO                   NT
     4.4--DOT                                            ND                      NT                           ND                   NT
     • nonn icstorw
      ru-trin 1 mtr n i
                                                         ND                      NT                           ND                   NT
     alpha chterdane                                     ND                      NT                           ND                   NT
     9smmai chlordvw                                     ND                      NT                           ND                   NT


"^^Ar^rl                                                 P-1]                   P.1]                        P-7]                   P-0]
    Chromium                                             1&5                    17T                         24.5                   209
                                                                                                                                                   J
    Cooper                                                ND                    ND                          P-5]                   P-S]
    Lead                                                  ND                    ND                          NO                     ND
    Znc                                                  69.9                   82.4                        6&2                    623
Norn:
     ND: Not Detected                                                    U .• ^il**jl*
                                                                              An»M» r^ut
                                                                                       l^rf i^vlJ
                                                                                            rwi                       <i listed is concentration
                                                                                                 inutuDOfi.
      [ ] : Anaiyte Concentration Detected QettunonIDLandCRQL            ** • *"***"1"™"' T-^1"11*^mutxwi

      R : Anaryticat Rrrautt Hefeeted by Cuafity Assurance Department    UJ : Compound Not Detected, Cwanttmtion Umtt Estimated


             NOTE: These tables have been revised in accordance with QA/QC review results, 7/30/92.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                           TABLE 3 --CONTINUED                           .                          page2

                                            MO Brook Surface Water AnalytfcaJ Rewta
                                    Renora Fooned Remedial InvMtfeitoi. Ed»«on, New Jar»ey
                                   SampieO: SS-2ArSW»           {                        SS*SW
                  Emeeo Uboratory Sampte No. :                    CBOS7&OQOS
                                                 3/T2/S2            3/12/82            ~ 3/12/92          3/12/82
                                  COfTlfTWfltS t Unftttsfsd
 Voialte Organic Compounds (ug/I)
                                                                        §,•»                 •.••%
                                                                       NT                    ND             NT
                                                   NO         UJ       NT                    NO      UJ     NT
                                                   fttn
                                                   NO                  NT                     1      J      NT
 S«ni-¥a<aiae Organici Compound* (ug/l)
       aoMUptthene                                 ND                  NT                    NO             NT
       dtenzafciran                                ND                  NT                    ND             NT
       ftiorane                                    NO                  NT                    ND             NT
       pcwiiantrirane                              •vm                 iifT                  fcJVS
                                                   NO                  NT                 ND                NT
                                                   ND                  NT                 ND                NT
     catbooto                                      ND                  NT                 ND               NT
     Buoraimene
      ^   MBM^rtvM^MCk^
                                                   ND                  NT                 ND               NT
     pyrene                                        ND                  NT                 ND               NT
     butylbenzylpritrtalati                        ND                  NT                 ND               NT
     bersoMafltriraoene                            ND                  NT                 ND               NT
     chry»ene                                      NO                  NT                 NO               NT
     bJs(2-ethyttMxy))phinalite                    10         U        NT                 10         U     NT
     beiuti$)iHjufajiliMiie                        ND                  NT                 ND               NT
                                                   un        111       ±fT
     Ml LU>QL)UUUia/ IBWIM                         NO        Uw        NT                 NO         UJ    NT
                                                   ND-                 NT                .NB—              NT
     Meno(1^3-od)pyrene                            ND "                NT                 ND               NT
     tffrfTTfr.h)-"tf"T'^»                         ND                  NT                 ND               NT
                                                   ND                  NT                 ND               NT
                                                                       UT
                                                                       NT


                                                  0.056                NT               O051               NT
     betfrBHC                                       ND                 NT                ND                NT
     dete^HC                                       0036                NT               O03          JN    NT
     feidane                                      0.013      JN        NT               04)11        JN    NT
   . hectaerilof                                    ND                 NT                ND                NT
     dMdrin                                        ND                  NT                ND                NT
     4.4--DOE                                       ND                 NT                ND                NT
     4,4X90                                         ND                 NT                ND                NT
     4.4-40T                                       ND                  NT                ND                NT
     •nonn utorift                                                      UT
                                                                       .Nl               ND
     •pnft cnlOfQeVM                               ND                  NT                NO                NT
     gamma ehkxdane                                ND                  NT                NO                NT


     M99fVC                                       P-7J                {12]               EW]              W
     CnfOfTflUfn                                  23JS                206                26.4             23.7
     Copper                                                   R                   R                  R                R
     LMd                                           ND                  ND                NO                ND
     Znc                                          68.1                71 JJ              722              77.0

Notes:
     NO:NotO>tMttd
     NT:NotTM»d
     []: Atatyt* Corxacmniun D»t»ct»d D«tx*«n BXand CROL
     U: AnaJytt Not DMet»d. Conowitration tot* b conowwtton mquirad for qumttafion.
     J i Es&nuttM Conotntntxsn
     UJ: Compound Not Detected, Ouwrtittfon limit Estimated
     JN: Anafyto Presumptively Prwant, Conoentration is Estimated
     R: AnaJyteml Resuit R0j«cted by Ouafity Aawranoe Departnwnt
Source: BCM Enginem Inc. (BCM Pioject No. 00-*37»08)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                            TABLE 3 - CONTINUED                pages
                                                                 ftC                        7
                                                        itonora r^cusad RBrfMdial ki^stiy            NawJ
                                                                     Trip Blank           FwidBtanfc
                                    ErtMoo Laboratory Samp** No. : 020576-0006
                                                                      3/12/92              3/12/82
                                                                      Urrftttvrod
Voiatib Organic Compounds (ug/l)
          tywfw cnionQc                                                        NO            NO
      acvtoot                                                                  NO       UJ   NO           UJ
          UUaCTuCNUtUWftt                                                      NO            NO
& ••' . .•» ^      . ^_ __ . _ . _»_ / _ •*
Satn-Votatw Uyaint* conipcmoi (UQ/V
     aoanapttthafw                                                             NT            NO
     dtenzoiuran                                                               NT            NO
     ftuomrw                                                                   NT            NO
     pn9nanttifao0                                                             NT            NO
          aRtfifaOSfW                                                          NT            NO
          carfcazoto                                                           NT            NO
          iluufantfMI w                                                        NT            NO
          pywne                                                                NT            NO
          butyibenzytpnthalate                                                 NT            NO
          b«nzo(a)antnrao*n«                                                   NT            NO
          cnryMfl*                                                             NT            NO
          bes(2-«hy!h«xyf)prrtnaJal«                                           NT             3           J
          h • 1 1 n nrt~in
          MnZO                i n It
                   \D fnUOC AfUT Wf M                                          NT            NO
          h      rt   Tfl              **                         •—   -       WT
                                                                               n t -_        tan
                                                                                             !<•&!/



         b«HO(a)pyr»ne                                                         NT            NO       .
         md«no(1 ^J-od)pyr*n«                                                  NT            NO
                            .
                                                                               MT
                                                                               ni            NT)
                                                                                             IW

         b*rtSoWH»fy«««l*                                                      NT            NO
^   .   I •> .              .....
Total Pwyarofnaoc Hyoroca/oons [rArtsj (uQ/i)
                                             ,    >•..   ..   *   .    •!
                                                                               NT             0
PMt)CiO^C^r40^blCiO^09/PC8B fUQj^l
         aiph«-BHC                                                             NT            NO           UJ
         beta-BHC                                                              NT            NO           UJ
         b«tt*-BHC                                                             NT            NO           UJ
         indane                                                                NT            NO           UJ
         ncptaehkx                                                             NT            NO           UJ
         dMdrin                                                                NT            NO           UJ
         4,4-ODE                                                               NT            NO           UJ
         4,4-^)00                                                              NT            NO           UJ
         4,4--ODT                                                              NT            NO           UJ
         •ftorin kvtoo0                                                        NT            NO           UJ
         alpha chlordan*                                                       NT            NO           UJ
         gamma ehJordane                                                       NT            NO           UJ


          Anvnic                                                               NT             NO
          Chromium                                                             NT             NO
          Copp*-                                                               NT             NO
          Lead                                                                 NT            NO
         Znc                                                                   NT            PL6]




     NT:NotTMtad
     []:AnaJyte Concentration DttKtBd B*twM>n O.and CROL
     U: Analytt Not D»t»ct»d. Coneermation EatBd i« uj.Mjeritn3»on nqwnd tec ouantitation.
     J: Estimated Cono
     UJ: Compound Not 0*l»et»d, Cuarrtitition Limit Eatimatad
SOUTOB : BCU Engm»»r» Inc. (BCM Project No.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                       TABLE 4
                                                                                                                                             pagel
                                                    Mil
                                                                                                         Lwey
                                                                            kMatf(^•non,
                                                                                  »^^!AA Bflisan,
                                                                                         ^-**— -^— pftpv
                                                                                                   ^^^^ «ji




                                           SamotelD:    i5S-1-SS)                    SS-1^EDOL-               SS-2-SED         S&3-SED
                        Enaaco Laboratory Sample No. : 0>                    •       fMfVk JK fWtt        C
                                                                                                                              UaOJD/KMJUUf
                                       SampOngData:      3/12/82                       3/12/92                3/12/82           3/12/92



     fTMtnywoft cnJonoft                                      2                  J        NT                    NO                 1         J
     ftflVlOCW                                                15                          NT                    NO                NO
    ^*"u                 ."                                                               fcJT
                                                                                          Nl                                      km
                                                                                                                                  NU


     aeenaprithene                                           NO                           NT                    100      J        NO
     dibenzofuran                                            NO                           NT                    69       J        NO
     ftuorene                                                48               J           NT                    180      J        NO
     phenantnfene                                            460                          NT                   1600                81         J
                                                             96               J           NT                    440               NO
     carbazoia                                               48               J           NT                    250      J        NO
     fluoramhtrte                                            660                          NT                   T700               140         J
     pyiene                                                  720                          NT                   1500               160         J
     butytbenzytpnitialata                                   NO                           NT                    NO                 70         J
     benzo(a)aRthracene                                      310              J           NT                   760                NO
     cnfyww                                                  340              J           NT                   720                 78        J
     bi»(2-etriylnexy<)phthalate                             430              U           NT                   470       U        440        U
     benzo(b)fluorarnhene                                    540                          NT                   920                120        J
     benzo(k)fluorantfiene                                   190              J           NT                   370       J         42        J
     befizo (a)pyrene                                        320              J           NT                   630                 70        J
     Weno(1A3<d)pyrw»e                                       158              J"          NT                   290       J         40        J
      n          r ii    ii                  *               MO
                                                             TfU                          MT
                                                                                          ni                                      wn
                                                                                                                                  nw
                                                             73               J           NT                    150      J        NO
                                                            QttCK                                              ACM
Total rotyaremaDC nyarecanens (rAncj                        waft                          MT
                                                                                          Nl                   VDvo

     aipha-BHC                                               NO                                      R          NO                NO
     bet»-8HC                                                                 R           NO                    NO                NO
     de«a-8HC                                                                 R                      R          1.4      JN       1.9        JN
     ftndane                                                 NO                                      R          NO                NO
     nectacntor                                                               R                      R         0.78      J        NO
     diaidhn                                                  14                                     R          6.1               5.4
     4,4'-OOE                                                 17                                     R           6       J        53         JN
     4.4--000                                                                 R           68          J         24                26
     4,4-^XJT ' "                                                             R           96                    36                28
                                                             A ft            JN
                                                                             9tn                                         R                   R
     enofiii Keione
                                                                              R           17                    7.9               &6
      gamma ehtordane                                                         R           18                    82                62
Metate (mg/Vg)
      Anenic                                                12J6                          NT                    43               3.4
      Chromium                                              30.4                          NT                    21.7             24^
      Copper '                                              37.6                          NT                   3O8               342
      Lead                                                   100                          NT                   39.7              7S£
     Zne                                                     110                          NT                    107               100

     *: Sample DBution

     NT:NotTetted
     [ 1 . Anatyte Coneentntion D*tAO»a Datanaen           •nH CROC
                                                          • W1D \^T^atl

                                                          J . JU JUlliMti
                                                          CUIlUBIIUaU                nrtd for QUWititiiiOfL
      1 • C««l«»««l«rd Pi .1 1 III ill   I


     UJ: Compound Not Detected, Oumntrtatioo Limit Estimated
     JN: Antlyte Pt»«umptiv»ty Present, Coowntntion Estimtted
     R: Analytical Rnutt Rejected by QuaJtty Assunno* Dapartment
Source : BCM Engineers he. (BCM Project No. 00-4376-09)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 TABLE 4 - CONTINUED
                                                                                                page 2
                                      Dannn rnnraarl Faimariiil hTfaatiQifoi. Mm. Maw

                                         Samp* ID : Ttip Blank           ReWannk
                      Enaaco Laboratory Sampia Mo. :                    bobso-0001
                                     Sampitng Diita: 3/12/B2              3/12/82
                                        Commoiits t  Uiifiliarad         Unfittafod
voiaata urparac cof iipufm (uQ/ij
       fnattvytaoa craonoa                               NO                  NO
      aoatooa                                            NO        UJ        NO        UJ
       •nracmoroatnana
sanv-VDiasia uryaract uompouui fUQ/lj
      acanapntnana                                       NT                  NO
       dtbanzofuran                                      NT-                 NO
      fluofana                                           NT                  NO
       phananthrana                                      NT                  NO
       antnracana                                        NT                  NO
      carbazole                                          NT                  NO
      Huoranthene                                        NT                  NO
       pyrana                                            NT                  NO
      Dutyibanzyipntnaiata                               NT                  NO
      batao(t)anthraoana                                 NT                  NO
      cnryaana                                           NT                  NO
      Dityc^tnytnaxyf/pntnaiaia'                         NT                   3         J
      .        __ . _                     - -
      D9HZO \D/fUlU( AJ 1 (1 Ml t0                       NT.                 NO
      DaYUOQc/nutwtttwna                                 NT                  NO
      uaruo(a)pyraria                                    NT                  NO
      •n0afvo ( i fZf3*cd )pyraoa                        NT                  NO
      dit)enz(a^i)aRthaoene                              NT                  NO
      penzo(fl^,I) pen^ene                               NT                  NO
Total PoJyuomalic Hydrocartwns (PAHs)                    NT                   0
PMtx3dM/HerbicidM/PC8« (ug/I)
      alpna-BHC                                          NT                  NO        UJ
      twta-BHC                                           NT                  NO        UJ
      detta-BHC                                          NT                  NO        UJ
      findane                                            NT                  NO        UJ
      heptachlor                                         NT                  NO        UJ
      dieJdnn                                            NT                  NO        UJ
      4,4'-OOE                                           NT                  NO        UJ
      4,4'-ODD                                           NT                  NO        UJ
      4,4-^xyr                                           NT                  NO        UJ
      anann icaiona                                      ni i
                                                         WT                  MD
                                                                             raw       LLJ
                                                                                       Uw

      alpha chiordana                                    NT                  NO        UJ
      gamma ehtordana                                    NT                  NO        UJ

      Araamc                                             NT                 NO
      CnfomRjfn                                          NT                 NO
      Copper -                                           NT                 NO
      Uad                                                NT                 NO
      Znc                                                NT                 Pi]

Notes:
     ND:NotDM»c!»d
     NT:NotT«t»d
     [ ]: Anatyta Concentration Detected BeNnwn Di. and CRQL
     U: Anaiyte Not Detected. Concentration fisted is cunuenHation required tor quantitation.
     J: Estimated Concentration
     UJ: Compound Not Detected, Quanttaton Limit EHimated
Source: BCM Engineers he. fBCM Project Me. 00-4376-09)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                      TABLE 5     RENORA SITE: CONTAMINANTS OF CONCERN
               Contaminant           Ground   Surface   Subsurface                     Surface
                of Concern           Water     Soils      Soils            Sediments    Water
     Volatile;
     Acetone                                    X           X                 X
     Benzene                              X     X           X
     2-Butanone (MEK)                     X     X           X
     Chloroethane (ethyl chloride)        X
     Ethylbenzene                               X                                                i
     2-Hexanone (MBK)                                       X
     Methylene chloride                         X           X                  X                 |
     Tetrachloroethyle ne                       X           X                 X                  i
     Toluene                                    X           X                                    I
     1,1,1 -Trichloroethane           .         X                    .••
                                                                                                 i
     Xylenes                                    X

<l   BNAs
     Acenaphthene                         X     X           X                 X
     Acenaphthylene                             X           X
     Anthracene                                 X           X                 X
     Benzo(a)anthracene                         X           X                 X
     Benzo(a)pyrene                             X           X                 X
     Benzo(b)fluoranthene                       X           X                 X
     Benzo(gJu)perylene                         X           X                 X
     Benzo(k)fluoranthene                       X           X                 X
     Benzvlbutylphthalate                       X           X
     Bis(2-ethvlhexyl)phthalate                             X
     Chrysene                                   X           X                 X
     Dibenzofuran                               X           X                 X
     Dibenz(a,h)anthracene                      X           X                 X
     2.4-Dimethylphenol                         X           X
     Di-n-octvl phthalate                                   X
     Fluoranthene -                       X     X           X                 X

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 TABLE 5 - CONTINUED

           Contaminant           Ground   Surface   Subsurface               Surface
            of Concern           Water     Soils       Soils     Sediments    Water
Fluorene                           X           X        X           X
Indeno( 1 ,2.3-cd)pvrene                       X        X           X
2-MethvInaphthalene                            X        X
4-Methvlphenol (p-cresol)          X                    X
Naphthalene                                    X        X
Phenanthrene                                   X        X           X
Pyrene                             X           X        X           X
Pesticides
alpha-BHC                                                                      X
beta-BHC                                                                       X
delta-BHC                                                                      X
                            "_                                      ™
2aroraa-BHC (Lindane)                     "-                                   X
alpha-Chlordanc                                                     X
garam a-Chlordane                                                   X
4.4'-DDD                                                            X
4.4'-DDE                                                            X
4.4'-DDT                                                            X
Dieldrin                                                            X
Endrin ketone                                                       X
Heptachlor                                                          X
Inorganics
Arsenic                            X           X        X           X           X
Cadmium                            X           X        X
Chromium                           X           X        X           X          X
Copper                                                              X          X
Lead                               X           X        X           X
Zinc                               X           X        X           X          X

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 TABLE
                         SUMMARY STATISTICS TOR"TllirRENORA SITU, BY CiilMICAL AND REDlt)M7AREA
                                                  ALL UNITS IN PPB


                                  Num.     Num .       Lowest      Iliyhe st Highest    Geom .       95 Pet.   Min         Max.
                                  Times   Samples    Detected     Detected Cone .       Mean      Upp. Conf. Detect.    Detect .
Class   NAME                    Detected Analyzed       Cone .       Cone . Locat .     Cone .         Limit Limit        Limit

VOCs    2-butanone                  1        3            2 .00       2. 00 RW-3          3.68        55.47    10. 00     10. OC
        benzene                     J.       3            2.00        2. 00 RW-3          3.68        55.47    10. 00     10. OC
         chloroethane               I        3           29.00       29. 00 RW-3          8.98    202046.88    10. 00     10. 0(
BNAs    4-methylphenol              1        3            2.00        2. 00 RW-6          3.68        55.47    10. 00     10. OC
        acenapJithene               1        3            2.00        2. 00 RW-3          3.68        55.47    10. 00     10. OC
         f luoranthene              .1.      3            2.00        2. 00 RW-2          3.68        55.47    10. 00     10. OC
         f luorene                  1        3            1.00        1. 00 RW-3          2.92     12960.77    10. 00     10. OC
        pyrene                      I        3            2.00        2. 00 RW-2          3.68        55.47    10. 00     10. OC
Inor.   Arsenic                     1        I           49.10       49. 10 RW-2         49.10        49.10      f           .
        Cadmium                     1        3           11.00       11. 00 RW-3          2.22 284118145.80     2. 00      2.0C
        Chromium                    3        3           14.70       28. 40 RW-3         18.51        71.22      f


        Chromium (+6)               2        3            0.01        0. 03 RW-3          0.01         8.36     0. 01      0.0]
         Lead                       3        3           35.60      130. 00 RW-3         58.16      6995.05      ,

         Zinc                       3        3           90.00      831. 00 RW-3        236.11 74000000.07                   .

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              TA15LE 5A
                  sUHMAKY STATISTIC S FOR TiUrRENOfiA 5 ITir, BY CHEMICAL, AND ft is
                                            AL), UNITS IN PPB



                           Num.        Num .                    Ilicfltesl; Highest    Geom .      95 P e t .    Min.        Max.
                           Times      Samp! en     Detected    Detected Cone .         Mean     Upp . C o n E . Detect.   Detect .
Class   NAME              Detected 7>        pel      Cone .       Cone . LOG at .     Cone .         Limit L i m i t       Limil

Inor.   Arsenic                1          1           15.50        15.50 RW-2-AD       15.50          15.50                    •
        Zinc                   3                                                                      99.48

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

.            ...                                                                                        TAHLli 5 A                                                                                                              .                    _^.      _
                   _..    .-.,.,-_—....              -._...^...^...^. ;:;j^:j.j j ; i j ;                                                                                                           . . . .' ..._'...'.'_
                                                                                            (!:H i'X)i< Tiihi Hi'ii-iouA ".• ; i ' i ' i ; ,                         iW ciihiMi.cAi, Ai-lh Misi'.i. l i i - i / ' A i f K A
                                                                                                                      A l . l . UNITS                 IN       PI Ml

                                                                                            '" ""   .1. 1 t. t'i" 1 >'l ' ' Ji t J 1.' Ol 1 1 l'..li.il. t . M l l l l i   WOl   ft^l.   -. -• ~ •- — •- -~ —   -•


                                                                           Minn.          Num.                                 liovjHst                       I l i t l l i e s t Hicjliest                          Geoin .        95 Pet.      Min.       Max.
                                                                           Tiiii^s      Simples                           l.i«»t. or:tRd                    l)etecl:etl Cone.                                        Mean      Upp.   C o n f . Detect.    Detect.
    Class    NAME                                                      l.)«l.^r,'i e-l Aiici.l.y ?.<::<\                         (jonc .                            Coin.! . l.iocaU ,                               Cone .           Liimit I.i.u n i t     Limit

    VOCn     toluene                                                                                                                  1 .00                                1 .00 UW-7                                 1.00             1.00
    DMAs     2 -me t l i y l n a p h t h a l e n e                                                                                    r. . r>o                          (;. r .O R W - 7                              6.50             6.50
             acenaplithene                                                                                                         ^0.00                              20.00 RW-7                                     20.00            20.00
             anthracene                                                                                                             3.50                                3.50 RW-7                                     3.50             3.50
             carbazole                                                                                                              1.00                                1.00 R W - 7                                  1.00             1.00
             dibenzofuran                                                                                                          11.00                              11.00 R W - 7                                  11.00            11.00
             fluoranthene                                                                                                           4.00                                4 . 0 0 RW-7                                  4.00             4.00
             fluorene                                                                                                              16.00                              1 6 . 0 0 RW-7                                 16.00            16.00
             naphthalene                                                        1                                                   3.50                                3.50 RW-7                                     3.50             3.50
             phenanthrene                                                       1                                                  10.50                              .1.0.50 RW-7                                   10.50            10.50
             pyirene                                                            1                                                   2.00                                2 . 0 0 RW-7                                  2.00             2.00
    irior.   Arsenic                                                            1                                                  95.70                              9 5 . 7 0 RW-7                                 95.70            95.70
             Zinc                                                               1                      1                           29.30                              2 9 . 3 0 RW-7                                 29.30            29.30

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                            TAHU-;      5 A.

                              CS' [;'dK Til K Ki-INORA iUtii, BY C i i l ;H.r.cAL AMI) "MEDIUM/AREA
                                               ALL UNITS IN PPB

                              ' fl!!- Racket r ound F i l t e r e d Ground UlVN ci-» 1-^, <-. v
                                                                                          ti JL *"
                                                                                                                                               _    —




                      N i.i m .  Num .             Lowest             H i g h e s t Highest          Geom .       95 P e t . M i n .             Max.
                     'rimes     Samples          Detected            Detected Cone .                 Mean      Upp. C o n f . D e t e c t .   Detect .
Class   NAME        Del.ected Ana ly zed            Cone .               Cone . Locat .              Cone .         Limit L i m i t             Limit
Inor.   Aroenic 1       1             .1.             07, .'50             0 2 . 5 0 RW-7-AD         82. '50           02.50
        Zinc            1             1               1-1.70               !M.70 RW-7-AD             14.70             14.70

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   tasa                                                                 TAIJLK 5A
                                                                                                                        otrs
                                      SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR THE RENORA SITE, BY CHEMICAL AND HtDIUM7AR"EA
                                                               ALL UNITS IN PPB
        .. —                 „                  „       'i'vr>p en *- r- r.^.^rji_»j.
                                                        1 1 r i:.~oul, l.oi.'r: c^4 j. i~
                                                                                       ,
                                                                                       D   /n..o
                                                                                          \V f. I.r^^i-\
                                                                                                   t:«r t./   ..   ..              —                      -       .

                                               Num .    Num.             Lowest           Highest Highest                 Geom .      95 Pet.   Min.        Max.
                                               Times   Samples         Detected          Detected Cone .                  Mean     Upp. ConC. Detect .   Detect .
Class          NAME                          Detected Analyzed            Cone.               Cone . Locat .              Cone.         Limit Limit        Limit
VOCs           1, 1, 1-trichloroethane           1         9                 8.00           8.00 TB-II-7-2         5. 93                  6 .47  11.00    12. 5C
               2-butanone                        4         9                 5.00          23.00 TB-II-4-2          6. 71                11 .07  11.00    12. OC
               acetone                           5         9                11.00         120.00 TB-II-4-2        22. 48               117 .98   11.00    53. OC
               benzene                           1         9                 1.00           1.00 TP-11-1-2          4. 66                 9 .02  11.00    12. 5C
               carbon disulfide                  1         9                 3.00           3.00 TB-II-5-2          5. 32                 6 .33  11.00    12. 5C
               ethylbenzene                      2         9                 2.00           2.00 TB-II-5-2          4. 50                 7 .19  11.00    12. 5C
               methylene chloride                4         9                 2 .00          3.00 TB-II-3-2          3. 93                 6 .39  11.00    12. 5C
               tetrachloroethene                 2         9                 3.00          18.00 TB-II-3-2          6. 01                 9 .64  11.00    12. 5C
               toluene                           6         9                 1.00           3.00 TB-II-5-2          2. 55                 6 .25  11.00    12. 5C
               xylene (total)                    6         9                 1.00          12.00 TP-11-1-2          4. 03                11 .88  11.00    12. OC
BNAs           2, 4-dimethylphenol               2         9                82.00        2500.00 TP-11-1-2      1188. 63             21320 .02 750.00 18000. OC
               2 -methyl naphthalene             2         9               300.00         340.00 TP-11-1-2      1099. 93              8989 .00 750.00 18000. OC
               acenaphthene                      6         9               280.00        4900.00 TB-II-6-2       804. 35              3542 .25 750.00 3700. OC
               acenaphthylene                    6         9               140.00        2300.00 TB-II-5-2       811. 46             20865 .91 3700.00 18000. OC
               anthracene                        9         9            240.00          11000.00 TB-II-6-2      1337. 75             14479 .72               .
               benzo(a) anthracene               8         9            640.00          12000.00 TB-II-5-2      2583. 87             16022 .27 370o!oO 3700. OC
               benzo(a) pyrene                   9         9            820.00          14000.00 TB-II-5-2      2766. 27             15113 .63               .
               benzo(b) fluoranthene             9         9         * 1100.00          17000.00 TB-II-5-2      3673. 51             19255 .54
               benzo (g, h, i ) -perylene        9         9            250.00           4600.00 TB-II-5-2       864. 83              5456 .86       .        t

               benzo(k) fluoranthene             5         9            470.00           4300.00 TB-II-6-2      1187. 02              4797 .49 720.00 7600. OC
               butylbenzylphthalate              1         9           1100.00           1100.00 TB-II-1-2      1235. 22              7260 .89 720.00 18000. OC
               carbazole                         6         9             99.00           5500.00 TB-II-6-2       805. 70              6336 .22 1900.00 3700. OC
               chrysene                          9         9            680.00          11000.00 TB-II-5-2      2480. 42             13249 .17       .        t

               dibenz (a,h) anthracene           2         9            200.00            290.00 TP-11-1-2      1028. 38             11399 .83 720.00 18000. OC
               dibenzof uran                     6         9            250.00           5900.00 TB-II-6-2       722. 41              3999 .91 750.00 3700. OC
                fluoranthene                     9         9           1400.00          29000.00 TB-II-6-2      5464. 87             39044 .68        .      .
                f luorene                        8         9             83.00           8400.00 TB-II-6-2       790. 11              9301 .14 1900.00 1900. OC
                indeno (1,2, 3 -cd) pyrene       9         9            440.00           6500.00 TB-II-5-2      1247. 09              6730 .77        .      .
               naphthalene                       5         9             86.00           3000.00 TB-II-6-2       750. 83              4169 .64 1900.00 3700. OC
               phenanthrene                      9         9            630.00          34000.00 TB-II-6-2      3742. 03             52682 .56               .
               pyrene                            9         9           1500.00          22000.00 TB-II-6-2      5009.28              25631 .80                t

Inor.          Arsenic                           9         9           3300.00          10000.00 TB-II-6-2      4935. 23              7430 .50        .       t


               Cadmium                           8         9            570.00           3300.00 TB-II-3-2      1199. 53              4342 .15 470.00    470. OC
               Chromium                          3         3          13450.00          21100.00 TB-II-2-2     17473. 81             32193 .31        .
               Lead                              9         9          36400.00         210000.00 TB-II-3-2     75655. 15            154901 .66               .
               Zinc                              9         9          46300.00         23000CLOO _TB^ILr_5^2_ 105350. 0?,           185293 ,44 —   .— i      .

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       TAUL1C     5A

                                 SUMMARY . ri'AT.is PICK FOR"' '\\K REWoRA siti*:, BY em ;MicAL A'Ni] MEDIUM/AREA
                                          c
                                                                ALL UNITS IN 1'TB
            „                _                    M                                    t n   pfeoio                                      _ _ .
                                           Num.     Num.          Lowest         Illqhest HicfhesU        Geom .       95 Pet.   Mill.      Max.
                                           Times   Samples      Detected        Detected Cone .           Mean      Upp. Conf. Detect.   Detect.
Class    NAME                            Detected Analyzed         Cone.           Cone . Locat .         Cone .         Limit Limit       Limit

VOCs     2-butanoiie                          1         1              IV .00      17 .00 TB-II-9-2       17. 00         17 . 00
         acetone                              1         1          110 .00        1 1 0.00 TB-1I-9-2     110. 00        110 .00
         benzene                              1         1            2 .00           2 .00 TB-II-9-2       2. 00          2 .00    .
         ethylbenzene                         1         1            2 .00           2 .00 TB-II-9-2       2. 00           2 .00
         xylene (total)                       1         1           11 .00         11 .00 TB-II-9-2       11. 00         11 .00    .
BNAs     benzo (a ) anthracene                1         1         1600 .00       1600 .00 TB-II-9-2     1600. 00       1600 .00    .
         benzo (a) pyrene                     1         I         1600 .00       1600 .00 TB-II-9-2     1600. 00       1600 .00
         chrysene                             I         1         1900 .00       1900 .00 TB-II-9-2     1900. 00       1900 .00
         f luoranthene                        1         1         3200 .00       3200 .00 TB-II-9-2     3200. 00       3200 .00
         plienanthrene                        1         1         3100 ,00       3100 .00 TB-II-9-2     3100. 00       3100 .00
         pyrene                               1         1         4100 .00       4100 .00 TB-II-9-2     4100. 00       4100 .00
I nor.   Arsenic                              1         1         4300 .00       4300 .00 TB-II-9-2     4300. 00       4300 .00
         Chromium                             1         .1       16400 .00      16400 .00 TB-II-9-2    16400. 00      16400 .00
         Lead                                 1         1        49800 .00      49800 .00 TB-II-9-2    49800. 00      49800 .00    .
         Zinc                                 1         1        60800 .00      60800 .00 TB-II-9-2    60800. 00      60800 .00    .

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    teat      TAIU.II 5A
                                       r
                            SUMMARY    ri'At] mes      FOR TiiK IWNOHA siTfe, BY CiiUHlCA'ir AND MliblUM/AHKA
                                                               ALL UNITS IN PPB
                                                                                  )   I - ' fin!'   V                 ___               ._.._.-....




                                           Num.      Num.          Lowest    Highest Highest            Geom .       95 Pet. M i n .          Max.
                                           Times    Samples      Detected   Detected Cone .             Mean     Upp. ConC. Detect.        Detect .
Class   NAME                          Detected Analyzed             Cone.      Cone . Locat .           Cone .         Limit Limit           Limit

VOCs    2-butarione                          3           '5         10.00       49 .00 TB-II-8-10    11.94            126 21      11.00      12. OC
        2-hexanone                           1           5           2.00         2 .00 TB-II-8-10    4.95             12 .38     11.00      15. OC
        acetone                              2           5         130.00      160 .00 TB-II-8-10    31.61          17465 22      11.00      48. OC
        benzene                              1           5           1.00         1 .00 TB-II-4-4     4.58             42 .03     12.00      15. OC
        methylene chloride                   4           5           2.00         3 .00 TB-II-8-10    2.70               6 .05    12.00      12. OC
        tetrachloroethene                    1           5           2.00         2 .00 TB-J.I-3-6    4.95             12 .38     11.00      15. OC
        toluene                              2           5           2.00         2 .00 TB-II-3-6     4.04             15 .37     12.00      15. OC
BNAs    2, 4-dimethylphenol                  5         16           86.00    1.1.00 .00 TB-II-2-6   490.00           1451 .98    400.00    5900. OC
        2 -methyl naphthalene                3         15          130.00      230 .00 TB-II-6-8    528.98           1631 .71.   400.00    5900. OC
        4-methylphenol                       2         1.5         210.00    1400 .00 TB-II-2-6     607.60           1390 .47    400.00    5900. OC
        acenaphtliene                        5         15          150.00      460 .00 TB-II-4-4    458.28           1465 .46    400.00    5900. OC
        acenaphthylene                       9         16           93.00    1100 .00 TB-II-SSl     449.22           1542 .34    400.00    5900. OC
        anthracene                          11         16          100.00    1900 .00 TB-II-4-4     579.58           1681 .50    410.00    3600. OC
        benzo (a) anthracene                13         16           45.00    5300 .00 TB-II-SSl     812.73           5028 .41    410.00    3600. OC
        benzo (a) pyrene                    14         16           54.00    6200 .00 TB-II-SSl     955.50           5941 .40    410.00    3600. OC
        benzo(b) f luoranthene              15         16           68.50    9200 .00 TB-II-SSl    1251.59           8759 .57    410.00     410. OC
        benzo (g, h, i ) -perylene          11         16           90.00    2200 .00 TB-II-SSl     526.16           1487 .21    400.00    3600. OC
        benzo(k) Eluoranthene               10         16          160.00    3700 .00 TB-II-SSl     679.72           2212 .30    400.00    3600. OC
        bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate           4         16           76.00      290 .00 TB-II-7-8    491.60           1544 .86    410.00    5900. OC
        butylbenzylphthalate                 1         16           72.00       72 .00 TB-II-S5     560.12           1591 .96    400.00    5900. OC
        carbazole                            5         15           83.00      630 .00 TB-II-4-4    480. 86          1624 .85    410.00    5900. OC
        chrysene                            15         16           56.00    7200 .00 TB-II-SSl     890.28           5853 .9.1   410.00     410. OC
        di-n-octylplithalate                 1         15           17.00        17 .00 TB-II-6-8   512.60           2939 .68    400.00    5900. OC
        dibenz (a,h) anthracene              5         16           73.00      380 .00 TB-II-6-8    457.74           1354 .78    400.00    3900. OC
        dibenzof uran                        4         15          110.00      350 .00 TB-II-4-4    482.84           1719 .62    400.00    5900. OC
        f luoranthene                       15         16           78.50   11000 .00 TB-II-SSl    1487.78          11947 .36    410.00     410. OC
         £ luorene                           5         15          240.00      860 .00 TB-II-4-4    591.11           1475 .83    400.00    5900. OC
        indeno (1,2, 3-cd) pyrene           13         16          190.00    4200 .00 TB-II-SSl     603.43           1898 .72    400.00    3600. OC
        naphthalene                          4         15          130.00      230 .00 TB-II-4-4    461.62           1615 .18    400.00    5900. OC
        phenanthrene                        14         16           48.00    5100 .00 TB-II-SSl     960.58           6411 .62    410.00    3600. OC
        pyrene                              14         16           76.50   11000 .00 TB-II-SSl    1415.47          11027 .40    410.00    6700. OC
Inor.   Arsenic                             10         10         2050.00 721000 .00 TB-II-1-10 27983.44         11428268 .58       .           .

        Cadmium                              9         10         1100.00    5000 .00 TB-II-1-10   1628.20           4720 .43    610.00     610. OC
        Chromium                             2            2      17000.00   70800 .00 TB-II-1-10 34692.94           70800 .00       .           .

        Lead                                10         10         5800.00 1010000 .00 TB-II-8-6 112966.26         3413412 .57                   .

        Zinc                                10         10        44300.00 1720000 ,00 TB-II-8-6 154864.66         1199343 ,32       .           .

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                       TAHLE 5A

                                sUMMAKY s'l'A'N ;:ti.c.c; i-'ou 'i'iii;: Ui;:MoRA S.iTii:, iW MlCAL
                                                                                               UII AND MlUlJIUM/AKliA
                                                                      AM., UNITS IN PPB
                                                                                               v, T   f /-**-» 1- \                                   —   —


                                           M i.i in .   Num.             Lowest        Highest Highest                  Geom .       95 Pet. Miu.               Max.
                                           Times      Samples          Detected       Detected Cone .                   Mean      Upp. ConC. Detect.          Detect.
Class   NAME                             Pet' PC ted Aua.l y /, er1       Cone .         Cone . Locat .                 Cone .         Limit L i m i t          Limit
BNAs    2 -methyl naphthalene                               1           1400 .00       1400 .00 TB-II-9-6             1400 .00       1400 .00
        acenaphthene                                        1           3900 .00       3900 .00 TB-I1-9-6             3900 .00       3900 .00     .
        acenaphthy letie                                    .1.           900 .00       980 .00 TB-II-9-6              980 .00        980 .00
        anthracene                                          J           9900 .00       9900 .00 TB-II-9-6             9900 .00       9900 .00
        benzo (a) anthracene                                1           V O O O .00    7000 .00 TB-II-9-6             7000 .00       7000 . 00
        beiizo (a ) pyreiie                                 1           6600 .00       6600 .00 TB-II-9-6              6600 .00      6600 .00
        benzo (b) fluoranthene                 1            1           0400 .00       8400 .00 TB-II-9-6              8400 .00      8400 .00     .
        benzo (y., h, i ) -perylene            :i.          1           2300 .00       2300 .00 TB-II-9-6              2300 .00      2300 .00
        benzo (k! f: .1 Moranthene             J.           1           3400 .00       3400 .00 TB-II-9-6              3400 .00      3400 .00
        carbazole                              1            1             990 .00       990 . 00 TB-II-9-6              990 .00       990 ,00
        chrysene                               1            1           7600 .00       7600 .00 TB-II-9-6              7600 .00      7600 .00
        dibenzofviran                          .1.          J           2300 .00       2300 .00 TB-II-9-6              2300 .00      2300 .00
        fluoranthene                           :i.          J.         20000 .00      20000 .00 TB-II-9-6             20000 .00     20000 .00
        f luorene                              1            1           4100 .00       4100 .00 TB-II-9-6              4100 .00      4100 .00
        indeuo (1,2, 3 -cd) pyrene              i.          1           3500 .00       3500 .00 TB-II-9-6              3500 .00      3500 .00     .
        phenanthrene                           l            1          12000 .00      12000 .00 TB-II-9-6             12000 .00     12000 .00     .
        pyrene                                 1            1          16000 .00      16000 .00 TB-II-9-6             16000 .00     16000 .00
Inor.   Arsenic                                1            1           5800 .00       5800 .00 TB-II-9-6              5800 .00      5800 .00
        Chromium                                1            1         12800 .00      12800 .00 TB-II-9-6             12800 .00     12800 .00
        Lead                                    l            1         34700 .00      34700 .00 TB-II-9-6             34700 .00     34700 .00
        Zinc                                    1            1         48400 .00      48400 .00 TB-II-9-6             48400 .00     48400 .00

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                      TABLE 5A

                                 SUMMARY s'l'A'j'l.p'i'.ics FOR (i'iii;: RiiNoiiA SITE, ijy ciiii MICAL AND MEDIUM/AREA '      "           " "~
                                                                AI.I.. UN.ITS IN    l'l?D




                                            Mum .    Num.          Lowest           Highest Highest           Geom .           95 Pot. Min.         Max.
                                            Timer!  Sampler!     Detected          Detected Cone .            Mean          Upp. ConE. Detect.    Detect.
Class     NAME                            Detected Analyzed         Cone.             Cone . Local; .         Cone .             Limit Limit        Limit

VOCs     methylene chloride                     .1        1           1.00             1 .00 SS-3-SED          1 .00              1 . 00
BNAs     benzo (a) pyrene                      J.         1          70.00            70 .00 SS-3-SED         70 .00             70 .00
         benzo(b) Cluoratithene                I          1         120.00           120 .00 SS-3-SED        120 .00            120 .00     .
         benzo(k) f luoranthene                .1         J.         42.00            42 .00 SS-3-SED         42 .00             42 .00
         butylbenzylphthalate                  .1.        1          70.00            70 .00 SS-3-SED         70 .00             70 .00     .
         chrysene                              1          1          78.00            78 .00 SS-3-SED         78 .00             78 .00
         f luoranthene                         1          1         140.00           140 .00 SS-3-SED        140 .00            140 .00
         indeno (1 , 2 , 3-cd) pyrene          1          1          40.00            40 .00 SS-3-SED         40 .00             40 .00
         phenanthrene                          J.         1          81.00            81 .00 SS-3-SED         81 .00             81 .00
          pyrene                               1          I         160.00           160 .00 SS-3-SED        160 .00            160 .00     .
Pest/PCBs 4, 4 '-ODD                           1          1          26.00            26 .00 SS-3-SED         26 .00             26 .00
          4, 4 '-DDE                           1          1           5.80             5 .80 SS-3-SED          5 .80              5 .80
          4, 4 '-DDT                           1          1          28.00            28 .00 SS-3-SED         28 .00             28 .00
          alpha chlordane                      1          1           6.60             6 .60 SS-3-SED          6.60               6.60
          delta-BHC                            1          1           1.90             1 .90 SS-3-SED          1 .90              1 .90
          dieldrin                             1          1           5.40             5 .40 SS-3-SED          5 .40              5 .40
          gamma chlordane                      1          1           6.20             6 .20 SS-3-SED          6 .20              6 .20
Inor .    Arsenic                              1          1        3400.00          3400 .00 SS-3-SED       3400 .00           3400 .00
          Chromium                             1          1       24900.00      24900 .00    SS-3-SED      24900 .00          24900 .00
          Copper                               1          1       34200.00      34200 .00    SS-3-SED      34200 .00          34200 .00
          Lead                                 1          1       75600.00      75600 .00    SS-3-SED      75600 .00          75600 .00
          Zinc                                 1          1      100000.00     100000 .00    SS-3-SED     100000 .00         100000 .00

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 -mi M            T A I i L U 5A

                       SUMMARY" stAtiStlcs l-'oK riii;: iurNoaA si '.ri-;, BY CHEMICAL AND MEDIUM/AREA
                                                     ALL           N PPB
                                                            UNITS '.1



                                 Nviin .  Mum .            Lowest       Ilkjliest Highest      Geoin.       95 Pet.     Min.       Max.
                                 Times   Samples       Detect ed       Detect ed Cone .        Mean      Upp . Con£ . Detect.   Detect.
Class     NAME                 Detected Analyzed          Cone .          Cona . Locat .       Cone .          Limit Limit        Limit
Pest/PCBs alpha-BIIC                2         2               0 .05        0. 05 SS-l-SW        0.05            0.05
          beta-BIIC                 I         2               0. 03        0. 03 SS-l-SW        0.03            0.03     0.05      0.0?
          delta-BHC                 2         2                0. 01       0. 05 SS-2-SW        0.03            0.05                ,

          lindane                   I         2                0. 01       0. 01 SS-2-SW        0.02            0.01     0.06      O.Of
Inor.     Arsenic                   2         2                2. 10       2 .70 SS-2-SW        2.38            2.70
          Chromium                  2         2              18. 60       24. 20 SS-2-SW       21.22           24.20                t


          Copper                    1         2                3. 50       3. 50 SS-2-SW        2.29            3.50     3.00      3.0C
          7,inc                     2         2        _     GJiL 65      69. 90 SS-l-SW      JLS_JJ           69,90                .

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   KUMMAUY .STATISTIC.'! |/u|!               Till-; HKI-IUUA .SITK, MY CMKM.I.CAI. AMI.) MI.-'.IVIIIM/ AIU'.A
                                                                 Al.l. IIMI.T!-: IH I'1'H




                               Hum.             Hum.                  l.owr-jst       Ilighosl: IliciheRl.          Geom.          9!S Pel..     Mill.         Max.
                               T.imwn       finmplen               l)cM.«i:r.e«.l   l.tol.eel.od Cone.              Menu        Upp. C o n C . Del.ect .    IJgtect.
Class   NAMI-:              l.>Hl.<?el.pcl A i i f i l y / . e d        Cone.            Cone, l.ioeot .            Cone .            liiiiiil. 1. im.il.      l>iin.it

Inor.   Arsenic                     '>.                ').                :i.:i.o        :i. 10 SS-I-SW-AD            3.10              3.10
        Chromium                    ').                '>,              -.1.7.00        20.7'.} SS-2-f3W--AO         10.70             20.75
                                                                          l
        Copper.                      1                  2                   ).6U         9 . 6 0 Sa-2-SW-/il)         3.79              9.60       3.00         3.0(J
        Zinc                        2                  2                62.40           67.0'j SS-2-SW-AU            64 .60            67.0'J

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                          TAULI                                                                               Wtt          «N>    titfft
                                       S U M M A R Y S T A T I S T I C S FOR Til I? K H N O R A S I T E , BY Clif :HlCAL AND M£bfU~M7AREA
                                                                                 ALL UNITS IN PPB



                                                    Nuin .       Nuin .       I./owsst        Iliqliest   IligliesL             Ocom .         95 Pet.       Miii.             Max.
                                                  Times    Samples           Detected        Detected Cone .                    Mean        Upp. C o n f . D e t e c t .    Detect .
Class        NAME                                Detected A n a l y z e d         Cone .        Cone . Locat .                  Cone .           Limit Limit                 Limit
VOCs      t e L r a c h ] oroeLliene                   1            1              1.00            1.00 SS-3-SW                  1.00                1.00
Pest/PCBs alpha- BIIC                                  1            1              0.05             0 . 0 5 SS-3-SW              0.05                0.05
          delta-BIIC                                   1            1              0.03            0 . 0 3 SS-3-SW               0.03                0.03
          lindane                                      :i           1              0.01             0 . 0 1 SS-3-SW              0.01                0.01
Inoi-.    Arsenic                                      1            1              2.90             2 . 9 0 SS-3-SW              2.90                2 . 90
          Chromi um                                     I.          1             26.40           2 6 . 4 0 SS-3-SW             26.40               26.40
          Zinc                                         :i.          1             72.20           7 2 . 2 0 SS-3-SW             72.20               72.20

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           TAHI.K   5A


                   sUMMA'KY stA'!'.f.KT~ C.S C-'Oii THE KKNbHA Sl'jTi, BY      Cll'l •MIcAlTANU   MGDIUMMREA -      "         -         '
                                                      ALL OMITS ll-l ITB

                                        f PK-Bnckground Filtered Sui/facfi TI u iw t; I.

                                Num.         Num .          I .owes t     Highest Highest             Geom.       95 Pet. Min.         Max.
                                TJ.WOS      Samples       Detected       Detected Cone .              Mean •   Upp. Conf. Detect.   Detect .
Class   NAME                 r>et<>'::tr>d Analyzed           Cone .        Cone . Locat .            Cone .        Limit Limit       Limit

Inor.   Arsenic                   1            1              2.60           2.60 SS-3-SW-AD           2.60          2 .60               .
        Chromium                  .1.          .1.           23.70          23.70 SS-3-SW-AD          23.70         23.70                .

        Zinc                      1            1             77.00          77.00 SS-3-SW-AD. __._    77.00         77.00                •

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                TABLE ,6. RENORA SITE: SUMMARY OF EXPOSURE PATHWAYS
                                                               TIME-FRAME                DEGREE OF
                                                               EVALUATED                 ASSESSMEIDT

Pathway                                  Re<*pfor               Prtienl     Future       Quint.            Qual.   Rat Innate for Selection or Exclusion            !)•!•   Grouping

                                                                                                                                                                            *•>-'. " '-" ' '"-''
                                                                                             v
                                                                                     ^
Of«Wd W»fW          -            '"*""

Ingeslion of Ground Water                Resident               No          Yes          X                         Adjacent areas are zoned residential.            All ground water samples
                                                                                                                   Although resident! currently rely on             (filtered and unfillered).
                                                                                                                   municipal water, ground water may be
                                                                                                                   potable. Reportedly inactive private wells
                                                                                                                   exist within one mile of the site.

Inhalation of Ground Water               Resident               No          No                     '               Three volatile) were detected infrequently (in
Contaminants during Showers                                                                                        one of three sample)) ami at concentrations
                                                                                                                   below sppSicsble MCLj.

Dermal Contact with Ground Water         Resident               No          No                                     Considered insignificant compared to other
                                                                                                                   ground water exposures.

SmfwaSoiU          *''">^'«,>*               \ \        -     > ;;/ ^ '.                          V                *        :         ,       '. '" - ^ ,-"<,               V-                 '"*\^
Incidental Ingeslion of Onsite Surface   Adjacent Resident      Yes         Yes          X                         Youths may trespass on the tile.                 All surface soils (V • 2*)
Soils                                    (youth trespasser)                                            ,

                                         Adjacent Resident      No          Yes          X                         Future site development (e.g., park or           All surface soils (ff • ¥)
                                         (adult and child)                                                         ballficld) may result in frequent visitations
                                                                                                                   by adjacent residents.

Dermal Contact with Onsile Surface       Adjacent Resident      Yes         Yes          X                         Youths may trespass on the site.                 All surface soil) (Of - 2')
Soils*                                   (youth trespasser)

                                         Adjacent Resident      No          Ye)          X                         IHilure site development (e.g., park or          All surface soils (Of • 2')
                                         (adult and child)                                                         IwiUfield) may result in frequent visitations
                                                                                                                   by adjacent residents.

Inhalation of V()C Emissions and         Adjacent Resident      No          No                    ||               Considered insignificant compared to other
('articulates from Surface Soils                                                                                   surface foil exposure*.
                                                                                                                                                    r
                                                                                                                             '   *   '' *                   t
SvrxurfKr) Soil*                                                                                                                                                                        '"<   "\'>


Incjdontil Ingpiiinn of On«itp           Ricivatinn Worker      No          Yf«          X                         (Uposure to subsurface so||s (?' to IS") may     All subiitrface soils
Subsurface Soils                                                                                                   occur during ««cavaiiotu for future lito         collected from depth)
                                                                                                                   development,                                     greater than 2' and left
                                                                                                                                                                    than or equal to 1 5'.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                        J . '. TABLE .' 6 ( - i CONTI NUED
                                                                        TIME-FRAME                           DERREE OF
                                                                        EVALUATED                            ASSESSMENT

 Pathway                                   Receptor                     Present             Future           Quant.              Qua!.          Rationale for Selection or Exclusion                Da4» Grouping

 Dermal Contact with Oiuiie Subsurface     Excavation Worker            No                  Yes              X                                  Exposure to subsurface soils (2' to 15') may        All subsurface soils
 Soils*                                                                                                                                         occur during excavations for future site            collected from depths
                                                                                                                                                development.                                        greater than 2' and less
                                                                                                                                                                                                    than or equal to T5*.
 « .<" , ' '     " -i-''? ','<"§ sT''*, ' / > { * -                 ^ ' '^ ' • ' ' • • . < ' ' "     '   *       ' "*>        <* <• * •*. t/,   ^'^      ""^ >'        v ,. r't '"'     ' •. ; ..„',*;
 S*<)iroenU '    • ;> " /*' * " C^V'-',- /' ' 4                                                                                                                                                 v"/w>^^S8i'
 Incidental Ingeslion of Sediments         Adjacent Resident            Yes                 Yes              X                                  Youths may trespass on the site.                    All sediment samples.
                                           (youth trespasser)

                                           Adjacent Resident            No                  Yes              X           ,>                     Fulurt site development (e.g., park or              All sediment samples.
                                           (•dull and child)                                                                                    hallfield) may result in frequent visitations
                                                                                                                                                by adjacent residents.

 Dermal Contact with Sediments**           Adjacent Resident            Yes                 Yes                            ,'    X              Youths may trespass on the site.                    All sediment samples.
                                           (youth trespasser)

                                           Adjacent Resident            No                  Yes                          ,'      X              Future site development (e.g., park or              All sediment samples.
                                           (adult and child)                                                                                    balllleld) may result in frequent visitations
                                                                                                                                                by adjacent residents.

 Inhalation of VOC Emissions and           Adjacent Resident            No                  No                                                  Moisture content, absence of physical
 Particulates from Sediments                                                                                                                    disturbance and vegetation limit release of                                 -
                                                                                                                                                paiticulates.

 SttrfacO W»»f , ;';, - ', -= V; jV \    ""'
                                            V,*; <><l >'• -     *
                                                                    \        ; \             ;'          ;_; ; [ ;:                  '          ; : :.L!.l: '\ \'{.'.^. ?'"7lV./.V ; ..il^^MSS?.
 incidental Ingeslion of Surface Water     Adjacent Reiidenl            No                  No                        [1                        Anticipated activity Involves negligible            All surface water samples.
                                                                                                                                                exposure via the oral route. Mill Brook Is
                                                                                                                                                shallow.

  Dermal Contact with Surface Water        Adjacent Resident            Yes                 Yes              X                   '              Youths may currently trespass and future site       All surface water samples.
                                           (adult and child)                                                                                    development (e.g., park or ballfield) may
                                                                                                                                                result in frequent visitations.


*Cadmium only
"Cannot be evaluated quanlllnllvely given lack of data for dermal pathway for chemicals detected.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    TABLE 6A TOXICITY VALUES FOR ALL CONTAMINANTS OF CONCERN AT THE RENORA SITE


                      _•              (CARCINOGENIC                             CHRONIC       SUBCHRONIC

                                          Weight              Oral Slope    i Chronic         Subchronic
      Chemical                            ofEvidenc e Factor                lOralRfD          OralRfD
                                      ! Classifiesloii (me/ka/dav)-l            fme/ka/dav)   (me/ks/dav)


    Volatiles
      Acetone                               D a                                  l.OOE-01 a    l.OOE+00 b
      Benzene                         |     A a                2.90E-02a I
      2-Butanone (MEK)                     D       a                             5.00E-02 b    5.00E-01 b
      Chloroethane (ethyl chloride)        B2      c           2.90E-03 c        4.00E-01 c    4.00E-01 h
      Ethylbenzene                          D      a      i                      l.OOE-01 a    l.OOE+GO b
      2-Hexanone (MBK)                      D      c                             4.00E-02 c
      Methylene chloride                   B2 a           i    7.50E-03a         6.00E-02 a    6.00E-02 b
      Tetrachloroethylene                 B2-C c          I    5.20E-02 c        l.OOE-02 a    l.OOE-01 b
      Toluene                               D      a                        I     2.00E-01a    2.00E+00 b
      1,1.1-Trichloroethane                 D      a                             9.00E-02 b    9.00E-01 b
  Xvlenes                                   D      a                            2.00E+00 a     4.00E+00 b
                                                          1
BNAs
      Acenanhthene                    ;     -      a                             6.00E-02 a    6.00E-01 b
      Acenaphthylene                        D      a
                                                                            !
      Anthracene                      !    D       a      1                      3.00E-01a     3.00E-rOO b
      Benzo(a)antnrac:ene                  B2      a           7.30E-01 d
                                      ;
      Benzo(a)Dyrene                       B2      a           7.30E+00 a
      BenzoCD)fiuoranthene                 B2      a           7.30E-01 d
      Benzo(g.h.i>perylene                  D      a                        i
                                      j
      BenzoCk)fluoranthene                 B2      a           7.30E-01 d
      Benzylburylphthalare                  C      a.or                          2.00E-01 a    2.00E+00 b
                                      !
      Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate           B2      a           1.40E-02 a        2.00E-02 a    2.00E-02 b
      Chrvsene                        i B2         a           7.30E-02 d
      Dibenzofuran                    i     D      a                             4.00E-03 c    4.00E-03 h
      Dibenz(aJuanthracene            ! B2         a           7.30E+00 d
      2,4-Dimethylphenol                -          a                             2.00E-02 a    2.00E-01 b
      Di-n-ocryl phthalate                                                       2.00E-02 b    2.00E-02 b
      Fluoranthene                          D      a                             4.00E-02 a    4.00E-01 b
      Fluorene                              D      a      i                      4.00E-02 a    4.00E-01 b
      Indeno(1.23-cd)pyrene                B2      a           7.30E-01 d
      2-Methylnaphthalene                   -
      4-Methylphenol (p-cresol)             C      a                             5.00E-02 b    5.00E-01 b
      Naphthalene                           D      a                             4.00E-02 b    4.00E-02 b
      Phenanthrene                          D      a      j
!      Pyrene                               D      a                             3.00E-02 a    3.00E-01 b
    Pesticides/PCBs                                       j                                                  1




       alpha-BBC                           B2      a      ! 6.30E+OOa i
      beta-BHC                              C      a        1.80E+00 a
       delta-BHC                                          I

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 TABLE 6A TOX3CITY VALUES FOR ALL CONTAMINANTS OF CONCERN AT THE RENORA SITE

                                       i CARCINOGENIC                       1 CHRONIC           SUBCHRONIC 1
                                       j
                                           Weight             Oral Slope    Chronic             Subchronic
     Chemical                           of Evidence Factor            Oral RfD                  Oral RfD
                                       ! Classificanor (mg/kg/day)- 1 (mg/kg/dav)               (mg/kg/dav)
                                       |
     gamma-BHC (Lindane)               I B2-C b                1.30E+00 b     3.00E-04 a         3.00E-03 b    1
     aJpha-Chlordane (r)               { B2         a          1.30E+00 a     6.00E-05 a         6.00E-05 b
     gamma-Chlordane (r)                    B2      a          1.30E+00 a     6.00E-05 a         6.00E-05 b
     4,4' DDD                          i B2          aj        2.40E-01 a                                      1
     4,4' DDE                            B2         a          3.40E-01 a
     4.4' DDT                            B2         a          3.40E-01 a     5.00E-04 a         5.00E-04 b
     Dieldrin                            B2         a          1.60E-KH a     5.00E-05 a         5.00E-05 b
     Endrin ketone
     Heptachlor                             B2      a     I 4.50E-4)Oa        S.OOE-Oi a         5.00E-04 b
Inorganics                                                                                  i
     Arsenic                                 A      a          1.75E+00 e     3.00E-04 a          3.00E-CX b
     Cadmium                                Bl      aJ                      ! 5.00E-04 aJ        5.00E-Oi h
     Chromium, total                                                          8.76E-01 g         8.78E-01 g
     Chromium. VI                            A      ad    j                   5.00E-03 a      2.00E-02 b
     Copper                                  D      a                       i 5.50E-02C     i 5.50E-02h
     Lead                                   B2      a     i
     Zinc                              i     D      a                         2.00E-01 b          2.00E-01 b
a.   From IRIS.
b.   From HEAST.
c.   Interim value from ECAO.
d.   Oral slope factor for B(a)P used for PAHs classified as B2 carcinogens with TEFs applied
e.   Arsenic oral slope factor derived from unit risk in IRIS.
f.   Cadmium RfD is for water. l.OE-03 mg/kg/day is R£D for food.
e.   Value is weighted-averaae value of the'Hex arid Tri RfDs assuming 7 parts Tri to 1 pan Hex.
n.   Chronic RfD'used as SuDchronic RID if no Subchronic value is available per RAGS,
i.   EPA Weight of Evidence Classification listed in HEAST under inhalation route only,
j.   EPA Weight of Evidence Classification lasted in HEAST under oral route only.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

            TABLE 7   SUMMARY OF CARCINOGENIC RISK ESTIMATED FOR THE RENOR;
                      SITE                                                !


Scenario                   Receptor            Present/Future      Total Risk


Unfiltered Ground Water

Ingestion                  Resident                                1 x Iff3**

Filtered Ground Water

Ingestion                 Resident                                 Sxlff4*

Surface Soil

Ingestion                  Youth Trespasser          P/F           1 x I0's*

Ingestion                  Adjacent Resident         F             8 x Iff5*    '

Subsurface Sofl

Ingestion                 Excavation Worker                        2 x Iff5*

Sediments

Ingestion                 Youdi Trespasser           P/F           3x Iff**

Ingestion                 Adjacent Resident          F             2 x Iff5*

Surface Water

Dermal Contact            Adjacent Resident          P/F           6xlff7


*Exceeds 10* risk
"Exceeds 10* risk

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

            .TABLE. 8 SUMMARY OF NONCARCINOGENIC HAZARD INDICES (HI)
                      ESTIMATED FOR THE RENORA SITE


Scenario                           Receptor             Present/Future          Chronic ffl


Unfiltered Ground Water

Ingestion                          Resident                                     5x 10*°*

Filtered Ground Water

Ingestion                          Resident                                     1 X 10*°

Surface Soil

Ingestion                          Youth Trespasser           P/F              2x ID"2
Dermal Contact                     Youth Trespasser           P/F              1 x lO'2^
                                                                         Total Sx'lO' 2

Ingestion                          Adjacent Resident          F           "^   2 x 10-1
Dermal Contact                     Adjacent Resident          F                2 x 10'2(a)
                                                                         Total 2 x 10'1

Subsurface Sofl

Ingestion                          Excavation Worker          F                1 x 10* (b)
Dermal Contact                     Excavation Worker          F                9 x lO'VaKb)
                                                                         Total 1 x KT1

Sediments
Ingestion                         Youth Trespasser            P/F               3 x IP*

Ingestion                         Adjacent Resident           F                2x la 1

Surface Water

Dermal Contact                    Adjacent Resident           P/F               1 x ID'3

* - HI exceeds one (1)
(a) - HI is for cadmium only.
(b) - HI is based on Subchronic Protective Body Dose.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

TABLE" 9 • :. RENORA SITE ECOLOGICAL RISK ASSESSMENT:
              CONTAMINANTS OF CONCERN
                          Contaminant   Surface Water   Sediment

VOLATILES

Acetone                                                    X
Methylene chloride                                         X
Tecncfaioroecbeae                                          X
BASE-NEUTRAUACID EXTRACTABLES

Dibenzofuran                                               X
Cart azoic                                                 X
FAHs

Acenapbthene                                               X
Anthracene                                                 X
Benzo(a)anthracene                                         X
BeaiD(b)fiuoranibene                                       X
Benzo(k)fluoranthene                                       X
Benzo(a)pyrene                    -_                       X
Beazo(^,b,i)perylene                                      IT
Chrysene                                                   X
Dibenz(a4i)a&thnceoe                                       X
Fluorantheoe                                               X
Fluorene                                                   X
Indeno(l J ,3-cd)pyrene                                    X
Phenasthieoe                                               X
Pyrene                                                     X
PESTICIDES

Alpha-BHC                                    X
Beta-BHC                                     X
Delta-BHC                                    X             X
Gamma-BHC (Lindane)                          X
Dieldno                                                    X
Heptachlor                                                 X
Alpha Chlordaae                                            X
Gamma Chiordane                                            X
Endrin Ketooe                                              X

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     TABLE . 9 - CONTINUED '
                  Contaminant                  Surface Water   Sediment
4,4-DDE                                                           X
4.4-DDD                                                           X
4.4-DDT                                                           X
INORGANICS
Arsenic                                             X             X
Chromium, Total                                     X             X
Copper                                              X             X
Lead                                                              X
Zinc                                                X             X

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    TABLE 10        SURFACE WATER ECOLOGICAL RISK SUMMARY
                                          SURFACE WATER                   WATER QUALITY                  RISK INDICES 2                       RISK INDICES 3
                                          CONCENTRATION                      VALUE 1                         FOR                                  FOR
       CONTAMINANT OV                             (tig/0                       (»B/D                    ACUTE CRITERIA                      CHRONIC CRITERIA
          CONCERN                       MEAN          | MAXIMUM           ACUTE      CHRONIC            MEAN     MAXIMUM                    MEAN      MAXIMUM

alpha-BHC                                 5.00E-02           5.00E-02      1.00E402       -                 5.0E-04           5.0E-04          -         .
beta-BllC                                  3.ME-02            3.00B-02     I.OOB+02       .                 3.0B-04           3.0E-04          .         -
della-BHC                                  3.00B-02           5.00E-02     I.OOE+02       -                 3.0E-04           5.0E-04          -         -
gninma-DIIC (Lindanc)                     2.00E-02 *          I.OOE-02     2.00E400   '8.00E-02             I.OE-02           5.0E-03          2.5E-OI   I.2E-01
Arsenic                                   2.38E400           2.70E+00      3.60E402    1.90E+02             6.6E-03           7.5E-03          I.3E-02   I.4E-02
Cliromiinn                                2.12E+01           2.42E401      I.60E+OI    I.IOE40I      '''' v tmob '"'^f''K5B400 \1^S:£9B400 '" ™y$$£fo
Copper                                    2.29E400           3.50E400      I.80B+01    1.20E40I             I.3E-OI             I.9E-01        1.9E-01   2.9E-OI
Zinc                                      6,880401           6.99E401      I.20E+02    I.IOE402             5.7E-01             5.8E-OI        6.3E-OI   6.4E-01
                                                                         TOTAL RISK INDEX           ;\*^VibfefOO      . », ,^'"^^feifirt
                                                                                                                             ; ^.Jb-tlA'   '' ^fy&ftf ''FF^Pi
- No data available.
* Maximum delected concentration below detection limit. One-half detection limit was utilized Tor non-delecls, therefore, average
      concentration is greater than maximum concentration.
1
    Water Quality Criteria from Table 5-4.                                               |l
2
    Risk Index = COC concentration (average or maximum) divided by water quality value (acute or chronic)

Note: Shading indicates a risk index greater than one.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   TABLE 11 S            1 liCJOI-XJCJICAL KK5lCT5UJVirviAKY

                             SEDIMENT                GUIDELINE VALUES'                SEDIMENT RISK INDICES1
                          CONCENTRATION                  ER-     ER-             EFFECTS RANGE     EFFECTS RANGE
          CONTAMINANT         (mg/kg)                 MEDIAN     LOW                MEDIAN              LOW
           OP CONCERN     MEAN        MAX.             (mg/kg)  (mg/kg)         MEAN      MAX.    MEAN       MAX.

Acclone                    9.87E-03     I.50E-02          .           -            -            -            .          .
Melhylene Chloride         3.61 E-03   2.00E-03 *         -           -            -            -            -          -
Telrachloroelliene         4.42E-03    3.00E-03 *       1.40E-OI      .           3.2E-02      2.IE-02       -          .
Cnrbnzolc                  1.10(1-01   2.50E-OI            -          -            .            .            -          -
[>ibenzufurnii             I.22E-OI    6.90E-02 *       5.40E-01      -           2.3B-OI      I.3EOI        -          -
Acenaphlhene               I.47E-01     1.00E-OI *     6.50E-OI     I.50E-OI      2.3E-OI      1.5E-01      9.8B-OI    6.7E-OI
Anthracene                 2.06E-OI    4.40E-OI        9.60E-01     8.50E-02      2.IE-OI      4.6E-OI   '':<W&W ?%tiMfi
Benzo(a)anlliracene        4.85E-OI    7.60E-OI        1.60E+00     2.30E-OI      3.0E-01                        &WW
                                                                                               4.7E-OI <- - 11K+61)
Benzo(l>)nuoranlhene       7.05E-OI    9.20E-01        8.00E+00       .           8.8E-02      I.2E-OI       .          .
Benzo(k)nuoranlhene        2.65E-01    3.70E-01        8.00E+00       „   ii      3.3E-02      4.6E-02       -          -
Benzo(g,ri,l)pcrylene      1.05E-OI     I.50E-OI       5.40E+00       -           I.9E-02      2.8E-02       -          -
Benzo(a)pyrene
Clirysene
                           4.49E-OI
                           4.95E-OI
                                       6.30E-OI
                                       7.20E-OI
                                                       2.50E+00
                                                       2.80E400
                                                                    4.00E-OI
                                                                    4.00E-01
                                                                                  1.8E-OI
                                                                                  1.8B-OI
                                                                                               2.5E-OI
                                                                                               2.6E-OI
                                                                                                         '^IW$,     S$J$>,
                                                                                                          t*JiiSMn ^fi;8E+ob
Dibenz(a)onthracene         1.34E-01   8.30E-02 *       2.60E-01    6.00E-02      5.IE-OI      3.2E-01   ',-;;,,;;,MM 'httMtM.
Fhioranlhene               1.06E+00    1.70E+00        3.60E+00     6.00E-OI      2.9EOI       4.7E-01     H«IMM    H3;B¥fO(f
                                                                                                       f
Fliiorcne                  9.300-02     1.80E-OI       6.40E-OI     3.50E-02      I.5E-OI      2.8E-OI   -jmiJpiw ^<k$>mw
Im1eno(l,2,3-cd)pyrene     2.09E-OI    2.90E-01        5.20E+00       .           4.0E-02      5.6E-02            .     -
I'hcnanllircnc             8.58E-OI    I.60EMH)        I.38E+00     2.25E-OI      6.2E-OI tTfOfe+po       VlggloS Sff.iH^d
Pyrene                     I.04E+00    I.50E+00        2.20E+00     3.50E-OI      4.7E-OI     6.8E-OI ^lXi40($         ;l<i|W
4.4-DDD                    4.04E-02    6.80E-02        2.00E-02     2.00E-03 ^''iOKlOO ^'^l^B^OO • > iOE+0l £?<&B40I
4,4-DDE                     I.OIE-02    I.70E-02        I.50E-02    2.00E-CJ3         6.7B-OI ,<VUE+bO / 5,00400
                                                                              r* r~- y*."$ " tT\~ *v
                                                                                                                   , C'-^too
4. 4 -DDT                  4.I6E-02    9.60E-02         7.00E-03    l.OOE-03   \ ^>9fifto      UK+m   ,-! 4JE*bl i?\9JBBMl
Alpha chlordnne             I.I6E-02    1.70E-02        6.00E-03    5.00E-04 • x'i.SB'fOO -- 2<^B+00 X/S-Wl ':^';'l4B4oI
Gamma clilordaiie           I.2IE-02    I.80E-02        6.00E-03    5.00B-04 > }i,OE40U - 3.0E4IX)       r>Mft+di •$ ^moi
Dicldrin                    9.24E-03    I.40E-02        8.(X)E-03   2.UOE-05 ^ :I.2BWO      • ^i.iK^' ' '4J&0M    £ vMtiHi
Dcltn-BHC                   I.40E-03    I.40E-03          -           -                                     -         -

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 11 SEDIMENT ECOLOGICAL RISK SUMMARY (continued)
                                                   SEDIMENT                        GUIDELINE VALUES'                          SEDIMENT RISK INDICES1
                                                CONCENTRATION                          ER-     ER-                       EFFECTS RANGE     EFFECTS RANGE
            CONTAMINANT                            (mg/kg)                          MEDIAN     LOW                          MEDIAN              LOW
             OF CONCERN                         MEAN | MAX.                          (mg/kg)  (nig/kg)                  MEAN      MAX.    MEAN       MAX.

flmlriii Kclone                                  4.80B-03          4.80E-03               -                -              -          -         -         -
Mcplachlor                                       7.80E-04          7.80E-04               .                .              .          .         .         -
Arsenic                                          7.86E+00          I.26E+01           8.50E401          3.30E40I         9.2E-02     I.5E-01   2.4E-01   3.8E-01
Chromium. Total                                  2.57E40I          3.04 E+OI          I.45E+02          8.00E40I         1.8E-OI     2.IB-OI   3.2E-OI   3.8B-OI
Copper                                           3.40E40I          3.76E+OI           3.90E+02          7.00E+OI         8.7E-02     9.6E-02   4.9E-OI   5.4E-OI
Lead                                             6.30E+01          l.OOB+02           UOE-r02   3.50E+OI                 5.7E-OI          '^mm ^;r:2M$
                                                                                                                                     9.IE-OI
Zinc                                             I.08E402          UOE+02             2.70E402  I.20E+02                 4.0E-OI v   4.IE-OI   9.0E-OI   9.2E-OI
                                                                                     TOTAL RISK INDtfX                             rOTi$i T1WM yzmm
      No data available
*       Maximum delected concentration below detection limit. One-half detection limit wai utilized for non-rfelecti.
            therefore, avenge concentration > maximum concentration.

1
    Sediment Guideline* from Table 5-5.
^ Rlik Indicei » Conlamlnanl Sediment Concentration (avenge or maximum) divided by tedlmenl guideline.


Nole: Shading Indicate! a riik Index greater than one.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   TABLE 12
PRESENT WORTH ANALYSIS'
ALTERNATIVE 1 - NO ACTION/ACCESS RESTRICTIONS
RE NORA SUPCTFUND SITE
VW94

                                                                        CAPITAL COSTS
                                                                              UNIT                       TOTAL                     PRESENT
DESCRIPTION                                    UNITS         QUANTITY        COSTJS)                    COSTJS)

Ctase AH Five Mentoring Wefl»                   each            5             $500                       $2,500                      S2JOO

                 TOTAL CAPITAL COSTS

                                                            OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS
                                                                           UNIT          TOT. ANNUAL   OPERATING       BEGIN       PRESENT
DESCRIPTION                                    UNITS         QUANTITY     COST($)          COST (S)     TIME   frrs)   YEAR        WORTH $}

6ytirreview                                     L.S.            B            $20,000           .           30 .         €          . $S5,S4Q

                     TOTAL O«M COSTS                                                                                     -          $S,S40



Suttota/                                                                                                                            $53,140
Cantit^eney. C 20%                                                                                                                  511,528 _.

TOTAL                                                                                                                          I_S69.788.

TOTAL PRESENT WORTH (ROUNDED)                          '"                -                                    ^                t    $70.000    "|

Notes:
• A tfieount rate ef 5% was used for preswrt worth calculations to detetmln* costs In 1B94do8«r$.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     TABLE 13

ALTERNATIVE 2 .ASPHALT CAP/ACCESS RESTRICTIONS
RCNORA SUPCRFUND STTE
•VW/M

                                                                   CAPITAL COSTS
                                                                                                           TOTAL                 PRESENT
DESCRIPTION                                  UNO'S      OUANTTTY       COST (S)                           COSTfS)                WORTH (5)


Sftt Prepanttion/Equfp Mobilization           L5.            1          $5,000                             55,000                  JS.OOO
     and DtmobffzBtJon (1)
OOM Monitoring Walls                          each          S            $500                              52,500                  5^500
Inttan Asphaft Cap (2)                      •q.yds.       S.324          520                              $106,480                5106,480
htttaB*tion of Storm Water                    LS.           1           $5.000                             55,000                  55,000
     Control System
OffsSe Disposal of Wsstewater (3)           Salions       5,000          $0.75                        .    $3,750                  53,750
Reptaesment of Fencing                        Lf.          800            $21                             516,800                 516,600
   Around Entire Site
Construction Oversight (4}                    LS.           1.          525,000                           $22,000                 $25,000

•uttotat                                                                                                                          5164.530

Engineering £ 15% '                                                                                                               524,630

                 TOTAL CAPITAL COSTS                                                                                         I    $169,210   |

                                                       OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS
                   -                                                 UNIT -  TOT. ANNUAL              OPERATING      BSG1N       PP.ESENT
DESCRIPTION                                 UNTT5       CUANTITY   COST(S)     COST (S)                TlME(yr-i^    YEAR        WORTH ($)

Yevfy Repair to Asphaft Op                   LS.            1           $2,000          $2,000              30         1           $30,740
(Conducted by Local Contractor)

Inspections and Reporting                    LS.            1           $5,000          $5,000              30         1           $76,850
5 year review                                LS.            6          $20,000                              90         5          5S5.640
Resurface Capped Area {5}                    LS.            2          $50,000                               1        15           $24.050
                                                                                                             1        30          $11,570

                       TOTA1 OiM COSTS                                                                                       I    $198,850   ]

Subtotal                                                                                                                         $388,060
Contingency, @ 20%                                                                                                                $77,612

TOTAL                                                                                                                        |    $465,672 1

TOTAL PRESENT WORTH (ROUNDED)                                                                                                |    5455,000   j


Notes:



{1} Site preparation includes construction of equipment decontatrtnatfon pad, moWzation and demooteatai of
    aqulpmenl, and fence rtmovaL
(2} InsiallaUonaf the uphaB cap K assumed to blci 15 days.
CS) For costing purpcsw His assumed that the waste-water wffltw disposed of as hazardous wst«.
(4) Construction Oversight costs Include one onsJte entfrnwr and H&S officer (1 0 hrs/day) and
     a weekly field visft and 40 hrs of Irv-efflce project mawiganwrt by the projact manager.
(5) Re^rf^gofme»sphaicapfeaKumedtobene«J«dW^                                                      Theunflcost
   for thh replacement Indudcc Canetaeiion OvsrsigM.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

(      TABLE 14

    PRESENT WORTH ANALYSIS'
    ALTERNATIVE 3 - FML/CLAY CAP/ACCESS RESTRICTIONS
    RENORA SUPERFUND SITE
    VW94

                                                                      CAPITAL COSTS
                                                                           UNIT                                   TOTAL                  PRESENT
    DESCRIPTION                                   UNfTS      QUANTITY    COST($)                                  COST(J)                WORTH ($)

    S&t Preparation/Equip MobfTeztion              LS.             1           $5,000                              $5,000                  $5,000

    Close Monitoring Write                        each •          5            $500                                $2,500                  $2.500
    Install FMUCty Cap (2)                       •q.ydt.        5,324          $59                                $314.116                $314.116
    tnstattaflon of Storm Water                    LS.            1           $5,000                               $9,000                  $5,000
          Contra! System
    Offslte Disposal of Wattewster (3)            gallons       6,000          $0.75                               $3,750                 $3,750
    Replaeement of Forcing                          Lf.          800            $21                               $16,800                 $16,800
      Around Entire Site
    Construction Omoight (4)                       LS.            1           $50,000                             $50,000                 $50,000

    Subtotal                                                                                                                              $397,168

    EnolneerinaeiS*        '-                                                                                                             $59,575

                    TOTAL CAPITAL COSTS                                                                                              [    $455,741   j



                                                            OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS
                                                                              UNIT         TOT. ANNUAL       OPERATING       BEGIN       PRESENT
    DESCRIPTION                                   UNITS      QUANTITY        CO5T{$)         COST ($)         TIME (yrs)     YEAR        WORTH (5)

    Vegetation Mowing                              each           4            $100            $400                 30         1           $6.148
    (Conducted by Local Landseaper)
    Syearreviw                                     LS.            6          $20,000              .                30         5           $55,640
    Inspections and Reporting                      LS.            1           $5,000           $5,000               30                    $7B,SSO



                         TOTAL O&M COSTS                                                                                             {   $13S,638    |




    Subtotal                                                                                                                             $595,379
    Contingency, @ 20%                                                                                                                   $119,076

TOTAL                                                                                                                                [    $714,455 _J

    TOTAL PRESENT WORTH (ROUNDED)                                                                                                    P    $71 4,000™"]

    Notes:
    • A tfseourt rate of 5* vw used far present womi
                                                                  ^
    fl) Sle preparation includes construction of equipment decontaniinaticn ped. mobifeattan and demeeHzatwn ef
        equipment, and fence removal.
    (2 InsUBalton of the FML/Cfcy cap Is assumed to take 30 days.
    P) For costing purposes Rb assumed tr*t the wasievv«teTwnt*rfspe**d of as hezardou» waste.
    {4) Construction OversiBht easts include one onslte enomeer and H&S officer (10hrsttay)and
        • weeklyfieWwit and 40 hne of in-ofTee prejed management &?*• Pf^K* "lanaflfir.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    TABLE 15

PRESENT WORTH ANALYSIS'
ALTERNATIVE 4 - EXCAVATION (2 FEETyOFFSITE DISPOSAL
RENORA SUPERFUND SITE
V14A4

                                                             CAPTTAL COSTS
                                                                  UNIT                                 TOTAL             PRESENT
 DESCRIPTION                              UNITS      QUANTITY   COST (S)                              COST (5)           WORTH fS)

Sitt Pr»pw«tten/Equip Moblbafion            LS.                     $30.000                           $30.000             $30,000
      tndD«mab(tfeatior!(1)
Cfcs» Menftwlnj WcDs                       nch           5           $500                             $2.500               $2.500
Intel SJH Survey                           LS.           1          $3,000                          $3.000                 $3,000
Extortion of *oO end debris (2)            tern        15,500         $14                          $77.000                $77.000
Transport and disposal of soil             tans        5£00          $345                         $1.897,500             $1,897,500
at o«sS« landfill facility (3)
Offsffr Disposal of Wa*t»wat»r (4)        gallons     15,000         S0.7S                            $18,750             $18,750
Btdrfffinc (de&vwy »nd ptectmcnt           -tons       5,500         $11                              $60,500             $60.500
    ef material)
Construction Oversight (5)                 L.S.          1         $35,000                            $35.000             $35,000
Pest-Excavation Sample Analysis            NJA
Rnal Site Sujvty                           LS.           1          $3,000                             $3,000              $3,000
Raphcwneni of FencinB                       Lf.         800          $21                              $16.800             $16,800
   Around Entire 5ft«

                                                                                                                         $Z144,050

                                                                                                                          $200.000

                TOTAL CAPITAL COSTS                                                                                      52,344.050


                                                    OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS
                                                                  UNIT    TOT. ANNUAL           OPERATING        BEGIN   PRESENT
DESCRIPTION                               UNITS      QUANTITY   COST{$)     COST (5)             TIME (yrs)      YEAR    WORTH (S)

                    TOTAL 04M COSTS                                                                                         $0



Subtotal                                                                                                                 $2,344,050
Ctt&ngcncy, Q 20%

TOTAL

TOTAL PRESENT WORTH (ROUNDED)

Nctw:



(1) S8» prepanrtien hdudw ewwtrudion of •qu^mtrt d«»ntamlnation pad. mobtaton arxJ demobEzatiixi ef
    aqulpmcnl, «nd finee tcmeval.
(^ Excavation is assumed ID take \5 days and bsckfnfing i« assumad to tefca 5 days.
(3) For costing purposes » is assumed that «fl axcavaltd tel win be efapoeed of as hazardoua waste;
  that 10% ovcrexcavation would occur and that ttw butt: d«nafty 'a 1.4.
(4) WastewBtwwil consist of water pumped from th««cav»!ion and wattr from the o>c»ntamin«tion
     eftqupmtntande^brts. For cosCfie purpose* 8i»«asum«d that te« wwtawater wOl bt disposed
     ef as hazardous vxastr
p) Censtruetkm Oversierrt costs include one onsft« «ngin*«r and H*S erfncw (10 lvs«ay) and
     • weekty field visa and 40 hra of in-«rT*ic« project manaeemont by tha prejoct manager.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            TABLE 16

    APPLICABLE RELEVANT AND APPROPRIATE REQUIREMENTS fARARs^

Chemcial Specific ARARs

     Federal Risk-Based Standards
Action-Specific ARARs
    National Ambient Air Quality Standards, 40 CFR 50 New Jersey
    Air Pollution Act N.J.A.C. &;27-l et sea.
    Occupational Safety and Health Act, 29 CFR Parts 1904, 1910
    and 1926
    Resource Conservation and Recovery Act,40 CFR 264.310(a)
    Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 40 CFR Parts 261,
    264 and 270
    Department of Transportation, 40 CFR Parts 107 and 171-179
    New Jersey Solid and Hazardous Waste Management Regulations,
    N.J.S.A. 13:E-1
    New Jersey Solid Waste Management Act, N.J.A.C. 26-6.2
    New Jersey Interdistrict and Intradistrict Solid Waste
    Flows, N. J.A.C. :26-6.2  _        -   ..      _
    New Jersey Noise Control Regulations, N.J.A.C. 7:29-1
Location-Specific ARARs
    Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act, 16 U.S.C. 661 et sea.
    Executive Order 11988 (40 CFR 6, Appendix A), Floodplain
    Management

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       APPENDIX III
ADMINSTRATIVE RECORD INDEX

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         Index Document Nuafcer Order                                       Page: 97
                                        IENORA Documents




Docuaent Muaber: REH-002-0523 To 0607                                                Date: 09/29/87

Title: Declaration for the Record of Decision (for the Renora, Inc., site)

     Type: 1ESAL DOCUMENT
   Author: Dawett, Christopher J.: USE**
Recipient: none: none


Docuaent Huaber: REi-002-0608 To 0739                                                Date: 07/01/89

Title: Manifests for Hazardous Waste Shipped Offsite for Renora PCS Excavation - Appendix A

      Type: REPORT
    Author: Betz Converse Murdoch (BOO

"""""""""""""""" """"""*"*"*"""""•"""""""""""""""" """"""""
Document KuDfaer: REM-002-0740 To 07S6         Date: 01/07/93
T
itle: Straw Biaaescssment, Mill Brook, Mew Jersey, Renora Site

      Type: REPORT
    Author: US EPA


Document Nuaber: REN-002-0757 To 0924                                                Date: 06/01/92

Title: Report of Sac?I ing Results for Ranora Site Remediation Presented to U.S. Environmental Protection
       Apency • Region II and the The Ranora Trust

      Type: REPORT
  Author: tetz Cemwrse Murdoch (BOO
Recipient: US EPA



OocuBent tkftxr: REK-002-0925 To 0971                                                Oat*: 01/17/90

Title: Saopling and Analysis tmutts for the K> Excavation and Off site Landfilling Phase of the
       Ranora Sit* Remediation in tonhamtwri. Maw J*r*ey

    Type: DATA
  Author: letz Converse Murdoch (BW)
Recipient: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                            Index Docuoent Hunter Order                               Page: 98
                                            REMORA Documents




    Oooajsnt Huaber: REM-002-0974 To 1349                                            Date: 12/05/89

    Title: Analytical Results Report of Bioreswdistion Treatability Study

         Type: DATA
       Author: Sybron Corporation


    Bocuatnt Umber: BEN-002-1350 To 1628                                             Date: 10/23/89

    Title: Bench-Scale Bioreaediation Studies for Kimoro Site Soils

         Type: KPORT                                            •
       Author: Ecova Corporation
    lacipiant: »eti Converse Murdoch (6CM)


    »ooj»nt MuBber: REN-002-1629 To 1863                                             Date: 07/14/89

/   Title: Analytical Results Report of Bioreaediation T reliability Study

         Type: REPORT
       Author: Sybron Corporation


    ftocuatnt MuHber: REN-002-1864 To 1917                                           Date: 01/01/89

    Title: Bioreswdiation Treatability Study Work Plan for Renora Site Remediation

         Type: PLAN
       Author: Sybron Corporation


    tocueent Huaber: REN-002-1918 To 2305                                            Date: OS/05/93

    Title: Final Risk Assessment, tenors Inc. Site. Edison Township. Mew Jersey

         Type: REPORT
       Author: TIC Environmental Corporation, Inc.
    Recipient: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                        Index Document Miaber Order                                  Page: 99
                                        RENORA Documents



OocuMnt Nuaber: REN-002-2306 To 2308                                                Date: 07/05/90

Title: (Letter regarding options for iavediete •itigation of oil seeps into Mill Brook)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
Recipient: Harney, Joyce: US EPA
 Attached: REN-002-2309 REN-002-2310 BXH-002-2311

Document Ikafcer: REN-002-2309 To 2309                   Parent: REH-002-2306       Date:   / /

Title: Figure 1, Property Layout and Location of Oil Seep

     Type: GRAPHIC
   Author: none: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
Recipient: none: none


Document Hiafcer: REN-002-2310 To 2310                   Parent: REN-002-2306       Date:   / /

Title: Figure 2, Filter Fence Concept

     Type: GRAPHIC
   Author: none: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
Recipient: none: none


Docueent Nudber: REN-002-2311 To 2311                    Parent: REN-002-2306       Date:   / /

Title: Figure 3, Stilling Well Concept

     Type: GRAPHIC
   Author: none: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
Recipient: none: none


tocuaentttiaber:REH-002-2312 Te 2313                                                Date: 05/16/90

Title: (Letter regarding the informal trestability study)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
Recipient: Narney. Joyce: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                Index Docuaent Muober Order                                   Page: 100
                                                RENORA Documents



        Document Number: REN-002-2314 To Z315                                               Date: 01/22/90

        Title: CUttcr forwarding the final version of IICM Engineer*' Draft Sampling and Analysis Results
               for the PCS Excavation and Offsite landfilling Phase of the Renora Site Rwnediation)

             Type: CORRESPONDENCE
           Author: Nyatt, tfiUfaa ».: Pitney, Nardin. ICipp t Szuch
        Recipient: various: various


        Document Number: REN-002-231e To 2468                       •                       Date: OS/01/94

        Title: Phase II Feasibility Study Report for Renora Inc. Site. Edison, New Jersey

             Type: REPORT
           Author: none: Betz Converse Murdoch (KM)
        Recipient: none: Renora Trust


    (    <ocuB*nt Number: RE*-002-2469 To 02S1                                               Date: 01/01/93

>       Title: Report of Supplemental Information to the Phase II Feasibility Study, Renora Superfund Site,
               Edison, New Jersey

             Type: REPORT
           Author: ftetz Converse Murdoch (BOO
        Recipient: US EPA
                    NJ Department of Environmental Protection UJDEP)


        Document Number: REN-003-0282 To 0287                                               Date: 02/24/93

        Title: (Letter providing additional summery information relating to the Phase II Feasibility Study
               for the Renora Inc. Site)

             Type: CORRESPONDENCE
           Author: Rochat-Nelbig. larbara: Betz Converge Murdoch        (KM)
        Recipient: Narney, Joyce: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       Index Document Nuober Order                                       Page: 101
                                      IENORA Documents




Docuaent Muaber: REN-003-0288 To 0288                                                Date: 12/08/92

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed letter report entitled. •Supplemental to Technical Review
       of June 18, W92 Report of Sampling Results for Renora Site Remediation Phase II Feasibility
       Study, Renora, Inc., BoniiemtoMn, Mew Jersey*)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Crater. Scott ».: Caap Presser B MtXe* (CBN)
Recipient: toieszefc. Erwin: US EPA
 Attached: REN-003-0289

Docuaent Muaber: REN-003-0289 To 0315                   Parent: tEN-003-0288        Date: 12/08/92

Title: Letter Report Supplemental to Technical Review of June 18. 1992, Report of Sampling Results
       for Renora Site Remediation, Phase II Feasibility Study, Renora, Inc., Bonhantown, New Jersey

     Type: REPORT                                          c

  Author: none: Caap Dresser t HdCee (COM)
Recipient: none: US EPA



Oocuaent Nuaber: KN-003-0316 To 0317                                                Date: 04/08/91

Title: (Letter forwarding the encloaed Revised Saopling Plan, Quality Assurance Project Plan Addendum,
       and the Addendum to Health and Safety Plan for additional sampling of soils and groundwater
       at the Renora Site located in Edison, Mew Jersey)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Rochat-Helbig, Barbara: B*tz Converse Murdoch (BOO
Recipient: Rarney, Joyce: US EPA
 Attached: REN-003-0318 REN-003-0337 KEN-003-0359

•ecuaent Hwber: KN-003-OS18 To 0336                     Parent: REH-003-0316        Date: 03/01/91

Title: Revised Saapling Plan for tenora tit* taetdietfon

    Type: PLAN
  Author: Manes, Kim: t«ti Converse Murdoch (MM>
           Rochat-Melbig. Barbara: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
Recipient: none: US EPA                                    *
                 Renora Trust

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         Index Document Umber Order                                        Page: 102
                                         REHORA Docueents




Document Number: REH-003-C537 To 0558                     Parent: REN-003-0316      Date: 03/01/91

Title: Quality Assurance Project Plan Addendum for Ronora Site Remediation Phase II Foasibility Study
                                                          •
     Type: PLAN
   Author: Davis, Atwood F.: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
Recipient: none: US EPA


Docuaent Number: REN-003-0359 To 0382                     Parent: tEN-003-0316      Date: 03/01/91

Title: Addendum to Health and Safety Plan, Prepared May 1988 for Phase II Feasibility Study, Renore
       Site Remediation, Edison, Men Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Pi res, Charles N.: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
••cipient: none: US EPA
           none: lanora Trust


Docuaent Nuriaer: IEN-003-0383 To 0383                                              Date: 04/08/91

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed report entitled, "Results of Preliminary Treatability Studies
       for Stabilization/Solidification and Asphalt Blending")

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE                                •
   Author: lochat-Helbig, Barbara: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
Recipient: Namey, Joyce: US EPA
 Attached: REN-003-0384

Document Muster: ftEN-003-0384 To 0432                   Parent: tEX-003-0383       Date: 03/01/91

Title: Results of Preliminary Treatability Studies for Stabilization/Solidification and Asphalt Blending

    Type: REPORT
  Author: Morrow, Steven R.: Belz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
           Rochat-Kelbis, Barbara: Betz Converne Murdoch (BCM)
Recipient: none: Ranora Trust

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 Index Docuaent Umber Order                                          Page: 103
"(f                                              RENORA Documents



                         : Ra-003-0433 To 0433                                                 Date: 12/05/90

          Title: {letter forwarding the enclosed report entitled,."Workplan for Phase II Feasibility Study,
                 Renora 8ft*. Wison. MM Jersey")

               Type: CORRESPONDENCE
             Author: Rochat-Helbig, Barbara: Irtz Converse Murdoch CKM)
          Recipient: Narney, Joyce: IB EM
           Attached: KN-005-OU4

          DocuHnt «u*>er: REM-003-0454 To 0462                   Parent: IEN-003-0433         Date: 12/01/90

          Title: Workptan for Phase II Fcwibility Study, Renora Site, Edison Township, Mew Jersey

               Type: PUN
             Author: none: letz Converse Murdoch (BOO
          Recipient: none: US EPA
                     none: Renora Trust

      i
          OocuMnt Kurtier: REM-D03-M63 To 0465                                                Date: 09/10/90

          Title: (Utter forwarding the Revised Sampling Plan, Quality Assurance Project Plan Addendum, and
                 the Health and Safety Plan Addendua for the preliminary stabilization/solidification treetability
                 study at the Renora Site)

              Type: CORRESPONDENCE
             Author: deH. Alexander. Henry: f*tz Converse Murdoch (BOO
                     Rochat-Helbig, Barbara: t«tz Converse Murdoch (BOO
          Recipient: Barney, Joyce: US EPA
           Attached: REN-003-0466 KK-003-0478 REM-003-0490

          BocuMftt koter: REN-003-0466 To 0477                   Parent: REN-003-0463         Date: 09/01/90

          Title: Revised Saapling Plan for tanora Site ReMdiation, Edison, Hew Jersey

              Type: PLAN
            Author: deM. Alexander, Henry; let* Cenveree Murdech (KCM)
                     Rochat-Helbig, tarter*: *etz Conwerce Murdoch (ICN)
          Recipient: none: US 17*
                                   Trust

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                        Index Document Umber Order                                           Page:
                                        RENORA Documents



              r: REN-003-0478 To 0489                   Parent: REN-003-0463        Date: 09/01/90

Title: Addendum to Quality Assurance Project Plan. Prepared July 1988 for Preliminary Stabilization
       Solidification Traatfbflfty Study, lanora Site Remediation. Editon, Maw Jersey

     Type: PLAM
   Author: Davis, Atwood F.: met! Converse Murdoch     (KM)
Recipient: none: US EPA
           none: Renora Trust                                 *


Document Number: REN-003-0490 To 0503                   Parent: REN-003-0463        Date: 09/01/90

Title: Addendum to Health and Safety Plan Prepared Nay 1988 for Preliminary Stabilization/Solidification
       Treatability Study, Renora Site Remediation, Edison, Hew Jersey

     Type: PLAN
   Author: Pirec, Charles M.: Retz Converse Murdoch (BOO
           Schneider, Christian N.: ftetz Converse Murdoch (BOO
Recipient: none: US EPA
           none: Ranora Trust


Document Number: REN-003-0504 To 0504                   Parent: REN-003-0504        Date: 05/03/94

Title: (Letter forwardins the enclosed monthly report for April 1994 regarding the Renora Site remediation
       effort)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: tetz Converse Murdoch       (KM)
Recipient:ttarney,Joyce: US EPA                               •
 Attached: REN-003-0504

Document Number: REN-003-0505 To 0506                                               Date: 04/01/94

Title: Renora Site Remediation. Monthly Report • April 1994

     Type: REPORT
   Author: deM. Alexander. Henry: letz Converse Murdoch       (KM)
Recipient: none: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       Index Document Muter Order                                            Page: 105
                                       RENORA Documents




Document Muter: REN-003-0507 To 0507                                                Date: 04/01/94


Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Monthly report for March 1994 regarding the Renora Site remediation
       Nork effort)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: deN. Alexander, Henry: Mtz Converee Murdoch (BCM)
tecipient: Barney. Joyce: US EPA
 Attached: IEM-D03-0508                                 *

Document Muter: REN-003-0506 To 0509                   *arent: REN-003-0507         Date: 03/01/94

Title: Renora Site Remediation, Monthly Report • March 1994

     Type: REPORT
   Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
Recipient: none: US EPA


"ocument Muter: REN-003-0510 To 0510                                                Date: 03/08/94

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Monthly report for February 1994 and the enclosed annual report
       for the Renora Site remedietion work effort)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
Recipient: Barney, Joyce: US EPA
 Attached: REN-003-0511 REN-003-0513

Document Muter: REN-003-0511 To 0512                  Parent: REN-003-0510          Date: 02/01/94
                                                         •
Title: Renora Site Reeadiation, Monthly Report - February 1994

     Type: REPORT
   Author: deH. Alexander. Henry: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
tecipient: none: US EPA


Oocuaent Muter: REH-003-0513 To 0514                   Parent: REN-003-0510         »ate: 08/01/94

Title: Renora Site Reaediation. Annual Report. March 1994. Remedial Action Progress Schedule

    Type: REPORT
   Author: none: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
•recipient: none: none

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              Index Document NuoberdOrder                                      Page: 106
                                              RENORA Docunents



        Document Nuaber: REN-003-0515 To 0515                                                Date: 02/01/94

        Titlt: (Letter forwarding the enclosed aonthly report for January 1994 regarding the Renora Site
                    Jtation work effort)

             Type: CORRESPONDENCE
           Author: deM. Alexander, Henry: letz Converse Murdoch CBCM)
        leeipient: Narney, Joyce: US EPA
         Attached: tEN-003-0516

        Document ttueber: REN-003-0516 To 0517                 Parent: REN-003-0515          Date: 01/01/94

        Title: Renora Site Reaedietion, Monthly Report - January 1994

             Type: REPORT
           Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: Setz Converse Murdoch (BCX)
        Recipient: none: US EPA


    (    wcuatnt NuBber: REN-003-0518 To 051£                                                 Date: 01/10/94

/       Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Monthly report for Decenber 1993 regarding the Renora Site
              remediation work effort)

             Type: CORRESPONDENCE
           Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: letz Convene Murdoch (BOO
        Recipient: Harney, Joyce: US EPA
         Attached: «•>•••••••*•*

                     er: REW-003-0519 To 0520                                                Date: 12/01/94

        Title: Renora Site Resttdiation, Monthly Report • Decanter 1993

             Type: REPORT
          Author: deH. Alexander, Nenry:    letz Converxe Murdoch (BOO
        Recipient: twne: US E»A



                      r: REH-003-0521 To 0521                                                Date: 01/10/94

        Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed aenthly report for fiovseber 1993 regarding the Renora Site
                   diation work effort)

             Type: CORRESPONDENCE
           Author: deH. Alexander, Henry:   Betz Conveme Murdoch (BCM)
        recipient: Harney, Joyce: US EPA
         Attached: KM-003-0522

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                            Index Document Nimber Order                                          Page: 107
                                            RENORA Documents




                 •r: REN-003-0522 To 0523                    Parent: REN-003-0521       Oate: 11/01/93

    Title: Renora Sfte Remediation, Monthly Report • November 1993

         Type: REPORT
       Author: deN. Alexander. Henry: Betz Converse Nurdoch (BCM)
    Recipient: none: US EPA


             lumber: REN-003-0524 To 0525                                               Oate: 10/01/93

    Title: Renora Site Remediation, Monthly Report • October 19*93

         Type: REPORT
      Author: deN. Alexander, Henry: Betz Converse Nurdoch (BCM)
    Recipient: none: US EPA



    Oocummt Nimber: REN-003-0526 To 0526                                                Oate: 10/01/93
{
    Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed monthly report for September 1993 regarding the Renora Site
           remediation work effort)

         Type: CORRESPONDENCE
       Author: deN. Alexander, Henry: Betz Converse Nurdoch (BCM)
    Recipient: Barney, Joyce: US EPA
     Attached: REN-003-0527

    Oocummt Nuober: REN-003-0527 To 0528                     Parent: REN-003-0526       Oate: 09/01/93

    title: Renora Site Remediation, Monthly Report - September 1993

        Type: REPORT
      Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: CcU Converse Murdoch (fttM)
    Recipient: none: US EPA



    Oocuunt lumber: RBMJ03-OS29 To 0529                                                 Oate: 09/07/93

    Title: (Letter forwrdtra the enclosed monthly report for August 1993 regarding the Renora Site remediation
           work effort)

         Type: CORRESPONDENCE
      Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
    Recipient: Harney, Joyce: US EPA
     Attached: REN-003-0530

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         Index Docunmt Umber Order                                           Page: 108
                                         RENORA Documents



Oocuecnt Husber: REN-003-0530 To 0531                    *»rent: REN-003-0529        Date: 08/01/93

Title: tenor* Site Remediation, Monthly leport - August.1993

     Type: REPORT
   Author: deN. Alexander, Henry: Betz Converse Murdoch      CKM)
lecipient: none: US EPA

......
     ..................... .
                           ...........
                                     ...
                                       ...
                                         ...
                                           ...
                                             ...
                                               ...
                                                 ...
                                                   >..
                                                     ...
                                                       ...
                                                         ...
                                                           ...
                                                             ...
                                                               ...
                                                                 ...
                                                                   .......
                                                                         ............
                                                                                    ...
                                                                                      .
DocuMnt feaber: REK-003-0532 To 0532                                 Date: 08/09/93

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed eonthly report for July 1993 regarding the Renore Site remediation
       work effort)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: de«. Alexander, Henry: ftetz Converse Murdoch (BOO
Recipient: Mamey. Joyce: US EPA
 Attached: REM-003-0533

 ocuMnt Nuober: REM-003-0533 To 0534                     Parent: REN-003-0532        Date: 07/01/93

Title: Renora Site laecdiation. Monthly Report - July 1993

    Type: REPORT
  Author: de*. Alexander, Henry: Betz Converse Murdoch (BOO
Recipient: none: US EPA


OocuHnt MuBter: IEN-003-0535 To 0535                                                 Date: 07/08/93

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed earthly report for J,une 1993 regarding the Renora Site repudiation
       work effort)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
  Author: deH. Alexander. Henry: «etz Con*«rse Murdoch (ICM)
Recipient: Hamey, Joyce: US EPA
 Attached: REN-003-0536

ftocuesnt Huaber: REN-003-0536 To 0537                   Parent: REN-003-0535        Date: 06/01/93

Title: Renora Site Reeadiation, Monthly Report • June 1993

     Type: REPORT
   Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: letz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
Recipient: none: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                          Index Document Nuober Order                                           Page: 109
                                          REMORA Documents



   Bnnaont Muter: tEM-003-0538 To 0533                                                 Date: 06/09/93

   Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Monthly report for May 1993 regarding the tenora Site remediation
          work effort)

        Type: CORRESPOMDEHCE
     Author: deH. Alexander, Renry: ««a Converse Murdoch (BCM)
   Recipient: Hamey, Joyce: (ft EPA                        »
    Attached: IEN-003-0539

   Docummt number: IEH-003-0539 To 0540                    Parent: IEN-003-0538        Date: 05/01/93

   Title: Renora Site Remediation. Monthly Report • May 1993

        Type: REPORT
      Author: deM. Alexander, Henry: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
   Recipient: none: US EPA


( feculent number: KM-003-0541 To 0541                                                  Date: OS/07/93

   Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed wnthly report for April 1993 regarding the Renora Site rMediation
          work effort)

        Type: CORSESPOIffiENCE
      Author: detl. Alexander, Henry: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
   Recipient: Narney, Joyce: US EPA
    Attached: REN-003-OS42

  Oocuient ttuiber: REN-003-OM2 To 0543                    Parent: REN-003-0541        Date: 04/01/93

   Tttte: tenora Site Remediation, Monthly Report - April 1993

        Type: REPORT
      Author: deH. Alexander, »enry: letz Conwrse Murdoch      (KM)
   Recipient: none: US EPA


   Oocuaent IMter: RE»-003-05U To 0544                                                 Date: 04/06/93

   Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed monthly report for March 1993 regarding the Renora Site remediation
          work effort)

        Type: CORRESPONDENCE
      Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
   Recipient: Hamey. Joyce: US EPA
    Attached: REN-003-OS45

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                        Index Document Hunber Order                                   Page: 110
                                        RENQRA Documents




OocuMnt Number: tEH-003-0545 To 0546                     Parent: REH-003-0544        Date: 03/01/93

Titlt: l«nora tite Reavdiation, Monthly Report • March 1993

     Type: 1EPORT
   Author: dtH. Alexander, Mnry: tetz Converse Nurdoch (KM)
Recipient: none: US EPA
                                                       •

tocuMnt ttuaber: KN-003-0547 To 0547                                                 Date: 03/04/93

Title: (Latter forwarding the enclosed ajonthly report for February 1993 regarding the Renora Site
       remediation work effort)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: Betz Converte Nurdoch (BOO
tecipient: Barney. Joyce: US EPA
 Attached: REN-003-0548

Bocuwnt Nueber: REK-003-0548 To OS49                     Parent: REM-003-0547        Date: 02/01/93

Title: Renora Site tamediition. Monthly Report • February 1993

    Type: REPORT
  Author: deH. Alexander, Henry:   Betz Converse Murdoch (BOO
Recipient: none: US EPA



Docuaent Nu^er: REH-003-0550 To 0550                                                 Date: 02/08/93
                                                           •
Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed ajonthly report for January 1993 regarding th* Renora Site
           diation work effort)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: letz Convert* Murdoch (KM)
Recipient: Harney, Joyce: US EPA
 Attached: REJf-003-0551

Oocuaent Nuaber: REM-003-0551 To 0552                    Parent: REN-003-0550        Date: 01/01/93

Titlt: Renora Site Remediation, Monthly Report • January 1993

     Type: REPORT
   Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: B*tz Convert* Murdoch (BCM)
Recipient: none: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

I                                           Indtx Docuaent Huaber Order                                       Page: '111
                                            REHORA Documents     *




    Oocuaent ttuaber: IEH-003-0553 To 0553                                               Date: 01/08/93

    Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Monthly report for Decaater 1992 for the Renora Site remediation
           work effort)

         Type: CORRESPONPEMCE
       Author: deM. Alexander, Henry: B*t> Convene Murdoch (BCM)
    Recipient: Herney, Joyce: US EPA
     Attached: REN-003-0554

    Docuaent Nuaber: KN-003-0554 To 0555                     Parent: XEN-003-0553       Date: 12/01/92

    Title: Renora Site teacdiation. Monthly Report • Decanter 1992

         Type: REPORT
       Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: letz Converge Murdoch (BCM)
    lecipient: none: US EPA

    .
    ...
      ...
        ...
          ...
            ...
              ...
                ...
                  ...
                    ...
                      ...
                        ...
                          ...
                            ...
                              ...
                                ...
                                  ...
                                    ...
                                      ...
                                        ...
                                          ...
                                            ...
                                              ...
                                                ...
                                                  ...
                                                    ...
                                                      ...
                                                        ...
                                                          ...
                                                            ...
                                                              ...
                                                                ...
                                                                  ...
                                                                    ...
                                                                      ...
                                                                        .
    Oocuaent Muater: R£N-003-055e To 0556                                               Date: 12/08/92

    Title: (Letter forwarding the ercloaed aonthly report for Hoveaber 1992 regarding the Renore site
               diation work effort)

          Type: CORRESPONDENCE
       Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: letz Converae Murdoch (BCM)
    Recipient: Barney, Joyce: US EPA
     Attached: REN-003-0557

    Docuaem Muater: REN-003-0557 To 0558                     Parent: REN-003-0556       Date: 11/01/92

    Title: Renora Site Remediation. Monthly Report - Moweater 1992

         Type: REPORT
      Author: deH. Alexander, Henry:   Betz Converae Murdoch (BCM)
    Recipient: none: US EPA



    Oocuaant Huaber: Rtt-OOJ-0559 To 0559                                               Date: 11/09/92

    Title: (Letter forwarding the encloaed earthly report for October 1992 regarding the Renora Site
           mediation work effort)

        Type: CORRESPONDENCE
      Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: Betz Converae Murdoch (BCM)
    ^cipient: Harney, Joyce: US EPA
    Attached: REN-003-0560

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   Index DocuMnt Hiober Order                                       Page: 112
                                                  IEHORA Docuoents     *



        Oocu*ent Muter: REN-003-0560 To 0561                       Parent: REN-003-0559       Date: 10/01/92

        Tttt*: Renora Site Remediation, Monthly Report • October 1992

              Type: REPORT
          Author: oeH. Alexander, Henry: Sett Convert* Murdoch (BCM)
        Recipient: none: US EPA


        tocuaent Kaaber: REN-003-0562 To 0562                                                 Date: 10/07/92

        Title: (Letter forMBrding the enclosed Monthly report for September 1992 regarding the Renora Site
               remediation work effort)

            Type: CORRESPONDENCE
          Author: deN. Alexander, Henry: Setz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
        Recipient: Barney, Joyce: US EPA
        Attached: HEN-003-0563 KM-003-0565

    (   tacuaent   Number: REN-003-0563 To 0564                    Parent: REN-003-0562       Date: 09/01/92

4       Title: Renora Site Remediation. Monthly Report • September 1992

            Type: REPORT
          Author: den. Alexander, Henry: B*tz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
        Recipient: none: US EPA


        Document Number: REN-003-0565 To 0565                      Parent: REN-003-0562       Date: 10/01/92

        Title: (Letter extending tfce deadline for suteitttal of the draft Phase II Feasibility Study Report
               to October B, 1992)

             Type: CORRESPONDENCE
          Author: Marney. Joyce: US EM
        Recipient: da*. Alexander, menry: Ittz Corwcrsa Murdoch (BCM)


        OocuMnt number: REK-003-0566 To 0566                                                  Date: 08/07/92

        Title: (Utter forwarding the enclosed monthly report for Jjjly 1992 regarding the Renora Site remediation
               Mork effort)

             Type: CORRESPONDENCE
    ,     Author: deM. Alexander, Nenry: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
        Recipient: Narney, Joyce: US EPA
         Attached: REN-003-0567 REN-003-0569

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                          Index Document Nuafcer Order                                      Page: 113
                                          RENORA Documents      *




•ocuaent Nuaber: REN-003-0567 To 0568                       Parent: REN-003-0566     Date: 07/01/92

Titlt: tenor* Site Remediation, Monthly leport - July 1992

     Type: REPORT
   Author: deN. Alexander, Henry: Setz Converse Murdoch (BOO
Recipient: none: IK B*


OocuMnt Nuaber: REN-003-0569 To 0573                        Parent: RE*-003-0566     Date: 07/30/92

Titlt: Minutes - Rtnora Technical Coaaittee Meeting

     Type: OTHER
   Author: none: none
Recipient: none: none


feculent   Nuaber: REN-003-0574 To 0574                                              Date: 07/09/92

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed aenthly report for June 1992 regarding the Renora Site remediation
       work effort)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: letz Converse Murdoch (BOO
Recipient: Harney. Joyce: US EPA
 Attached: REN-003-0575

OocuMnt Muaber: REN-003-0575 To 0576                        Parent: REN-003-0574     Date: 06/01/92

Title: Renora Site Remediation, Monthly Report - June 1992

      Type: REPORT
   Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: S*tz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
Recipient: none: US EPA


Pocuaint       •r: REN-003-0577 To 0577                                              Date: 06/05/92

Title: (Letter forwarding      enclosed aenthly report for Nay 1992 regarding the Renora Site remediation
       worfc effort)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: Betz Converse Murdoch (KM)
Recipient: Harney, Joyce: US EPA
 Attached: REN-003-0578

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 108 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              Index Docuaisnt ttueber Order                                        Page: 114
                                              RENORA Docusents        *




       Oocuaent Ntater: REN-003-0578 To 0579                     Parent: BEN-003-0577     Oate: 05/01/92

       Title: lanora Site KaMdiatien, Nonthly Report - Nay 1992

            Type: REPORT
          Author: deH. Alexander. Henry: Jetz Converae Murdoch (BOO
       lecipient: none: US EPA


      DOOM* Nuaber: REN-003-0580 To 0580                                                  Oate: 05/06/92

       Title: (Letter forwarding the encloMd Monthly report for April 1992 regarding the Renora Site remediation
              uorfc effort)

           Type: CORRESPONDENCE
         Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: ketz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
      lecipient: Harney, Joyce: US EPA
       Attached: REN-003-0581
      ........... ........... .
                              ...
                                ... ....
                                       .....
                                           ... ............... ..
                                                                .......... ......
                                                                                ...
                                                                                  ..—
                                                                                    ..........—.....—.
                                                                                                     ...
                                                                                                       .
    ( ocuaent Nuaber: REK-003-0581 To 0582                 Parent: REN-003-0580       Oate: 04/01/92

[      Title: Renora Site Remediation, Nonthly Report - April 1992

           Type: REPORT
        Author: deH. Alexander. Henry:   Betz Convert* Nurdoch (BOO
      Recipient: none: US EPA



      Oocuacnt Muaber: REN-003-05£3 To 0553                                               Oate: 04/07/92

      Title: (Letter forwarding the encloaed Monthly report for March 1992 regarding the Renora Site remediation
             work effort)

           Type: CORRESPONDENCE
         Author: 4eN. Alexander, Menry: «etz Cenverw Nurdoch (KM)
      tecipient: Namey. Joyce: US EPA
       Attached: REN-D03-OS84

      Oocuamt Neater: REN-003-05S4 To 0585                       Parent: REN-OG3-0583     Oate: 03/01/92

      Title: Renora Site Remediation, Nonthly Report •• Narch 1992

            Type: REPORT
         Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: ftetz Converan Nurdoch (»CM)
       'ecipient: none: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 109 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

II                                            Index Decuaent Nuaber Order
                                              RENORA Documents     *
                                                                                                                Page: 115




     Docuaent Rusher: REN-003-0586 To 0586                                                     Date: 03/09/92

     Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed monthly report for February 1992 regarding the Renora Site
            remediation work effort)

          Type: CORRESPONDENCE
        Author: deH. Alexander, mtnry: B*t* Converse Murdoch (BOO
     Recipient: Narney. Joyce: IB EPA
      Attached: REN-003-0587

     Docuaent Nuaber: REN-003-0587 To 0588                     ••rent: RE*-003-0586           Date: 02/01/92

     Title: Renora Site Remediation. Monthly Report - February 1992

          Type: REPORT
        Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: Betz Converse Murdoch (BOO
     Recipient: none: US EPA


     fecuaent Nuaber: REN-003-0589 To 0589                                                    Date: 02/07/92

     Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed monthly report for January 1992 for the Renora Site remediation
            work effort)

          Type: CORRESPONDENCE
        Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: Betz Converse Murdoch (BOO
     Recipient: Narney, Joyce: us EPA
      Attached: REN-003-0590

     Docuaent Nucber: REN-003-0590 To 0592                     Parent: REN-003-OS89           Date: 01/01/92

     Title: Renora Site Remediation, Monthly Report - January 1992

         Type: REPORT
       Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: Bet* Converse Murdoch        (BOO
     Recipient: none: US EPA



     Bocuaent •uaJaer: REV-OB -0593 To 0593                               tote:                     01/06/92

     Title: (Utter forwarding the enclosed aenthly report for ftKeaber 1991       regarding the Renora Site
                diation work effort)

         Type: CORRESPONDENCE
       Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: Retz Converse Murdoch       (BOO
     Recipient: Harney, Joyce: US EPA
     Attached: REN-003-0594

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 110 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   Index Oocuunt Nudber Order                                 Page: 116
(                                                  RENORA Documents




         Document Number: REN-003-0594 To 0596                      Parent: REN-003-0593     Date: 12/01/91

         Title: Renora Kite Remediation, Monthly Report • December 1991

             Type: REPORT
           Author: deH. Alexander, •enry: Cetz Converse Murdoch (KM)
         Recipient: none: us EPA



         Oocuaent Nuaber: REN-003-0597 To 0597                                               Date: 12/09/91

         Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed monthly report for November 1991 regarding the Renora Site
                remediation work effort)

              Type: CORRESPONDENCE
            Author: Guest, Daniel T.: R*tz Converse Murdoch (BOO
         Recipient: Narney, Joyce: US EPA
          Attached: REN-003-0598

     /   Document ttuaber: REN-003-0598 To 0600                     Parent: REN-003-0597     Date: 11/01/91

         Title: Renora Site Remediation. Monthly Report - November 1991
',
              Type: REPORT
            Author: fiuest, Denlel T.: R«tz Converse Murdoch (BOO
         Recipient: none: US EPA                                  •


         •ocummt Number: REN-003-0601 To 060A                                                Date: 11/07/91

         Title: (letter forwarding the enclosed monthly report for October 1991 regarding the Renora Site
                    Nation work effort)

              Type: CORRESPONDENCE
            Author: Rochat-telbig. iertera: tetz Convene Murdoch (ROD
         Recipient: Barney, Joyce: US B>A
          Attached: REN-003-0602

         Docuaent ttuafoer: REN-003-0602 To 0604                   **rent: KH-003-0601       »ete: 10/01/91

         Title: Renora Site ReMdiation. Monthly Report - October 1991

              Type: REPORT
           Author: Rochat-ielbig. tartaera: letz Convert* Murdoch (RCM)
         Mcipient: none: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 111 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

(                                              Index Document Nunber Order                                      Page: 117
                                               RENORA DocuoenU




    Docuaant Nuaber: REN-003-0605 To 0605                                               Pate: 10/09/91

    Titlt: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Monthly report for September 1991 regarding the Renora Site
           remediation work effort)                           *

         Type: CORRESPONDENCE
       Author: Rochat-Melbig, ffjarfaera: letz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
    Recipient: Barney, Joyce: 88 EPA
     Attached: IEN-003-0606

    Oocuaent Nuaber: REN-003-0606 To 0608                       Parent: KN-003-0605     Date: 09/01/91

    Title: lenore Site leacdiation, Monthly Keport - Septeober 1991

         Type: KPORT
       Author: lochat-Helbig, larbara:     tetz Converae Murdoch (BCM)
    tecipient: none: US EPA



    •ocuaent Muober: IEN-003-0609 To 0609                                               Date: 09/09/91

    Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Monthly report for August 1991 for the Renora Site remediation
           work effort)

         Type: CORRESPONDENCE
       Author: Rochat-Netbig. tarbara: Betz Converae Murdoch (BCH)
    Recipient: Marney, Joyce: US EPA
     Attached: REN-003-0610

    Oocuaent Kurtxr: REN-003-0610 To 0611                       Parent: REN-OQ3-0609    Date: 08/01/91

    Title: Renore Site Re*ediation, Monthly Report - Auguit 1991

        Type: REPORT
      Author: Rochat-telbig. tarbara: B«tz Converae Murdoch (BCM)
    Recipient: none: UK CPA



    Document   ttuter:   REN-OOJ-W12 To 0612                                            Date: 08/06/91

    Title: (Letter forwarding the encloaed Monthly report for July 1991 regarding the Renora Site reaediation
           work effort)

         Type: CORRESPONDENCE
       Author: Rochat-Helbig, Barbara: Betz Converae Murdoch (BCM)
    recipient: Narney, Joyce: US EPA
     Attached: REN-003-0613

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 112 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                        Index Docuaent Nuaber Order                                         Page: 118
                                        REMORA Documents




      nt Nuftber: REN-003-0613 To 06U                    Parent: REN-003-0612        Date: 07/01/91

Tftlt: tenor* Sit* Raaediation, Monthly Itport • July 1991

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Rochat-Melbfa. Barbara: Betz Convent* Murdoch (UN)
•acipfant: none: IK EPA



Docuaent Nuaber: REN-003-0615 To 0615                                                Date: 07/08/91

Title: (Letter forwarding the aneloted Monthly report for June 1991 regarding the Renora Site remediation
       Mork rffort)

     Type: COKRESPCMDENCE
   Author: Kochat-Nelbig, tarbara: Mtz Converse Murdoch (BOO
Recipient: Hamey, Joyce: US EPA
 Attached: REN-003-0616

)ocuMnt Muifcer: REM-003-0616 To 0617                    Parent: tEN-003-0615        Date: 06/01/91

Title: tanora Site laMiiliiTlm . Monthly Report - June 1991

     Type: KPORT
   Author: Rochat-belbig, Barbara:   Bctz Convcrce Murdoch (BOO
tacipient: none: US EPA                                      •



Docuaent Buaber: tEN-003-0618 To 0618                                                Date: 06/06/91

Title: (Letter forwarding the cncloMd Monthly report for May 1991 regarding the lenora Site raaa diet ion
       work effort)

    Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Rochat-Nelbig, Barbara: Betz Converge Murdoch (BCM)
Recipient: Marney, Joyce: US &>A
 Attached: IEN-003-0619

Docuaent Nuaber: RBI-003-96W To 8620                     tmrant: tfM-003-0618        Date: 05/01/91

Title: tenora Sit* taawdiation. Monthly Report • Nay 1991

     Type: REPORT
   Author: Rochat-Nelbig. Barbara: Bctz Convert* Murdoch (BOD
tacipient: none: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 113 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                           Indtx Document Muaber Order                                       Page: 119
                                          IENORA Documents




         Muter: KN-003-0621 To 0621                                                 Date: 05/07/91

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed with I y report for AprU 1991 regarding the Renore Site remediation
       work effort)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: lochit-Nelbis. tartar*: B*tz Converse Murdoc* (KM)
lecipient: Barney, Joyce: US EPA
 Attached: KN-003-0622

Bocuaent Muaber: R£M-003-0622 To 0623                       Parent: 101-003-0621    Bete: 04/01/91

Title: lenore Site Remediation, Monthly Report • April 1991

     Type: REPORT
   Author: ftcchet-Helbig, Barbara: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
lecipient: none: US EPA



feculent ttuafaer: REN-003-0624 To 0624                                             Date: 04/05/91

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed aonthly report for March 1991 regarding the Renore Site remediation
       nort effort)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Rochet-Netbig. Barbara: Betz Converse Murdoch fBCM)
Recipient: Narney, Joyce: US EPA
 Attached: IEN-003-0625

Document Muaber: I£N>003-0625 To 0626                       Parent: IEN-003-0624    Bate: 03/01/91

Title: lenore Site Remediation. Monthly Report - March 1991

     Type: REPORT
   Author: lochat-Nelbig, Barbara: Betz Converse Murdoch (KM)
lecipient: none: US EPA


Bocuicnt ttuaber: IEJ1-B03-0627 To 0627                                             Date: 03/05/91

Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed aonthly report for February 1991 regarding the Renora Site
           diation work effort)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Rochat-Helbig, Barbara: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
lecipient: Hamey, Joyce: US EPA
 Attached: IEN-003-0628

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 114 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                           Index Document Husber Order                                       Page: 120
                                           RENORA Docuaents



    Document Kuaber: REN-003-0628 To 0629                   Parent: tEN-003-0627            Date: 02/01/91

    Title: tenor* Site Remediation. Monthly leport • February 1991

         Type: KPORT
       Author: tocfcat-Nelbig, Barbara: Betz Conven* Murdoch (BOO
    lecipient: none: US EM


    BocuMnt NuBber: tEH-003-0630 To 0630                                                    Date: 02/04/91

    Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Monthly report for January 1991 regarding the Renora Site
           remediation work effort)

         Type: CORRESPONDENCE
       Author: tochat-Helbig, Barbara: Betz Convert* Murdoch (BOO
    lecipient: Harney. Joyce: US EPA
     Attached: REN-003-0631

    Mcuwnt NuBber: tEil-003-0631 To 0632                    Parent: REN-003-0630            Date: 01/01/91

I   Title: lenora Site KeaMdiation, Monthly Report •• January 1991

         Type: REPORT
       Author: tochat-Nelbig, Barbara: Betz Converne Murdoch (BOO
    •ecipient: none: US EPA                                  *


    Oocuaent Muiber: REN-003-0633 To 0633                                                   Date: 01/08/91

    Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Monthly report for December 1990 regarding the Renora Site
           remediation work effort)

         Type: CORRESPONDENCE
       Author: tochat-Helbig, Barbara: Betz Convene Murdoch (BOO
    tecipient: Barney, Joyce: US EPA
     Attached: REN-003-0634

    Document Mu*er: BEH-003-0634 To 0635                    **r«nt: REN-003-0633    tete:         12/01/90

    Title: Renora Site teaadiation. Monthly taport • Beceater 1990

         Type: REPORT
       Author: Rochat-Helbig, Barbara: Betz Convene Murdoch (BOO
    tecipient: none: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 115 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                            Index Document Nurfwr Order                                   Page: 121
                                           tENORA Documents




    •ocuasnt Mtfter: fEM-003-0636 To 0636                                                Date: 12/07/90

    Titlt: (Letter forwarding the enclosed Monthly report for Movaster 1990 regarding the Renora Site
               diet ion work effort)

         Type: CORRESPONDENCE
       Author: tochat-Melblg, Barbara: (etz Corner** Murdoch (KM)
    Recipient: Barney. Joyce: US EPA                         «
     Attached: t£N-003-0637

    ftocuacnt MuBber: KEN-003-0637 To 0639                   Parent: REN-003-0636        Date: 11/01/90

    Title: lenora Site leaadiation, Monthly Report • floveaber 1990

         Type: REPORT
       Author: tochat-Melbtg, krbara: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
            t: none: us EPA


(   Mcuaent Huaber: REK-003-0640 To 0640                                                 Date: 11/08/90

    Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed eanthly report for October 1990 regarding the fienora Site
           reavdiation work effort)

         Type: CKRESPOHDENCE
       Author: Kochat-Nelbfg, tarbara: tetz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
    Recipient: tUmey, Joyce: US EPA
     Attached: KM-003-0641

    •ocuHnt Nuaber: KEN-003-0641 To 0642                     Parent: IEN-003-0640        Date: 10/01/90
                                                                •

    Title: lenora Site tea»diation. Monthly Report • October 1990

         Type: REPORT
       Author: ftochat-Melbfg, Barbara:   Betr Converse Murdoch (BCM)
    tectpient: none: US EPA



    Oocuaent lUter: t£N-003-0643 To 0643                                                 0ate: 10/06/90

    Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed eanthly report for September 1990 regarding the Renora Site
               iiation vori effort)

         Type: CORRESPOKDENCE
       Author: Rochat-Hclbig, Barbara: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
    Recipient: Harney, Joyce: US EPA
     Attached: IKN-003-0644

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 116 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                Index Docuannt Buster Order                                          Page: 122
                                                RENORA Documents




        Oocuaent Mueber: RW-003-06U To 0645                      Perent: REK-003-0643      Date: 09/01/90

        Tftlt: Renora Site Remediation. Monthly Report - Septeober 1990

             Type: REPORT
          Author: Rochat-Nelbfa, tarbara: ftetz Converse Murdoch CKM)
        Recipient: none: US EPA



        Oocuaent Nuaber: KM-003-06M To 0646                         A              tete:         09/07/90

        Tittt: (letter fomerding the enclosed Monthly ropert for August 1990 regarding the Renora Site remediation
               work effort)

             Type: CORRESPONDENCE
           Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: Betz Converse Murdoch (804)
        •ecipient: Itorney. Joyce: US EPA
         Attached: REt)-003-0647

    /   loeuwnt Killer: tEM-003-0647 To 0649                     Parent: REN-003-0646      Bate: 08/01/90

(       Title: lenora Site Rewdiation, Monthly Report - August 1990

             Type: REPORT
           Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
        Recipient: none: W EPA


        Bocuaent Nuaber: REN-003-0650 To 0650                                              Date: 08/06/90

        Title: (Letter forwardino the enclosed antthly report for July 1990 regarding the Renora Site repudiation
               work effort)
                                                                    •
             Type: CORRESPONDEVXC
           Author: deH. Alexander, •enry: R«tz Converse Murdoch CKM)
        Recipient: Marney, Joyce: US EPA
         Attached: RED-005-0651

        Oocuaent Nuaber: REM-003-0651 To 0652                    Parent: REN-003-0650      Date: 07/01/90

        Title: Renora Site Remediation. Monthly Report • July 1990

             Type: REPORT
           Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: R«tz Converse Murdoch (KM)
    ,   Recipient: none: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 117 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

           "                                  Index Document Huaber Ordtr                                         Page: 1123
^1                                            REHORA Docuaents




     Oecuaant Huaber: REH-003-0653 To 0653                                               Date: 07/06/90

     Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed aonthly report for June 1990 regarding the Renora Site remediation
            work effort)

          Type: CORRESPONDENCE
        Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: Oatz Converse Murdoch CEOO
     Recipient: Harney, Joyce: US EPA
      Attached: REH-003-065*

     Oocuaent Huaber: REH-003-0654 To 0655                     Parent: REN-M3-0653       Oate: 06/01/90

     Title: Renora Site Remediation. Monthly Report - June 1990

         Type: REPORT
       Author: deli. Alexander, Henry:   getz Converse Murdoch (BOO
     Recipient: none: US EPA



               Huaber: REH-003-0656 To 0656                                              Oate: 06/08/90

     Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed earthly report for May 1990 regarding the Renora Site remediotion
            work effort)

          Type: CORRESPOHDEHCE
        Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: letz Converse Murdoch (KM)
     Recipient: Harney, Joyce: US EPA
      Attached: REN-003-0657

     Oocuaent Huaber: REH-003-0657 To 0659                     Parent: REN-003-0656      Oate: 05/01/90

     Title: Renora Site Remediation, Monthly Report - May 1990

          Type: REPORT
        Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: tetz Converse Murdoch (BOO
     Recipient: none: US EPA


     ftocuaent Huaber: REH-009-M60 T» 0660                                               Oate: 05/07/90

     Title: CLattar foruafding the enclosed •onthly report for April 1990 regarding the Renora Site remediation
            Morfc cffart)

          Type: CORRESPODENCE
        Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: letz Converae Murdoch (BOO
     Recipient: Harney, Joyce: US EPA
      Attached: REN-003-0661

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 118 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        •    '   .                               Index Docunent Nuober Order                                           Page: 124
(                                                REMORA Docuaents




        oocuaent lluaber: REH-003-0661 To 0662                    Parent: KM-003-0660         Date: 04/01/90

        Title: Renora Site *ea*di%tton. Monthly Report •• April J990

                 Type: REPORT
           Author: deH. Alexander, Henry:   fetz Converse Murdoch (KM)
        lecipient: none: US EPA



        OocuMnt Huetoer: KN-003-0663 To 0663                         A                       Date: 04/03/90

        Title: (Letter forwarding tfce enclosed aonthty i-eport for March 1990 regarding the Renora Site remediation
               work effort)

             Type: CORRESPONDENCE
          Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: aetz Converse Murdoch (BOO
        Recipient: Narney. Joyce: US EPA
        Attached: REU-OC3-0664

    (   Mcuwnt Ikafeer: R£N-003-0664 To 0665                      Parent: REN-OQ3-0663        Date: 03/01/90

I       Title: Renora Site ReMdiatfon, Monthly Report • March 1990

                 Type: REPORT
          Author: deH. Alexander, Henry:    letz Conver»e Murdoch (BCM)
        Recipient: none: US EPA



        Oocuaent Nunfaer: IEH-003-0666 To 0666                                                Date: 03/07/90

        Title: (Letter forwarding the encloeed Monthly report for February 1990 regarding the Renora Site
                   Jiation work effort)

                 Type: CORRESPONDENCE
           Author: deH. Alexander, •anry: letz Converse Murdoch (KM)
        Recipient: Harney, Joyce: « EPA
         Attached: IEN-003-0667

        »ocUMnt Muefaer: REK-003-0667 To 0668                     Parent: IEN-003-0666        Date: 02/01/90

        Title: Renora Site Remediation, Monthly Report - February 1990

                Type: REPORT
              Author: deM. Alexander, Nenry: tetz Convene Murdoch (BCM)
    (       Recipient: none: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 119 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              Draft Index Document Hotter Order                            Page: 125
                                              RENORA Documents




     Document Nuaber: REN-003-0669 To 0669                                                Date: 01/18/90
                                                               •
     Title: (Letter forwarding copies of Sybron Chemical's completed draft treatability study report for
            the Renora site)

          Type: CORRESPONDENCE
        Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: Reti Converse Murdoch (BO*)
     Recipient: Hartley, Joyce: US EPA


     Docuaent Ruafcer: REN-003-0670 To 0670                                              Date: 01/04/90

     Title: (Letter forwarding the annthly report for January 1990 regarding the Renora Site reaediation
            work effort)

          Type: CORRESPONDENCE
        Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: Betz Converse Murdoch (BCK)
     Recipient: Hamey. Joyce: US EPA
      Attached: REN-OG3*0671

     Oocuaent Kusfcer: REM-003-0671 To 0672                    Parent: REN-003-0670      Date: 01/01/90

     Title: Renora Site Raaediation, Monthly Report - January 1990
                                                                  •
          Type: REPORT
       Author: deH. Alexander, Henry:   Betz Converse Murdoch CBCM)
     Recipient: none: US EPA



     Document Niafeer: REN-003-0673 To 0673                                              Date: 01/04/90

     Title: (Letter forwarding the enclosed monthly report for Veceober 1989 regarding the Renora Site
                diation work effort)

          Type: CORRESPONDEKX
     Condition: MARGINALIA
        Author: deH. Alexander, Marry: tctz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
     Recipient: tarney, Joyce: US £PA
      Attached: REM-003-0674




<i

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 120 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                        Draft Index Docunent Umber Order                                      Page: 126
                                        tENORA Docunents



Oocuaent Nuaber: REN-003-0674 To 0675                    Parent: REN-003-0673       Oate: 12/01/89

Title: tenors Site Remediation, Monthly Report • December 1989

     Type: REPORT
   Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: lets Convert* Murdoch CBCM)
Recipient: none: US EPA


Rocuaent Nuaber: REN-003-0676 To 0678                                               Date: 05/31/94

Title: (Letter regarding the Renora Superfund Site, Edison Township, Middlesex County, Phase II Feasibility
       Study dated Hey 1994)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: PureeU, Christina H.: Neu Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy
Recipient: Narney, Joyce: US EPA
 Attached: REN-003-0679

document Nuaber: REM-003-0679 To 0683                    Parent: REN-003-0676       Date:   / /

Title: Subchapter 9: Seating of Abandoned Welli;

     Type: OTHER                                            ,
   Author: none: none
Recipient: none: none


Oocuaent Nuaber: REN-003-0684 To 0684/A                                             Date: 01/11/94

Title: (Letter stating that the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy disagrees
       with the EPA's conclusion that a land uu; restriction Mould not be necossary to impose on the
       Renora Site after the removal action is conducted)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Miller, Lance R.: Hew Jersey Depertnent «f Environmental Protection and Energy
Recipient: Pavlou, fieorge: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 121 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                           Index Document Mister Order                                         Page: 127
                                           RENORA Documents
                                                                •



    Document Muter: REN-003-0688 To 0690                                                Date: 03/04/93

    Title: (Letter regarding the Renora Superfund Site. Edison Township, Middlesex County. Supplemental
           •base 11 Feasibility Study dated January 1993)

        Type: CORRESPONDENCE
      Author: Purcell, Christina «.: itnt Jersey Department of Envfronaental Protection and Energy
    Recipient: ttarney. Joyc»: US EPA



    Document Muter: REN-003-0691 To 0698                                                Date: 11/16/92

    Title: (Letter regarding Renore Inc., Edison Township, Middlesex County, Draft Risk Assessment II
           and Draft Feasibility Study Report II)

        Type: CORRESPONDENCE
      Author: Purcell, Christina H.: NeM Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy
    Recipient: Narney, Joyce: US EPA



^   Document Muter: REN-003-0699 To 0701                                                Date: 08/26/92

    Title: (Letter regarding the Ranora Site, Edison Township, Middlesex County, Report of Sampling Results)

         Type: CORRESPONDENCE
      Author: Purcell, Christina H.: Mew Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy
    Recipient: Narney, Joyce: US EPA



    Document Muter: REN-003-0702 To 0703                                                Date: 02/07/92

    Title: (Letter commenting on the conference call of 2/7/92 regarding various wells at the Renora
           Site)

        Type: CORRESPONDENCE
      Author: Purcell, Chrtstfna •.: *aw Jersey Pauii leant of Environmental Protection and Energy
    Recipient: Maraey, Joyce: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 122 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         Index Document Huaber Order                                          Page: 128
                                         RENORA Docuients



    Document Number: REN-003-0704 To 0704                                               Date: 10/23/91

    Titlt: (Letter stating that HJDEPE has reviewed the revised Sampling Plan, the Health and Safety
           Plan, and the Quality Assurance Plan for the Renora Site incorporating nil of NJDEPE's previous


         Type: CORRESPONDENCE
       Author: PureeU, Christina «.? «ew Jersey DcpBrtmnt of Environmental Protection and Energy
    Recipient: Marney, Joyce: US EPA


    Document number: REN-003-070S To 0705                                               Pate: 05/17/91

    Title: (Letter commenting on the preliminary Trentebility Study for the Renora Site prepared by BCM
           Engineers dated March 1991)

         Type: CORRESPONDENCE
       Author: Luzecky, Roman S.: Hew Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
    Recipient: Narney. Joyce: US EPA

(                                                             ^
    Oocuecnt Nuaber: REH-003-0706 To 0707                                               Date: OS/16/91

    Title: (Letter coBBenting on the Revised Sa*plimg Plan (RSP), Quality Assurance Project Plan (QAPP),
           and the addendum to the Health and Safety Plan (HSP) for the Renora Site all dated 1991 prepared
           by KM Engineers)

         Type: CORRESPONDENCE
       Author: Luzecky, Rosnn S.: Hew Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
    Recipient: Harney. Joyce: US EPA


    Document HuAer: REN-003-0708 To 0706                                                Date: 01/24/91

    Title: (Letter stating that HJDEP umamndi approval of the revised work plan for Phase II Feasibility
           Study for the Renora Site prepared by KM dated 1990, and revised Decarter 1990)

         Type: CORRESPONDENCE
       Author: Luzecky, town C.t «ew Jersey OepartMnt of Environmental Protection
    Recipient: Harnry, Joyce: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 123 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                           Index Document Number Order      •                                      Page:
                                           IENORA Dncuntnts



                 r: REH-003-0709 To 0710                                               Date: 09/28/90

   Title: (Letter commenting on the revised Sampling Plan for the preliminary stabilization/solidification
          trmatability study at the tenors. Inc. Site prepared by BCM Engineers dsted July 1968 and revisedSeptember
          1990)

        Type: CORRESPOBDHCE
      Author: Luzecky, Roman S.: m*w Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
   Recipient: Barney, Joyce: US EPA
                                                                                                        \



   Document Number: REN-003-0711 To 0711                                               Date: 09/14/90

   Title: (Letter stating that HJDEP finds the use of a filter fence instelled continuously along the
          Mill Brook acceptable provided that the filter fence and oleophillic polymer is installed deep
          enough to intercept oil seeping into the brook)

       type: CORRESPONDENCE
     Author: Luzecky, Roman S.: New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(tecipient:Barney, Joyce: US EPA                             •
   Attached: REN-003-0712

   Document Number: REN-003-0712 To 0713                    Parent: REN-003-0711       Date: 09/14/90

   Title: (Fax copy of the letter in which NJDEP accepts the use of a filter fence installed continuously
          along the Mill Brook)

        Type: CORRESPONDENCE
      Author: Luzecky, Roman S.: New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
   Recipient: Barney, Joyce: US EPA


                 r: REN-003-07U To 0714                           tote:                      08/20/90

   Title: (Letter stating that NJDEP mas no comments en the fcioremediation studies performed for the
          tenora Site, that bioremediation is untikeiy to Mork on tme contamination, and that the bioromediation
          studies are arr»ro»acl as submitted)

        Type: COMESPONDENCE
      Author: Luzecky. ftmman S.: Van Jersey Ospartaunt of Environmental Protection
   tacipiant: amrney. Joyce: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 124 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         Index Documnt Muster Order                                   Page: 130
                                         REMORA Doctoentc




Docuaant Nuaber: IEN-003-0715 To 0716                                                Date: 06/12/90

Title: {Letter coHsenting on the Draft tanora SUe Remediation Sailing Plan prepared by KM Engineers
       dated April 1990)

    Type: CORRESPOaTCNCE
  Author: Luzedty, Brman £.: VMM Jersey Dependent of Eovironaerrtet Protection
Recipient: Nerney. Joyce: IK B*


DocuHnt Nwber: KH-003-0717 To 0718                                                   Date: 03/20/90

Title: (Latter regarding a aite inspection conducted at the Kenora Site fay the MJDEP geologist on
       March 9, 1990)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Luzecky, toaon S.: Mew Jersey Deperiaecnt of EnvironMntal Protection
tacipiant: Harney, Joyce: US EPA



fiocuaent Muriaer: KH-003-0719 To 0720                                               Date: 03/04/90

Title: (Latter cceBenting on the draft Morkplan for the Focused Feasibility Study for the Renora
       Inc. Site praparad by KM Engineers dated January 1990)

     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: Luzecky, toaan S.: New Jersey Department of Environsental Protection
•acipiant: Narney, Joyce: US EPA



Document Nuriaer: KN-003-0721 To 0721                                                Date: 02/15/90

Title: (Letter stating NJDEP's approval of the Beapling and Analysis Result* for the PCS excavation
       and off-site tandftiling phase of the Renora Site remediation as prepared by KM Engineers
       dited January 15, 1990)

    Type: CORRESPONDENCE
  Author: Luzecky. Roman S.: New Jersey acparttsant of Environaantat Protection
Recipient: Narney. Joyce: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 125 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                             Index Docuaent Nuafaer Order                                      Page: 131
                                            tENORA Docuaents




    Docuaent Muter: REN-003-0722 To 0746                                                   Date: 08/22/90

    TftU: Adainistrative Order. Index Mo. II-CERCLA-00111..fn tht Natter of:      Renora, Inc. Site, Edison,
          Mew Jersey

         Type: LEGAL DOCUMEBT
       Author: Sidaann-Eristoff. Constan: US EM
    leciptant: various: various PRPs



    Docueant Muafaer: BCN-003-0747 To 0747                                                 Date: 03/12/91

    Title: (Letter sufaaitting the enclosed Order Modifying the Consent Decree in the USA v. AI can Aluminum
           Corp., Civil Action Mo. 88-4646; and State of New Jersey v. AIcan Aluainun Corp., Civil Action
           Mo. 88-4670)

         Type: CORRESPONDENCE
       Author: Brooke-Davidson, Carrick: US Dept of Justice
    Recipient: Clerk: US District Court
(    Attached: REN-003-0748

    Docuaent Muaber: REN-003-0748 To 0760                      Parent: REN-003-0747        Date: 03/21/89

    Title: United States of Aeerica v. AIcan Alueinue Corp. et al., Civil Action Mo. 88-4646, Hon. Nicholas
           B. Politan; State of Meu Jersey v. AIcan Alueinua Corp, et el.. Civil Action No. 88-4670, Hon.
           Nicholas H. Politan


        Type: LEGAL DOCUMENT
      Author: Brooke-Davidson, Carrfck: US Dept of Justice
               Engel, Richard F.: Deputy Attorney General, State of Meu Jersey
               Tucker, WfUiaai C.: Assistant Regional Counsel, EPA
    Recipient: Hyatt, Uilliaa «.: Pitney, Mardin, Kipp ft Szuch
               Morton. Kenneth N.: Meu Jersey Transit Bus Operations, Inc.



    Docuaent Muaber: REM-003-0761 To 0764                             tot*:                      08/19/92

    Tftlt: {Letter registering the Renora Trust'* objection to the decision toy tfce U.S. EPA to require
           the Trust to prepare the suppleaental feesfbility study for the *«x>ra Cite prior to eeapletion
           toy the EPA of the risk asmiaint)

        Type: CORREIPUMUENCE
      Author: deH. Alexander, Henry: tetz Converse Murdoch (BCM)
    Recipient: Barney. Joyce: US EPA                        ^
I

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 126 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       Index Docunent Umber Order                                           Page: 132
                                       RENORA Documents




                •r: REN-003-0765 To 0766                                               Date: 09/26/91

   Title: (Letter Invoking dispute re«olut1on regarding the Civil Action No. 88-4646 (NHP). Consent
          Pecree entered March 21. 1969)

        Type: CORRESPONDENCE
      Author: Hyatt, tlUUa» «.: Pitney, Mardin. tipp t Szuch
   lacipient: various: various


   Document Huaber: KN-003-0767 To 0769                                                Date: 10/16/90

   Title: (Letter designating Daniel T. Guest, P.E. a* the Facility Coordinator pursuant to Section
          WKA) of the lenora, Inc. Superfund Site Adninietrative Order Index Mo.-II-CERCLA-00111)

        Type: CORRESPONDENCE
      Author: Nyatt. Willie* H.: Pitney, Hardin, Kipp t Szuch
   lacipiant: Narney, Joyce: US EPA


^ Document Nuaber: tEM-003-0770 To 0775                      *                          Date: 05/18/90

   Title: (Letter aunestfng alternate approaches to the performance of the Phase II Feasibility Study
          or the remediation of the tenora Site, and providing coonents on the draft Adninistrative Order
          en Consent received April 25, 1990)

       Type: CORRESPONDENCE
     Author: Nyatt. Willie* H.: Pitney. Nardin. Kipp I Szuch
  Recipient: Tucker, Willie*,, Esq.: US EPA


  Ooojatnt Number: XCN-003-0776 To 0776                                                Date: 03/11/92

   Title: (Letter thanking Ms. Manny for being sensitive to the concerns of the cooounity surrounding
          the lenora Site)

        Type:
      Author: firun, John 0.: Edison NJ, Town of
   Recipient: Narney. Joyce: US EPA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 127 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    Index Document Nuaber Order                           Page: 1133
                                    MENORA Documents




ftocuaant Mater: tEN-003-0777 To 0788                                    Date: 06/01/94


Titlt: Proposed Ptan for tttf Mnor* Inc. Site

     Type: PLAN
   Author: none: US EPA
••clpient: none: none



OocuHnt Muriwr: KM-003-0789 To 0789                                      Date: 11/01/90

Title: (Letter rescinding the Unilateral Order •mered August 22, 1990)
                                                         •
     Type: CORRESPONDENCE
   Author: none: US EPA
Recipient: Hyatt, William: Pitney, Mardin, Kipp * Szuch

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 128 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     APPENDIX IV
RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 129 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                           APPENDIX IV
                     RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

                   RENORA,INC. SUPERFUND SITE

INTRODUCTION
A responsiveness summary is required by Superfund policy. It
provides a summary of the public's comments (received during the
public comment period and at the public meeting) and the United
States Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA's) response to
these concerns. All comments summarized in this document have
been considered in EPA's final selection of a remedy for the
Renora site.
This community relations responsiveness summary is divided into
the following sections:
I. Overview: This section describes EPA's preferred alternative
for remedial action.
II. Summary of Community Relations Activities; This section
describes community relations activities related to the Renora
site.
III. Public Meeting Comments and EPA Responses; This section
provides a summary of commentors' major issues and concerns, and
responds to all significant comments raised at the public
meeting.
IV. Response to Written Comments: This section provides a
summary of, and responses to, written comments received during
the public comment period.
I. OVERVIEW
The selected remedy for the site includes excavation of the top
two feet of soil and off-site disposal at an EPA approved
landfill, and backfilling of the site with certified clean fill.
EPA did not receive any public comments that indicate that
changes to the selected remedial alternative are appropriate.
II. SUMMARY OF COMMUNITY RELATIONS ACTIVITIES

The Phase II Feasibility Study (FS) report, and the Proposed Plan
for the site were released for public comment on July 20, 1994.
These documents are available to the public in the administrative
record file at the EPA Docket Room in Region II, New York and the
information repository at the Edison Township Public Library
located on Plainfield Avenue in Edison Township, New Jersey. The
notice of availability for these documents was published in the

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 130 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

News Tribune on July 20, 1994. The public comment period was
held from July 20, 1994 to August 18, 1994.
On August 9, 1994, EPA conducted a public meeting at the Edison
Township Municipal Building to, 1) inform local officials and
interested citizens about the Superfund process, 2) review
current and planned remedial activities at the site, and 3)
respond to any questions from area residents and other attendees.

Community involvement with Renora site activities has been
somewhat limited. EPA distributed the Proposed Plan for the
Renora site to more than 350 area residents; however, attendance
at the public meeting was limited. The majority of the comments
received from the local community involved risk-related issues.
III. PUBLIC MEETING COMMENTS AND EPA RESPONSES

The questions and comments raised during the public meeting are
grouped into the following categories:
     A.   Remediation of Subsurface Soils
     B.   Remediation of Ground Water
     C.   Remediation of Mill Brook Surface Water and Sediments

     D.   Risk Issues
     E.   Administrative Record Documents
     F.   Replacement of the Perimeter Fence

     G.   Environmental Land-Use Restriction

     H.   Disposal of Excavated Soil
Each question or comment is followed by EPA's response, as
required.
A.   Remediation of Subsurface Soils
1.   A representative of Congressman Pallone's office stated that
     the Congressman believes it is critical for EPA to address
     the subsurface arsenic contamination and requested an
     explanation as to why remediation of the subsurface soils is
     not part of EPA's cleanup plan.

     EPA Response: EPA's Risk Assessment evaluated the potential
     carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic risk of exposure to
     subsurface soils using a future-excavation worker scenario.
     The potential risks were assessed using the reasonable
     maximum exposure (i.e., the "worst case" exposure scenario)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 131 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

f)   which assumes that an excavation worker would be exposed to
     the maximum concentration of contaminants at the site for 65
     days and would ingest 480 milligrams per day (rag/day) of the
     soil containing the maximum concentration.
     The results of the risk assessment revealed that even though
     reasonable maximum exposure values were used, the potential
     carcinogenic risk of exposure to subsurface soils is well
     within EPA's acceptable risk range. The calculated risk to
     an excavation worker was 2 x 10"5, or two in one hundred
     thousand, while EPA's acceptable risk range is one in ten
     thousand to one in a million.
     The potential non-carcinogenic risk of exposure to
     subsurface soils was determined to be greater than EPA's
     acceptable risk level. A hazard index of 10 was calculated
     compared to EPA's acceptable level of 1.0. This indicates
     that there may be a concern for chronic health effects.
     However, because this risk is solely due to the presence of
     elevated concentrations of arsenic in subsurface soils, in
     particular, the maximum concentration that was detected in
     only one sample (taken from eight to ten feet below the
     surface), EPA concluded it was necessary to examine the
     assumptions utilized in the risk assessment.
     Use of the reasonable maximum exposure (ingestion of 480
     mg/day of the maximum concentration of arsenic for 65 days)
     is extremely conservative and may overestimate the potential
     non-carcinogenic risk of exposure to the subsurface soils.
     The ingestion rate of 480 mg/day is based on gardening
     activities (contact with soil using hand tools); however, an
     excavation worker is more likely to use heavy machinery
     which would result in a maximum soil ingestion rate of 50
     mg/day. In addition, the 65 days of excavation activities
     would not be limited to the one area —   eight to ten feet
     below the surface — where the maximum concentration of
     arsenic was detected. The excavation worker would
     reasonably be exposed to subsurface soils over the entire
     site, resulting in exposure to an average (rather than
     maximum) concentration of arsenic during the 65 days of
     excavation activities. Therefore, EPA also evaluated the
     risk based on a "central tendency", using the average risk
     parameters noted above. The use of these central tendency
     values results in a decrease of the hazard index to 0.2,
     indicating that adverse non-carcinogenic effects are
     unlikely to occur.
     In addition, risk also depends on a chemical's toxicity
     factor. The potential non-carcinogenic risk of exposure to
     subsurface soils was generated by comparing the chronic
     daily intake to the reference dose, which is a measure of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 132 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     arsenic's threshold for causing chronic adverse health
     effects. Since the daily exposure dose in the excavation-
     worker scenario, which is of sub-chronic duration (two to
     seven years), is being compared to a threshold dose (RfD)
     based on a chronic exposure (greater than seven years), the
     potential risk of the sub-chronic exposure (65 days) would
     be considerably lower.
     Finally, it should be recognized that since the maximum
     concentration of arsenic was detected at eight to ten feet
     below the surface, it is unlikely that anyone will come in
     contact with it. However, even if casual contact with these
     soils were to occur, the maximum concentration of arsenic
     detected in the subsurface soils is not high enough to cause
     acute health effects, and therefore, does not represent an
     imminent and substantial health threat.
     Therefore, since the subsurface soils do not pose an
     unacceptable carcinogenic or non-carcinogenic risk (based on
     the analyses, above), EPA has determined that remediation of
     the subsurface soils is not required.
2.   A representative of the Edison Wetlands Association
     suggested that the reason EPA is not addressing the
     subsurface soil contamination is to save the potentially
     responsible parties' (PRPs) money. In addition, he stated
     that because a land-use restriction would be required, the
     site's future use would be limited.
     EPA Response: EPA selected the preferred alternative based
     on an evaluation of four alternatives with respect to the
     following nine evaluation criteria:
          • Overall Protection of Human Health and the
             Environment
          • Compliance with Applicable or Relevant and
             Appropriate Requirements
          • Long-Term Effectiveness
          • Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility or Volume through
             Treatment
          • Short-Term Effectiveness
          • Implementability
          • Cost
          • State Acceptance

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 133 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

          • Community Acceptance
     As required by the National Oil and Hazardous Substances
     Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), EPA uses the above
     criteria to select remedies at all Superfund sites —
     regardless of who is paying for remediation of the site.
     EPA selected the preferred remedy because it provides the
     best balance of the nine evaluation criteria — not to
     reduce remediation costs for the PRPs.
     In addition, as stated above, EPA determined that
     remediation of subsurface soils was not necessary based on
     an assessment of the risk and likelihood of exposure to
     subsurface soils. As explained, the risks associated with
     the subsurface soils are within EPA's acceptable risk range.
     EPA agrees that a land-use restriction would limit
     development of the site. However, the restriction would
     only apply to subsurface soils. Because the water table is
     rather shallow (five feet below the surface) in some areas
     of the site, excavation activities would likely be confined
     above the water table. Therefore, a restriction on use of
     the deep soils at the site is not expected to significantly
     hinder future development or use of the site. EPA believes
     that removal of the top two feet of soil and replacement
     with clean fill would provide additional flexibility for
     future development.
B.   Remediation of Ground Water
1.   A representative of Congressman Pallone's office stated that
     the Congressman believes that EPA should include ground
     water as part of its final cleanup action at the Renora site
     since the potential risk posed by ingestion of unfiltered
     ground water at the site exceeds EPA's acceptable risk
     range. A member of the township council also expressed
     concern about the risk due to ground water.
     EPA Response: Although EPA conservatively evaluated the risk
     of exposure to shallow ground water underlying the site, it
     is not considered a complete pathway of exposure. EPA
     determined that the shallow ground water flows in a
     horizontal direction and discharges into Mill Brook. Due to
     the low permeability of the shallow aquifer, which impedes
     downward flow of contaminants, it is reasonable to assume
     that only the shallow aquifer has been impacted. Since all
     potable wells in the vicinity of the site are cased in the
     deep aquifer (greater than 100 feet), it is unlikely that a
     well would be installed in the shallow aquifer. However, if
     a well were installed in the shallow aquifer, its poor
     productivity would result in low yielding wells that would
     not support a potable water supply. In addition, most

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 134 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Edison Township residents depend on public water for their
     public water supply.
     Nonetheless, EPA did quantitatively assess the risk due to
     exposure to site ground water in its risk assessment.
     Results of the risk assessment revealed that the potential
     cancer risk associated with ingestion of unfiltered shallow
     ground water exceeds EPA's acceptable risk range. Because
     the unfiltered ground water contains a high percentage of
     sediments, EPA considers ingestion of the unfiltered ground
     water to be the worst-case scenario. If shallow ground
     water underlying the site were to be used as potable water,
     it would require a filtering system to remove the solids.
     Therefore, EPA believes that the concentrations of
     contaminants in the filtered ground water are more
     representative of the concentrations that would be ingested.
     EPA's assessment of the potential carcinogenic risk
     associated with ingestion of filtered ground water risk
     shows it to fall within EPA's acceptable risk range.
     Based on the risk assessment, site conditions and ground
     water usage in the vicinity of the site, EPA concluded that
     exposure to the contaminated ground water underlying the
     site is highly unlikely, and that remediation of the shallow
     ground water is not required.
2.   The Director of Health and Human Resources in Edison
     Township stated that the township will not allow ground
     water wells to be installed on or near the site without
     permission from the state and the township.
     EPA Response: EPA appreciates the township's efforts to
     limit installation of new wells in the vicinity of the site,
     and is willing to provide the township with any ground water
     quality information which may be of assistance.
C.   Remediation of Mill Brook Surface Water and Sediments
1.   A representative of the Edison Wetlands Association stated
     that EPA's preferred remedy would not achieve one of the
     remedial objectives for the site (preventing further
     contamination of Mill Brook) since, 1) the contaminated
     ground water will not be remediated, and 2) the contaminated
     ground water will continue to discharge into Mill Brook
     after remediation of the surface soils is completed.
     EPA Response: EPA disagrees. EPA sampled Mill Brook
     surface water and sediments upstream from the site, adjacent
     to the site, and downstream from the site, to determine if
     the site is a significant source of contamination. The
     results showed that polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs)
     are the only contaminants detected at higher concentrations

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 135 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     downstream from and adjacent to the site. Since the highest
     levels of PAHs are found in the surface soils, contamination
     of Mill brook is most likely occurring through surface
     runoff. Therefore, removal of the contaminated surface
     soils and replacement with clean fill should prevent further
     contamination of Mill Brook.
     The shallow ground water will continue to discharge into
     Mill Brook. However, EPA determined that the shallow ground
     water is not contributing significant contamination to Mill
     Brook because contaminants found in the ground water were
     detected in Mill Brook at similar concentrations upstream
     from, adjacent to, and downstream from the site. In
     addition, the results of EPA's risk assessment indicated
     that exposure to Mill Brook surface water and sediments does
     not pose an unacceptable risk to human health and the
     environment.
D.   Risk Issues; General
1.   A representative of the Edison Wetlands Association stated
     that EPA's risk assessment process is not based on
     scientific principles, and that there are many sources of
     uncertainty in the risk assessment. He further stated that
     because I) risk models are based on studies performed with
     rats and 2) the effects of exposure to multiple contaminants
     are not considered, the risk assessment may underestimate
     risk to human health.
     EPA Response: Risk assessment is an evolving science that
     EPA is constantly striving to improve. The foundation of
     risk assessment is based on scientific principles, however,
     existing data gaps may result in some degree of uncertainty.
     Some examples of these data gaps include the qualification
     and quantification of analytical data, extrapolation of
     dose-response relationships from animals to humans, and
     measures of exposure (i.e., ingestion rate and duration of
     exposure).
     To account for possible uncertainties in assessing risk, EPA
     uses very conservative assumptions including reasonable
     maximum exposure (the maximum exposure reasonably expected
     to occur) for contaminant concentrations and exposure
     frequency. In addition, EPA uses reference doses (the
     threshold for causing adverse health effects) which
     incorporate safety factors to account for extrapolation of
     animal studies to humans. For example, EPA may add a safety
     factor of up to 10,000 to a dose that causes adverse effects
     in rats to estimate the dose that will cause similar effects
     in humans.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 136 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     EPA's risk assessment process also includes an evaluation of
     the additive effect of all contaminants of concern found at
     a site for each pathway of exposure (i.e., the risk
     associated with exposure to each contaminant is summed to
     determined the total risk of exposure).
2.   The president of the Association at Edison Glen Condominiums
     asked if the Renora site contamination posed a risk to the
     residents of Edison Glen. In addition, she asked if
     additional sampling of the Edison Glen property should be
     conducted.
     EPA Response: EPA has determined that the contamination
     found at the Renora site does not pose a risk to the
     residents of Edison Glen.
     Due to concern about possible arsenic contamination in the
     surface soils at the Edison Glen condominium complex, EPA
     conducted sampling of the surface soils on the Edison Glen
     property. The results indicated that, with the exception of
     one area (which EPA will be remediating), the concentration
     of arsenic is below 20 parts per million, which is
     consistent with background levels in the State of New
     Jersey.
E.   Administrative Record Documents
1.   The Director of Health and Human Resources in Edison
     Township asked if the letter he sent to EPA during the
     public comment period would be part of the official record.
     EPA Response: The letter will be included in Attachment A of
     the Responsiveness Summary, which will be incorporated into
     EPA's Administrative Record. The Administrative Record for
     the site may be viewed in the Edison Township Public Library
     located on Plainfield Avenue, or EPA's Superfund Document
     Center located in EPA's Region II Office in New York City.
P.   Replacement of Perimeter Fence
1.   The Director of Health and Human Resources in Edison
     Township stated that he wants the perimeter fence to be
     reinstalled after the remediation is complete to prevent
     unauthorized use of the site.
     EPA Response: Unlike Alternatives 2 and 3 which depend on
     maintenance of the site fence for long term effectiveness,
     the selected remedy does not require maintenance of the
     fence to ensure protectiveness. Since all contamination of
     concern will be removed from the site, EPA does not believe
     that the remedy must include long term maintenance of the
     fence. However, EPA acknowledges the concern about
                                8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 137 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     unauthorized site use. EPA does not anticipate that the
     existing fence will need to be removed during excavation and
     backfilling activities. However, if sections do need to be
     removed, EPA will request that the contractor reinstall the
     existing fence.
G.   Environmental Land-Use Restriction
1.   A representative of the New Jersey Department of
     Environmental Protection (NJDEP) stated that the State of
     New Jersey agrees with EPA's preferred remedial alternative.
     However, because the contamination remaining on the site
     (after remediation) poses a risk greater than one in a
     million, NJDEP requires an environmental land-use
     restriction for the site. In addition, he stated that the
     NJDEP and EPA will try to resolve this issue before EPA
     signs the Record of Decision.
     EPA Response: EPA acknowledges NJDEP's position relative to
     the need for a land-use restriction, and explained that the
     two agencies would work together to address this concern.
H.   Disposal of Excavated Soil
1.   A resident of Edison Township asked where the excavated
     soils would be disposed, and if treatment would be required
     prior to disposal.
     EPA Response: EPA has not yet determined where the
     excavated surface soil will be disposed. Tests will be
     performed to determine if the surface soil is a hazardous
     waste and if treatment will be required prior to disposal.
     If the test results indicate that the surface soil requires
     treatment, it is likely that the receiving facility will
     select the method of treatment at that time.
IV. RESPONSE TO WRITTEN COMMENTS

During the public comment period, EPA received correspondence
from the following:
     •    William Hyatt, Esq., of Pitney, Hardin, Kipp & Szuch,
          on behalf of a group of the PRPs
     •    John O. Grunn, M.S., Director of Health and Human
          Resources, Edison Township Department of Health
Written questions and comments received during the public comment
period are grouped into the following categories:
     A.   Remediation of Subsurface Soils

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 138 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     B.   Remediation of Ground Water
     C.   Remediation of Mill Brook Surface Water and Sediments
     D.   Remediation of Surface Soils and EPA's Risk Assessment
          Process
     E.   Environmental Land-Use Restriction
     F.   Replacement of the Perimeter Fence
     G.   Future Site Use
     H.   Miscellaneous
Each question or comment is followed by EPA's response, as
necessary.
A.   Remediation of Subsurface Soils
1.   A representative of a group of PRPs commented that the PRPs
     agree with EPA's conclusion that subsurface soils at the
     site do not pose an unacceptable risk to human health and,
     further, that the risk due to exposure to subsurface soils
     under a future excavation-worker scenario was calculated
     utilizing overly conservative assumptions. The
     representative of the PRPs stated that the PRPs support
     EPA's selection of a remedy that does not require
     remediation of subsurface soils.
     EPA Response: EPA agrees.
B.   Remediation of Ground Water
1.   A representative of a group of the PRPs commented that the
     PRPs agree with EPA's conclusion that exposure to
     contaminated ground water at the site is highly unlikely and
     supports EPA's selection of a remedy that does not require
     remediation of the ground water.
     EPA Response: EPA agrees.
2.   An Edison Township health official commented that ground
     water contamination at the site is of no concern because no
     one presently uses, or is expected to use the shallow ground
     water as a potable water supply. In addition, his letter
     stated that Edison Township planned to maintain internal
     institutional controls to ensure that no potable wells are
     installed on or near the site in the future.
     EPA Response: EPA agrees.

                                 10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 139 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

C.   Remediation of Mill Brook Surface Water and Sediments
1.   A representative of a group of the PRPs commented that the
     PRPs agree with EPA's conclusion that exposure to Mill Brook
     surface water and sediments does not pose a risk to human
     health or the environment and supports EPA's selection of a
     remedy that does not require remediation of the surface
     water and sediments.
     EPA Response: EPA agrees.
D.   Remediation of Surface Soils
1.   A representative of a group of the PRPs commented that the
     PRPs do not agree that the surface soils warrant
     remediation. The commentor states that because the risk
     posed by surface soils is within EPA's acceptable risk
     range, and in accordance with the NCP Section 300.430(e) and
     OSWER Directive 9355.0-30, Role of Baseline Risk Assessment
     in Superfund Remedy Selection, remedial action is not
     warranted. In addition, he states that EPA's site-specific
     remedial objective for surface soil is unsupported by the
     risk assessment and that there is no reasonable basis for
     EPA to require remediation of surface soils.
     EPA Response: EPA's Risk Assessment Report (TRC, May 1983),
     evaluated the potential risk of exposure to contaminated
     surface soils under an adjacent-resident, future-use
     scenario. The risk was determined to be 8 x 10~5, which is
     within the range where EPA has the discretion to take
     remedial action. According to OSWER Directive 9355.0-30,
     Role of Baseline Risk Assessment in Superfund Remedy
     Selection (April 22, 1991), "EPA may determine that risks
     below 1 x 10"* are not sufficiently protective, and
     therefore, warrant remedial action."
     In addition, future use of the site is a significant factor.
     As the site is currently zoned for light-industrial use, it
     will at least be used for commercial purposes. However,
     based on the proximity to residential properties, the site
     may be developed for recreational use for area residents,
     which would likely result in frequent exposure to the most
     sensitive human receptors — children. Such exposure to
     children might occur at a greater frequency and duration
     than that estimated under the "adjacent resident" scenario
     evaluated in the risk assessment, and therefore, could
     result in a higher carcinogenic risk. In addition, EPA
     estimated the risk posed by direct contact with surface
     soils under a residential scenario to be 2.2 x 10^, which is
     at the upper bounds of EPA's acceptable risk range.
     Therefore, EPA has determined that remediation of the

                                 11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 140 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     surface soils is required to prevent contact with
     contaminated surface soils and protect human health.
     The NCP, Section 300.430(e), requires EPA to establish
     remedial action objectives, which are specific goals to
     protect human health and the environment, for every site.
     In accordance with the NCP, EPA has determined that the
     remedial action objective for the site is to prevent direct
     contact with, and ingestion of contaminated surface soil.
2.   An Edison Township health official commented that he agrees
     that the PAH-contaminated surface soils pose an unacceptable
     risk to residents that may come in contact with the soils,
     and thus, agrees with EPA's decision to remediate the
     surface soils.
     EPA Response: EPA agrees.
E.   Environmental Land-Use Restriction
1.   A representative of a group of the PRPs commented that the
     PRPs object to EPA's rejection of a use restriction as
     remedial technology for soil. The commentor further
     requested that EPA consider a detailed analysis of a remedy
     consisting of a capping technology in conjunction with
     access restrictions and a land-use restriction to prevent
     future excavation of (and exposure to) subsurface soils.
     EPA Response: EPA has rejected land-use restrictions for
     the site as the sole remedy, and believes that including
     such restrictions as part of the capping alternatives would
     not significantly impact the results of the detailed
     analyses of the remedial alternatives.
     Section 300.430 (a) (1) (iii) (D) of the NCP states that
     institutional controls (including access and land-use
     restrictions) should not be relied upon as the sole remedy:
     "The use of institutional controls shall not substitute for
     active response measure (e.g., treatment and/or containment
     of source material,, restoration of ground waters to their
     beneficial uses) as the sole remedy unless such active
     measures are determined not to be practicable, based on the
     balancing of trade-offs among alternatives that is conducted
     during selection of the remedy." EPA has determined that
     active response measures are practicable for this site.
     Therefore, a land-use restriction would not be appropriate
     as a stand-alone remedial alternative.
     EPA has evaluated the inclusion of a land-use restriction
     under the two capping alternatives (Alternatives 2 and 3).
     Based on this evaluation, EPA has determined that including
     a land-use restriction with Alternatives 2 and 3 to prevent
                                 12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 141 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     excavation of subsurface soils would not enhance the overall
     protectiveness of human health and the environment or the
     long-term effectiveness of Alternatives 2 and 3 when
     compared to the selected remedy (Alternative 4). Since the
     primary risk associated with the site is direct contact with
     contaminated surface soils, Alternative 4 remains the most
     protective, as it completely eliminates the potential for
     exposure to these surface soils. Because the contaminated
     surface soils would remain on the site under Alternative 2
     and 3, protectiveness would only be assured if the cap was
     properly maintained. The addition of a land-use restriction
     to prevent excavation of subsurface soils would not increase
     the protectiveness of Alternatives 2 and 3, since the
     potential for exposure to contaminated surface soils due to
     possible breaches in the cap would still exist.
     In addition, even with the inclusion of a land-use
     restriction, both Alternatives 2 and 3 would still rely
     heavily on long term maintenance and monitoring activities,
     as opposed to the Alternative 4, which does not require
     maintenance to be effective over the long term.
     Section 121 of CERCLA requires that EPA select remedies
     which utilize "permanent solutions and alternative treatment
     technologies or resource recovery technologies to the
     maximum extent practicable." Alternative 4 is the most
     permanent solution as it involves complete removal of the
     contamination of concern, and as stated above, does not rely
     on long-term maintenance. Including a land-use restriction
     as a component of Alternative 2 and 3 would not enhance
     their permanence at all — both alternatives would still
     rely on long-term containment as the primary technology to
     address site contamination.
     As noted in EPA's Proposed Plan, Alternative 4 also provides
     a greater degree of flexibility for future use of the site.
     Because Alternatives 2 and 3 depend on maintenance of the
     cap to be protective, future use of the site would likely be
     limited. The addition of a land-use restriction would not
     affect this dependance on maintenance; therefore,
     Alternative 4 would still be most likely to accommodate
     future use of the site.
     Consequently, EPA has concluded that even if a land-use
     restriction were included under Alternatives 2 and 3,
     Alternative 4 would be the most protective of human health
     and the environment and would provide the greatest degree of
     long term effectiveness and permanence.
2.   An Edison Township health official commented that subsurface
     soil contamination is not likely to pose a risk unless
     disturbed, and recommended that a deed restriction be placed
                               13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 142 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     on the site. His letter stated that he is aware that
     neither EPA nor NJDEP has the authority to impose land-use
     restrictions at this time, but recommended that EPA work
     towards a way to impose such restrictions. In addition, his
     letter stated that Edison Township Department of Health and
     Human Resources would advise local land-use regulators of
     site conditions to the best of their ability.
     EPA Response: EPA will work with NJDEP, the site owner, and
     responsible parties to address this concern.
F.   Replacement of the Perimeter Fence
1.   A representative of a group of the PRPs commented that EPA
     has no basis for requiring the replacement of the perimeter
     fence under Alternative 4 as this alternative involves the
     removal of contaminated surface soil and replacement with
     clean fill. The commentor states that the PRPs object to
     EPA's explanation that the replacement of the fence will
     prevent unauthorized use of the site by the site owner.
     Rather, the PRPs believe that this requirement only serves
     EPA's interest in eivoiding potential administrative
     inconveniences.
     EPA Response: Since all contamination of concern will be
     removed from the site, EPA does not believe that the
     selected remedy must include long-term maintenance of the
     fence. Although EPA does not anticipate that the existing
     fence will need to be removed during excavation and
     backfilling activities, if sections do need to be removed,
     EPA will request that the contractor reinstall the existing
     fence, based on concern expressed by local officials.
G.   Future Site Use
1.   A representative of a group of the PRPs commented that
     Alternative 2 is more likely to conform to future use
     because the site is zoned for light-industrial use and
     future residential use is unlikely.
     EPA Response: EPA disagrees that Alternative 2 is more
     likely to conform to future use. Under Alternative 2, the
     cap and the perimeter fence must be maintained —
     essentially forever — in order to ensure its protectiveness
     by preventing exposure to contaminated surface soils. Due to
     the requirement for long term maintenance of the site cap,
     which includes periodic repairs and replacement, it is
     unlikely that the site would conform to any future use at
     all, including a light-industrial or commercial use.



                               14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 143 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

H.   Miscellaneous
1.   A representative of a group of the PRPs commented that the
     first sentence of Section 1.9.2.5 of the Phase II FS report
     should be deleted and replaced with wording to clarify that
     the findings of both the Remedial Investigation (RI) and
     Phase II FS field investigation indicate that the site has
     not contributed volatile organic compounds (VOCs) or semi-
     volatile organic compounds (SVOCs) to the surface waters of
     Mill Brook.
     EPA Response: The first sentence of Section 1.9.2.5 of the
     Phase II FS report has been revised to read: "No VOCs or
     SVOCs were detected in Mill Brook surface waters." But,
     because VOCs and SVOCs were detected during the RI, EPA
     cannot state that the Renora site has not contributed VOC
     and SVOC contamination to Mill Brook.




                               15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 144 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

           APPENDIX V

CORRESPONDENCE RECEIVED DURING THE
       PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 145 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              PITNEY. HARDIN, KIPP & SZUCH
                                                   (MAIL TO)

                                           P.O. BOX 1945
                                 MORRISTOWN, NEW JERSEY O7962-I945
                                                 (DELIVERY TO)

WILLIAM H. HYATT, JR.                         3OO CAMPUS DRIVE                                TELEX 6*20-1
                                     FLORHAM PARK. NEW JERSEY O7932-O95O                 FACSIMILE (SOI) 866-I55O
DIRECT DIAL NUMBER

   (201)966-0011                         FLORHAM PARK (3OI) 966-63OO

                                            NEW YORK (213) 936-O33I



                                                                       August 15, 1994
          VIA CERTIFIED MAIL. RETURN RECEIPT REQUESTED
           Joyce Harney
           USEPA Region II
           26 Federal Plaza - Room 747
           New York, NY 10278
           Renora Public Comments
           Re:       Renora Superfund Site, Edison, Mew Jersey
           Dear Ms. Harney:
                On behalf of the Renora RD/RA Trust, enclosed are comments on
           the final Phase II Feasibility Study ("FSII") and the Proposed Plan
           for the Renora Site. Also included are the Trust's responses to
           Raymond Basso's July 18, 1994, letter to Henry Alexander of BCM
           Engineers, Inc.
           1.        The Renora RD/RA Trust supports EPA's conclusion that
                     subsurface soils do not pose an unacceptable risk.          In
                     calculating a non-carcinogenic hazard index of 10, and a
                     carcinogenic risk of 2 x 10~5, from direct exposure to
                     subsurface arsenic, the Risk Assessment report prepared by TRC
                     Environmental Corporation in May 1993 used overly conservative
                     exposure factors. First, the risk assessment used the maximum
                     arsenic concentration of 721 ppm, detected in one sample 8-10
                     feet below the surface, instead of the average concentration
                     of 71 ppm calculated from the ten subsurface samples analyzed.
                     Second, the risk assessment assumed that an excavation worker
                     would be exposed to the maximum concentration of 721 ppm for
                     five days per week for three months, for a total of 65 days.
                     This duration is highly unlikely for any excavation project at
                     the one-acre Renora Site, particularly for a single worker.
                     Third, the risk assessment assumes a soil ingestion rate of
                     480 mg/day, which does not account for the use of heavy
                     equipment or personal protective equipment during the course
                     of the excavation.    In other words, the risk presented by
                     subsurface soil is based on a single individual working five
                     days per week for thirteen weeks in direct contact with the
                     maximum arsenic concentration measured at the Site, without

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 146 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

PITNEY, H A R D I N , KIPP & SZUCH

    August 15, 1994
    Page - 2 -



          even a dust mask on.     This scenario is unrealistic and,
          therefore, EPA was correct to select a remedy that does not
          address subsurface soil.
    2.    The Renora RD/RA Trust supports EPA's conclusion that shallow
          groundwater at the site is unlikely to be used for human
          consumption and therefore does not require remediation. As
          noted by EPA, the highest risk levels associated with shallow
          groundwater result from arsenic levels in unfiltered samples,
          which are not representative of potential drinking water.
          Furthermore, as noted by EPA, local residents are connected to
          the municipal water supply.      There are no potable wells
          drawing water from the shallow aquifer near the site, and no
          potable wells will be installed given the poor productivity of
          the shallow aquifer. Finally, the shallow aquifer is not
          connected to and does not.recharge the deeper aquifers in the
          area, nor does it have an effect on Mill Brook. Thus, there
          are no pathways of exposure to shallow groundwater and EPA was
          correct to select a remedy that does not require groundwater
          remediation.
    3.    The Renora RD/RA Trust supports EPA's conclusion that surface
          water and sediment do not require remediation. As shown by
          samples collected at and adjacent to the site, concentrations
          of compounds in surface water are within applicable limits or
          are at background levels, indicating that the site is not
          contributing contamination to surface water. Similarly, in
          sediment, the concentration of all compounds, with the
          exception of PAHs, are essentially at background levels, and
          the Risk Assessment shows that the PAHs in sediment do not
          present a significant risk under conservative exposure
          scenarios. EPA's decision not to remediate surface water and
          sediment is sound.
    4.    The Renora RD/RA Trust disagrees that surface soil warrants
          remediation. Based on the TRC Risk Assessment Report for the
          Renora Site (May 1993) , the FSII Report states that the
          carcinogenic risk posed by contaminated surface soil on the
          site is "within EPA's acceptable risk range." FSII Report §
          1.11; Proposed Plan p.5. Therefore, in accordance with the
          NCP section 300.430(e) and OSWER Directive 9255.0-30, Role of
          Baseline Risk Assessment in Superfund Remedy Selection
          Decisions (April 22, 1991), remedial action is not warranted.
          EPA's site-specific remedial objective for surface soil is
          therefore unsupported by the Risk Assessment.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 147 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

PITNEY, H A R D I N , KIPP & SZUCH
    August 15, 1994
    Page - 3 -



          Furthermore, it should be noted that contrary to Mr. Basso's
          July 18 letter, the TRC Risk Assessment Report already
          considered land use in the vicinity of the Renora Site in
          calculating the risk posed by surface soils. For surface soil
          exposure to youth trespassers, TRC assumed trespassing
          activity "was to occur over a period of 10 years" and that
          •'exposure to contaminated surface soils and sediments was
          assumed to occur frequently, especially during summer months
          (total of 117 days per year.)       Dermal contact scenarios
          assumed exposed areas of arms, hands, and legs." TRC Risk
          Assessment Report, p.4-14.     For surface soil exposure to
          adjacent residents in the future, TRC assumed residents would
          "be exposed to site soils, sediments, and surface water for a
          total period of 30 years, 6 years as a child and 24 years as
          an adult (EPA, 1991a). Children were assumed to frequent the
          site 143 days per year while adults visited 78 days per year."
          TRC Risk Assessment Report, p.4-14. Thus, using EPA's own
          exposure models, TRC considered land use in the vicinity of
          the site in calculating the potential risk posed by surface
          soils. That risk is within EPA's acceptable risk range, and
          therefore there is no reasonable basis for EPA to require
          remediation of surface soils.,
    5.     The Renora RD/RA Trust objects to EPA's rejection of a use
           restriction as a remedial technology for soil. FSII Report §
           2.2.4.2. The site owners have informed the Trust they would
           be willing, under certain circumstances, to allow a use
           restriction to be placed upon their title to the site, and the
           Trust conveyed this information to EPA during a December 10,
           1993, telephone conference call and in a May 20, 1994, letter
           to EPA. This technology therefore cannot be considered "not
           implementable," and should be retained for integration into
           remedial alternatives developed by the FSII Report.
           Although neither EPA nor the State have unilateral authority
           to obtain a land use restriction, as Mr. Basso pointed out in
           his July 18 letter, both EPA and the State have authority to
           issue such orders as may be necessary to protect public
           health. See, e.g.. CERCLA § 106(a); New Jersey Spill Act §
           58:10-23.llf(a) (1). Both the FSII and the Proposed Plan fail
           to consider remedial alternatives in which EPA or the State
           could invoke that authority to order the site owner to impose
           a land use restriction on the title to the property.
           Furthermore, pursuant to the New Jersey Industrial Site
           Recovery Act, the NJDEP has developed a model "Declaration of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 148 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

PITNEY, H A R D I N . KIPP & SZUCH

    August 15, 1994
    Page - 4 -



           Environmental Restrictions" designed to control a land use
           restriction in the future.
    6.     The detailed analysis of alternatives should consider, to the
           extent possible, state acceptance as one of the nine criteria
           for evaluation under NCP § 300.430(e)(9). FSII Report § 4.1;
           Proposed Plan p. 12.      Although the FSII Report and the
           Proposed Plan provide that state acceptance will be addressed
           following review of comments received on the FSII Report and
           the Proposed Plan, by letter dated January 11, 1994, the State
           notified EPA that it does not concur with EPA's site-specific
           remedial action objective for the site, and the Trust
           reiterated this concern in its May 20 letter. To the extent
           that EPA is already aware of the State's lack of concurrence,
           this information should be considered in the detailed analysis
           of alternatives.
    7.     The FSII Report and the Proposed Plan should develop and
           provide a detailed analysis of a remedy consisting of a
           capping technology in conjunction with access restrictions and
           a use restriction to prevent future excavation of subsurface
           soil. The detailed analysis for this alternative, as for all
           the alternatives evaluated, should include to the extent
           possible the criterion of state acceptance as required by NCP
           section 300.430(e)(9) (iii) (H).
    8.     There is no basis for requiring the replacement of the
           perimeter chain link fence in Alternative 4. FSII Report §
           3.1.4; Proposed Plan p. 8. Given that Alternative 4 involves
           the removal of surface soil and replacement with certified
           clean, fill there is no reason to require replacement of the
           fence.
           Furthermore, the Renora RD/RA Trust objects to EPA's
           requirement for a perimeter fence for the purpose of making it
           less difficult for EPA to keep Mr. dementi from using the
           site for unauthorized purposes, as noted in Mr. Basso's July
           18 letter. Preventing Mr. Clementi from storing automobiles
           on the site after the remedy is complete does not advance the
           remedial action objective of protecting human health and the
           environment.   Rather, this requirement only serves EPA's
           interest in avoiding potential administrative inconveniences.
           EPA has other tools, such as the ability to obtain an
           injunction or issue an administrative order, to prevent
           unauthorized use of the site prior to delisting from the NPL.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 149 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

PITNEY, HARDIN. KIPP & SZUCH

   August 15, 1994
   Page - 5 -



   9.    The first sentence of section 1.9.2.5 of the FSII Report
         should be deleted and replaced with wording to clarify that
         the findings of both the Remedial Investigation and the 1992
         Field Investigation indicate that the site has not contributed
         VOCs or SVOCs to the surface waters of Mill Brook.
   10.   The FSII Report and the Proposed Plan should state that of the
         two capping alternatives, Alternative 2 is more likely to
         conform to future site use given that the site is zoned for
         light-industrial use and that future residential use is
         unlikely.    FSII Report § 4.3; Proposed Plan pp. 10-11.
         Routine maintenance of either type of cap is easily
         implemented and would insure that a capping alternative would
         conform to future land use.

                                       Verfy truly yours,


                                                       t, Jr.
                                                        RD/RA Trust
   cc:   William Tucker, Esq., USEPA Office of Regional Counsel
         Christina Purcell, NJDEP, Bureau of Federal Case Management

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 150 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN RESOURCES                                 P T^ T <N O                  \7
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICES: 100MUNICIPALBOULEVARD, EDISON,,N.J.
                                                       N.J. 08817-3353   Ls \~S I        O V_/      1M
   MEDICAL FACILITY: Dr. WILLIAMTOTH MEMORIAL HEALTH CENTER
                     80IDLEWILDROAD, EDISON, NEW JERSEY 08817-3353       N   0 11)   J   O Y C O II



    908.248-7270   it    t  1>                                                       JOHN O. G R U N S .
FAX 908-248.0494        "~—




                                                                 July 23, 1994



    Ms. Joyce Harney
    U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
    26 Federal Plaza - Room 747
    New York, N.Y.   10278

    Dear Ms. Harney:

                                      Renora, Inc.
                                      83 South Main Street
                                      Edison, New Jersey


   I have reviewed the Phase II FS and the proposed remedy for the Renora site.
   It was unfortunate that the bioremediation was unscucessful in treating the
   PAH contaminated soil, therefore, surface soil on site still poses unacceptable
   risks to residents that could come in contact with it.

   The ground water contamination at this site is not critical - no one uses or
   can realistically be expected to use this shallow aquifer for drinking purposes.
   This office will maintain internal institutional controls to see that no potable
   well permit is ever issued on (or near) this site.

   Contamination of the deeper soils is not likely to pose a risk unless disturbed.
   Ideally, a deed restriction would solve this problem. However, as per our research
   and prior discussions this options does not currently exist, unless imposed by the
   owner. Therefore, either the contamination must be cleaned or some type of
   institutional controls must be implemented. This office will continue to keep the
   documentation on file permanently and advise local land uses regulators of the
   conditions, as best we can,

   I would urge the agency to push for institutional controls (new laws) to allow
   EPA to impose deed restrictions or in the alternative to create a registry of
   sites that could pose a danger to workers and others. This could be done as part
   of the "call before you dig" type 800 #'s similar to proposed regulations recently
   discussed for gas pipelines.

   One other issue that was not discussed, requires a fence to continue around the
   site until the matter of liens are settled regardless of the clean-up undertaken.
   If you do not keep the fence in place,unauthorized use of the property is almost
   assured.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 151 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Ms. Joyce Harney
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Continued




In closing, I agree with the choice of alternative #4, which not only
protects public health and the environment, it eliminates most future
costs and it could release the property to productive commercial uses
in the near future.

Please call, if there are any questions.

                                            pry truly yours,



                                           John 0. Grun, M.S.
                                           Director of Health and
JOG:jbd                                       Human Resources
cc: Hon. G.A. Spadoro, Mayor
    Hon. Councilmembers
    Health Advisory Committee
    Planning Board
    Zoning Board

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 152 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      APPENDIX VI
STATE CONCURRENCE LETTER

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 153 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Christine Todd Whitman                             Department of Environmental Protection                          Robert C. Shinn, Jr.
Governor                                                                                                               Commissioner


                                                                                                    SEP 3 0 1994
       William J. Muszynski, Deputy Regional Administrator
       United States Environmental Protection Agency
       Region II
       26 Federal Plaza
       New York, NY 10278

       Dear Mr. MuszynsM:

       Re:        Renora Superfund Site
                  Edison Township, Middlesex County
                  Record of Decision

       The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (DSP) has reviewed the
       Record of Decision and Responsiveness Summary prepared by the United States
       Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) for the Renora Superfund Site, Edison
       Township, Middlesex County,

       The DEP concurs with the selected remedy, Alternative- $4, provided that
       institutional controls are established for the site,

       The Record of Decision documents the selection of Alternative #4 consisting of
       excavation and off -site disposal of the top two fe.et of contaminated surface soil
       and debris at an approved landfill, and backfilling the site with certified clean
       fill.

       New Jersey appreciates the opportunity to participate in this decision making
       process, however, if institutional controls are not established, the DEP cannot
       concur with the selected remedy for the Renora site.

       The DE? looks forward to future cooperation with USEPA.

                                                                                 Sincerely,




       c:         Michael Hogan, Commissioner's Office

       S: \ j r j \ r jcs\ifcT!!\rer.ir«l$ . ehp




                                                      New Jersey Is an Bqvil Opportunity Employer
                                                                     Recycled ?>per

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 154 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

             RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT FACT SHEET
                          EPA REGION II

Site;
Site name: Renora, Inc.
Site location: Edison Township, New Jersey
HRS score: 40.44
Listed on the NPL: December 1982
EPA Site ID #: NJD 070 281 175

Record of Decision;
Date signed: 9/94
Selected remedy: Removal of top two feet of surface soil
Estimated Construction Completion: 1997
Capital cost: $2,344,050 (in 1994 dollars)
Annual O & M cost: n/a
Present-worth cost: $2,812,860 (including 20% contingency)

Lead; EPA - Enforcement

Primary Contact: Joyce Harney - (212) 264-6313
Secondary Contact: Janet Feldstein - (212) 264-
Main PRPs: Contact - William Hyatt, Esq., of Pitney, Hardin, Kipp
and Szuch
Waste;
Waste type: polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
Waste origin: mixing/blending operation
Estimated waste quantity: 5,500 tons of contaminated soil
Contaminated medium: surface soil
