LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES FOR OU2 FOR THE FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY SITE
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/676977
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: d368370f3913260913ca8e60743d22eb1e7b133e4ccc0983898ab545e5ae33f6
Source PDF pages: 7
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES

                         Former Kil-Tone Company Superfund Site
                                     Operable Unit 2


Site Name and Location
Former Kil-Tone Company Superfund Site
Vineland, Cumberland County, New Jersey

Introduction
The purpose of this Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) is to explain the United States
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) changes to the remedy selected in the September
2019 Record of Decision (ROD) for the Former Kil-Tone Company Superfund Site (Site),
Operable Unit (OU) 2. The OU2 ROD was prepared by EPA as lead agency for the Site, in
consultation with the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP). The
selected remedy described in the OU2 ROD represents the second of four planned remedial
phases, or operable units, for the Site.

Under Section 117(c) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act of 1980, as amended (CERCLA or Superfund), 42 U.S.C. § 9617(c), EPA is
required to publish an ESD when, after issuance of a ROD, subsequent enforcement or remedial
action leads to significant, but not fundamental, changes in the selected remedy. Sections
300.435(c)(2)(i) and 300.825(a)(2) of the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution
Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 C.F.R. §§ 300.435(c)(2)(i) and 300.825(a)(2), set forth the criteria
for issuing an ESD and require that an ESD be published if the remedy is modified in a way that
it differs significantly, but not fundamentally, in scope, performance, or cost from the remedy
selected in the ROD for the Site.

This ESD modifies the remedy selected in the OU2 ROD by providing for permanent relocation
of businesses occupying structures that will be demolished to conduct the remedy, as well as
appropriate compensation of the owner and/or tenant of such structures, as components of the
OU2 remedy. This ESD also provides a brief history of the Site, describes the original remedy,
and explains how, subsequent to the finalization of the decision document, issues concerning the
scope and performance of the selected remedy were identified.

This ESD and the documents that provide the basis for the modification will be incorporated into
the administrative record maintained for the Site in accordance with Section 300.825(a)(2) of the
NCP, 40 C.F.R. § 300.825(a)(2). The administrative record file is available for review during
business hours at the EPA Region 2 Superfund Records Center, 290 Broadway, New York, NY
10007 (Monday through Friday, 9:00 AM–5:00 PM); at the information repository at the
Vineland City Library, 1058 East Landis Ave., Vineland, New Jersey 08360 (for library hours:
http://www.vinelandlibrary.org); and online at: www.epa.gov/superfund/former-kil-tone.



                                                                                    *676977*
                                                                                         676977

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Site Location, History, Contamination Problems, and Selected Remedy

   A. Site Location and Description

The Site includes the former Kil-Tone Company facility (Property) located at 527 East Chestnut
Avenue, City of Vineland, Cumberland County, New Jersey, and the areal extent of
contamination. The Site also includes residential, commercial and industrial properties in the
vicinity of the former Kil-Tone facility, groundwater contamination, and may also include
potential sediment and surface water contamination, currently under investigation. The Site has
been divided into four OUs. OU2, the subject of this ESD, addresses the Property as well as
nearby non-residential properties (commercial/industrial and public areas).

The Property is 3.15 acres and is located in a mixed-use (residential, commercial and industrial)
community that has been identified as a community with potential environmental justice (EJ)
concerns because EJ index percentiles for many environmental and demographic indicators for
the area immediately adjacent to the Site were above state and national averages. According to
the 2010 Census, the approximate racial breakdown of the City of Vineland included White
(67%), Black or African American (14.2%), Asian (1.7%), and Others (12.9%). The 2010
Census also reported a Hispanic/Latino population of 38%. The total median household income
was reported in 2010 at $54,024 and $50,690 in 2014. The Property is bordered to the north by
East Chestnut Avenue; to the east by South Sixth Street; to the south by Paul Street; and to the
west by South East Boulevard, which is next to railroad tracks used for freight
transport. Residential, commercial and industrial properties are located throughout the area.

A storm sewer catch basin located in the northwestern corner of the Property discharges into the
head of the Tarkiln Branch, a tributary of the Parvin Branch that flows into the Maurice River
that flows into Union Lake.

   B. Site History

The Property was the site of pesticide manufacturing operations from about 1916 to about 1933.
Starting in or about 1916, the former Kil-Tone Company manufactured, among other things, the
pesticide lead arsenate at the Property. In 1926, the Property was purchased by John Lucas &
Company, which created a new subsidiary named the Lucas Kil-Tone Company that continued to
manufacture arsenic-based pesticides on the Property until on or about 1933, at which point
pesticide manufacturing ceased. Since 2008, Urban Sign and Crane, Inc., a sign making and
installation business, has leased the building at the Site.

Lead arsenate is a pentavalent form of inorganic arsenic and contains about 22 percent arsenic.
Inorganic arsenics are known to be acutely toxic. Among the products manufactured at the
Property were Green Cross Dry Powdered Arsenate of Lead, Green Cross Standard Arsenate of
Lead, Green Cross Sulpho-arsenate Powder, Green Cross Sulphur and Arsenate Lead Mixture,
Modified Kil-Tone, Improved Kil-Tone, Fruit Kil-Tone, Bordeaux Mixture, Dry Powdered
Arsenate of Zinc, and Beetle Mort.



                                                2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   C. Contamination Problems

An August 2014 investigation of the Property by NJDEP found arsenic at concentrations as high
as 740 parts per million (ppm) in the top six inches of soil, and at concentrations as high as 5,800
ppm between 3.5 to 4 feet below ground. Groundwater beneath the Property had concentrations
of arsenic of 8.1 micrograms per liter (μg/L) to 14,000 μg/L. As a result of its investigation, on
November 14, 2014, the NJDEP referred the Site to EPA.

From January 2015 through February 2016, EPA conducted several sampling events at the Site
to determine the nature and extent of contamination. Sampling results identified arsenic and lead
in soils at the Property, as well as in soils in the vicinity of the Property including at residential,
commercial and industrial properties. Arsenic and lead were also found in groundwater, surface
water and sediment samples collected by EPA. On April 5, 2016, EPA placed the Site on the
National Priorities List.

In April 2016, EPA initiated a removal action to address potential exposure to surface soil
contaminated with arsenic and lead at residential properties in the vicinity of the Property. Clean
topsoil was placed over portions of 26 residential properties as an interim measure until a
permanent remedy was selected and implemented to prevent exposure to arsenic and lead
contaminated soil. Additional removal work was done farther from the Property in the flood
plain of the Tarkiln Branch. Clean soil was placed on six residential properties in the flood plain
and fencing was installed at portions of two public housing developments along the Tarkiln.
These additional removal activities are also interim measures designed to prevent exposure to
and migration of arsenic and lead contaminated soil until a final remedy is selected and
implemented.

In September 2016, EPA signed a ROD for OU1 of the Site, which addresses residential
properties in the vicinity of the Property. The ROD included the excavation of an estimated
21,000 cubic yards of soil contaminated primarily with arsenic and lead from approximately 57
residential properties in the vicinity of the Site, and the remedy is being conducted in phases.
During Phase 1 of the OU1 remedial action, six residential properties were remediated and
restored to conditions allowing unrestricted future use, including continued residential use. Phase
1 was initiated in 2017 and completed 2018. During Phase 2 of the OU1 remedial action, an
additional 26 residential properties were remediated and restored to conditions allowing
unrestricted future use, including residential use. Phase 2 was initiated in 2018 and completed in
2020. At least 48 additional residential properties have been identified for Phase 3 of the OU1
remedial action, which EPA currently expects to be the last phase of remedial action for OU1.
The design for Phase 3 of the remedial action was completed in 2021 and the remedial action
was initiated in 2022 and is ongoing. In July 2021, an ESD was signed which provided for
permanent relocation of residents as part of the OU1 remedy based on the need to excavate
contaminated soil from beneath the house, the structural integrity of the house, the ongoing risk
to human health and the environment if the contamination were to remain in place, and the cost
of remediating the contaminated soil underneath the structure if it were to remain standing. The
ESD also provided that EPA might determine relocation to be necessary at additional residential
properties.

                                                   3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       D. The OU2 Remedy

EPA issued the OU2 ROD in September 2019. The OU2 ROD identified remedial action
objectives (RAOs), which are specific goals to protect human health and the environment. The
following RAOs were established for OU2 of the Site:

       x   Prevent current and potential future unacceptable risks to human receptors resulting
           from direct contact with contaminated soil;
       x   Prevent migration of chemicals of concern (COCs) from the OU2 properties to other
           areas via overland flow and air dispersion;
       x   Prevent or reduce the migration of COCs from soil to groundwater; and
       x   Prevent current and potential future unacceptable risks to ecological receptors
           resulting from direct contact with contaminated soil.

The major components of the remedy selected in the OU2 ROD include the following:

       x   Excavation of an estimated 57,800 cubic yards of soil contaminated with arsenic and
           lead from the former Kil-tone Company property and approximately 40 non-
           residential properties in the vicinity of the former Kil-Tone Company property, not to
           exceed the depth of the groundwater table;
       x   Off-site disposal of excavated contaminated soil, and backfilling of excavated areas
           with clean fill;
       x   Restoration of the affected properties;
       x   Institutional controls;
       x   Engineering controls, if necessary; and
       x   Long-term monitoring.

The description of the remedy goes on to say that excavation activities associated with
remediation may require the demolition and replacement of secondary structures, such as garages
and sheds, as well as surfaces including asphalt and driveways. In cases where contamination
extends below more permanent structures (buildings, offices, etc.), effort will be undertaken to
avoid demolition (underpinning, etc). In cases where this is infeasible, other options will be
considered, including engineering and institutional controls.

The contaminants of concern and remediation goals outlined in the OU2 ROD were as follows:




                                                4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  Arsenic (mg/kg)                        Lead (mg/kg)
       Residential Soil                                 19                                   4001
     Non-Residential Soil                               19                                   800
    Impact to Groundwater                               19                                 400/8002
      Ecological (Plants)                               69                                   500
       Ecological (Soil                                93.7                                 3,162
        Invertebrates)


1
  The OU2 ROD also indicated that an average concentration across the surface of the remediated area for
residential properties must be at or below 200 mg/kg, with no single point above 400 mg/kg, which corresponds to a
child blood lead level of 5 μg/dL.

2
  The OU2 ROD indicated that the impact to groundwater value was “under development.” Sampling and analyses
conducted during the pre-design investigation to support the OU2 remedial design determined that residential and
non-residential direct contact soil cleanup levels would be protective of groundwater. As outlined in the OU2 ROD,
this finding has been memorialized in a technical memorandum that has been incorporated into the site file.

In September 2019, EPA initiated the design of the OU2 remedy to address non-residential
properties at and in the vicinity of former Kil-Tone facility. Phase 1 of the design, which
included the majority of the OU2 properties to be addressed, was finalized in September 2022
and the remedial action is expected to be initiated in 2023. Phase 2 of the design is expected to
be completed in 2023.


Description of Significant Differences

The remedy selected in the OU2 ROD includes excavation of contaminated soil (not-to-exceed
the depth of the groundwater table), off-site disposal of the excavated soil, back filling with clean
fill, and restoration of the affected properties.

The OU2 ROD specifies that excavation activities may require the demolition and replacement
of structures such as sheds, garages and the removal of asphalt and driveways, but it does not
provide for complete demolition of an entire structure and permanent relocation of the
commercial occupants, although the ROD does state that in cases where contamination extends
below more permanent structures (buildings, offices, etc.), effort will be undertaken to avoid
demolition (underpinning, etc), and that in cases where this is infeasible, other options will be
considered, including engineering and institutional controls.

The Property is part of Phase 2 of the OU2 remedial design, which is still being finalized. On the
Property is a large, single-story slab-on-grade structure approximately 27,000 square feet in size.
Sampling results indicate that soil beneath the structure is heavily contaminated with arsenic and
lead at levels posing a risk to human health and/or the environment. The contamination extends
down to, and below, the water table. Sampling conducted by EPA as part of the design from
2019 through 2022 found arsenic concentrations as high as 11,800 ppm and lead concentrations
as high as 96,100 ppm in soil underneath the structure. It is estimated that the volume of
contaminated soil beneath the structure is more than 18,000 cubic yards, with at least 7,200 cubic
                                                        5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

yards in the saturated soil, and this arsenic contamination can act as an ongoing source to
groundwater contamination.

Concentrations of arsenic in groundwater in the vicinity of this structure were detected as high as
29,000 parts per billion (ppb) and up to 5,000 ppb under/adjacent to the building (the New Jersey
Groundwater Quality Standard for arsenic is 3 ppb). The Tarkiln Branch, which originates at the
northwest corner of the Property, and which is the focus of OU4 of the Site, may also be
impacted by this contamination. Consistent with the OU2 ROD, contaminated soil lying beneath
the building will be excavated and sent off-site for disposal.

According to EPA’s National Superfund Permanent Relocation Interim Policy, and EPA’s
OSWER Directive: 9355.0-71P, Interim Policy on the Use of Permanent Relocations as Part of
Superfund Remedial Actions, permanent relocation should be considered as part of a remedial
action only if there is a risk to human health that cannot be effectively addressed by the cleanup,
or where the structure is an impediment to a protective cleanup. The structure on the Property
obstructs access to the contaminated soil beneath the structure and prevents the excavation of
contaminated soil that exceeds the cleanup criteria in the OU2 ROD and that may be a source of
groundwater contamination. The structure therefore impedes implementation of the OU2 remedy
on the Property. EPA has determined that permanent relocation of the business currently
operating at the Property is more cost-effective and environmentally preferable to lifting or
moving the structure, which would be difficult to undertake from engineering perspective, may
not be successful, and would be too costly to pursue given the uncertainty of success.
As required, Superfund-related permanent relocations and property acquisitions would be
conducted under the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act
of 1970, as amended.

During implementation of the OU2 remedial action, EPA may identify additional properties
where EPA determines that permanent relocation is appropriate to effectively perform the OU2
cleanup, because there is a risk to human health that cannot effectively be addressed by cleanup
or where the structure is an impediment to a protective cleanup, consistent with EPA’s National
Superfund Permanent Relocation Interim Policy, and EPA’s OSWER Directive: 9355.0-71P,
Interim Policy on the Use of Permanent Relocations as Part of Superfund Remedial Actions. The
modifications described in this ESD will apply to and include permanent relocation of businesses
occupying any such additional commercial structures that EPA determines need to be
demolished to remove impediments to the effective implementation of a protective cleanup for
OU2.

Support Agency Comments

The State of New Jersey concurs with this ESD. The State’s letter providing its concurrence is
dated April 20, 2023 and is located in the administrative record maintained for the Site.

Affirmation of Statutory Determinations

EPA, after consultation with NJDEP, is issuing this ESD to modify the selected OU2 remedy to
provide for permanent relocation of businesses occupying structures that will be demolished to
                                                 6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

conduct the remedy, and property acquisition and/or compensation for the value of demolished
structures. The OU2 remedy, as modified by this ESD, still satisfies the requirements of Section
121 of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. § 9621.

The remedy, as modified by this ESD, will be protective of human health and the environment
and will comply with federal and state requirements that are legally applicable or relevant and
appropriate to the remedial action.

The modified remedy is technically feasible, cost-effective, and represents the maximum extent
to which permanent solutions and treatment technologies can be used in a practicable manner at
the Site.

This ESD does not alter the five-year review requirements outlined in the OU2 ROD.

Public Participation Compliance

In accordance with the NCP, a formal public comment period is not required when issuing an
ESD. A notice briefly summarizing this ESD will be published in a major local newspaper of
general publication in accordance with Section 300.435(c)(2)(i) of the NCP, 40 C.F.R.
§ 300.435(c)(2)(i).

This ESD and the documents that provide the basis for the decision to modify the OU2 remedy
to provide for permanent relocation of businesses, and property acquisition and/or compensation
for the value of demolished structures, will be incorporated into the administrative record for the
Site in accordance with Section 300.825(a)(2) of the NCP, 40 C.F.R. § 300.825(a)(2). The
administrative record file is available for review during business hours at the EPA Region 2
Superfund Records Center, 290 Broadway, New York, NY 10007 (Monday through Friday,
9:00 AM–5:00 PM); at the information repository at the Vineland City Library, 1058 East Landis
Ave. Vineland, New Jersey 08360 (for library hours: http://www.vinelandlibrary.org); and online
at: www.epa.gov/superfund/former-kil-tone.



                         Digitally signed by Pat
Pat Evangelista Evangelista
                Date: 2023.05.16 16:16:02 -04'00'
                                                                    May 16, 2023
Pat Evangelista, Director                                           Date
Superfund & Emergency Management Division
U.S. EPA, Region 2




                                                    7
